S/PV.8445

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8445th meeting

Wednesday, 16 January 2019, 9.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Singer Weisinger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Dominican Republic)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2018/1174)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-01192 (E)
*1901192*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.8445

The meeting was called to order at 9.45 a.m.

that, since the holding of the presidential elections in
July and August, more emphasis has been placed on the
implementation of the agreement. The determination of
the signatory parties has been illustrated, among other
things, by the establishment in September of a ministry
tasked with monitoring the implementation of the
agreement and by the signing of the Pact for Peace in
October. The more frequent meetings of the Agreement
Monitoring Committee is another concrete example.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2018/1174)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Mali to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1174, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
members of the Security Council on the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1174) on the situation
in Mali.
Before doing so, allow me to share with the Council
some brief observations following my visit to Mali one
month ago, accompanied by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support, Mr. Oscar
Fernandez-Taranco. We were there to assess the progress
made in the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. During our stay,
we had the privilege of meeting President Keita, his
Prime Minister, the members of the Government, the
signatory movements to the agreement, the opposition,
civil society, the diplomatic community and the United
Nations country team, among others.
During our visit, we were particularly encouraged
by the constructive momentum that seems to be present
in relations among the parties. The general opinion is
2/23

16/01/2019

It is no doubt too early to fully evaluate the
impact of the sanctions adopted by the Council in
December against three people who have hindered
the implementation of the peace agreement. However,
it is fair to say that the parties are fully aware of the
Council’s frustration and its impatience with regard
to the ongoing delays in the implementation of the
agreement. That undoubtedly explains the efforts
under way to accelerate the implementation of its
key provisions.
Finally, we were pleased to note through our
conversations with the parties that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) continues to be seen as playing an
essential political role in working with all parties to
accelerate the implementation of the agreement. The
conclusions of our joint visit will be reflected in the
Secretary-General’s next report, to be submitted to
members of the Security Council for their review in
early March, six months after the swearing in of the
President of the Republic.
The progress highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report under consideration touches upon issues
that are central to the peace process, including the
institutional reforms envisaged in the agreement. The
reconstitution and reform of the defence and security
forces remains key to establishing lasting peace in
Mali. The launching, in November, of an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
is a first concrete step to that end. The holding of a highlevel workshop on security sector reform in December
enabled progress on important issues.
With regard to institutional reforms to strengthen
decentralization, we welcome the holding in November
of consultations on administrative restructuring as a
first step in carrying out territorial reform. Dialogue
must continue in order to reach a consensus on these
reforms. I therefore not only invite the Government but
also members of the political class, whether they be the
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

opposition or the majority, to pursue their efforts in
order to ensure greater inclusivity in these discussions.
With regard to national reconciliation, the National
Assembly has postponed discussions on the national
accord act in order to allow for more consultations.
I urge the parties to continue their efforts to support
the reconciliation process, which is indispensable to
fulfilling the vision of a Mali that is united and fully
anchored on the path of peace. In that context, the fight
against impunity must remain a top priority. There can
be no compromise that would jeopardize the progress
that has been made towards reconciliation. It must
be noted that the political landscape has remained
polarized since the presidential election. A constructive
and inclusive dialogue among political stakeholders,
including civil society, women and young people, is
essential in order to carry out the ambitious reform
agenda set out in the 2015 agreement.
Recent signs of a more open dialogue — which
made it possible, for example, to reach a consensus
on postponing the elections — are encouraging. I
strongly urge the political class to continue along that
path, working together to build the foundations of a
united and reconciled nation with an inclusive system
of representation.
(spoke in English)
As I witnessed during my visit to Gao and Mopti,
the security situation remains of grave concern and
a major challenge to the implementation of the peace
agreement. Asymmetrical attacks continue to target
peacekeepers, national and international forces and,
increasingly, civilians. In Ménaka, MINUSMA was
targeted on 21 December by a complex attack on its
camp, which once again indicated the determination of
extremist groups and spoilers to prevent the Mission
from implementing its mandate. Our peacekeepers
and the Malian defence and security forces continue
to serve under very difficult conditions. Far too often,
they pay the ultimate price in supporting peace and
stability in Mali.
Last year, Mali experienced a significant increase
in improvised explosive device (IED) incidents,
particularly in the centre of the country. MINUSMA
and the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS)
continue to support the Malian authorities through the
provision of advice, training and specialized equipment
to mitigate the risks posed by the IED threat. From
September through December, Malian instructors,

S/PV. 8445

previously trained by MINUSMA/UNMAS, delivered
their first explosive-ordnance disposal courses to their
own troops in Bamako. The training was supported by
MINUSMA but entirely delivered by Malian trainers,
marking a milestone in the development of national
capacities and contributing to the restoration of
State authority.
We remain concerned about the further
deterioration of the security situation in the centre,
where intercommunal violence, instrumentalized
by extremist armed groups, has intensified over the
past months. On 1 January, 37 members of the Fulani
community were killed in an attack in the Bankass
district. The authorities swiftly responded by deploying
a Malian armed forces unit to the site of the incident
and opening an investigation. On 4 January, President
Keita visited the village where the attack took place.
MINUSMA is engaging the Government to define
the political parameters framing the approach in the
centre and is stepping up its support to the Government
in responding to the rapidly evolving situation and
protecting civilians, in coordination with the United
Nations country team.
With regard to security in central Mali, MINUSMA
is enhancing its assistance to the Government in the
protection of civilians by increasing its mobility and
its presence. This approach should also enable the
United Nations country team and humanitarian and
development partners to intensify their contributions
to peace and development. The deteriorating situation
resulted in a dramatic 75 per cent increase in displaced
persons in December 2018, compared with June 2018.
Overall, the humanitarian situation in Mali remains
dire, with 2.3 million vulnerable people targeted by
the 2019 humanitarian response plan. Over 800 schools
remain closed due to insecurity.
Addressing the challenges facing Mali must take
into account the complex cross-border dynamics
and drivers of conflict occurring within the broader
regional context. I therefore reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call on national, regional and international
actors to redouble their efforts to tackle the multiple
threats facing Mali and the Sahel region.
The Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint
Force remains an instrumental part of the response
needed to address the threat of violent extremism in
the region. I wish to call on G-5 Sahel member States
to take all steps necessary to resume the operations of

19-011923/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

the Joint Force as soon as possible, and on international
partners to provide it with the support it requires. In
parallel, we also must redouble our efforts to address
resilience, governance and development deficits in the
region. In this regard, the United Nations will continue
to move forward in the implementation of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
In conclusion, it is important to continue impressing
on all parties to the peace agreement the importance of
maintaining positive momentum in order to continue
accelerating the implementation of priority measures of
the peace agreement and register meaningful progress
without further delay. MINUSMA, through the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, remains
committed to supporting the parties in their efforts to
advance the implementation of the peace agreement.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Keita
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Assistant-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Bintou Keita, for
her informative briefing. I also would welcome the
presence at this table of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of Mali, Her Excellency
Ms. Kamissa Camara. Her participation in this meeting
is an important gesture, and we appreciate it.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali must remain the top
priority. It is more than ever our guiding compass.
Resolution 2423 (2018) establishes a clear framework
for this by defining a specific list of measures whose
implementation is expected no later than six months
after the inauguration of the Malian President. That
deadline will fall on 4 March, which is only a few
weeks away. We are all involved in that task, so the
time to act is now.
France welcomes the first concrete progress
that has been made in recent weeks in implementing
the measures identified in resolution 2423 (2018).
I am thinking in particular of the establishment of
new interim authorities; the launch of an accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
for over 1,400 combatants; the holding of a second
high-level workshop towards the establishment of a
reconstituted army, special anti-terrorist units and
4/23

16/01/2019

territorial police; and the establishment of a sustainable
development fund to ensure the development of the
northern part of the country. I am also referring to
the establishment of a weekly consultation framework
among the Malian parties, which illustrates the
restoring of a climate of trust and would not have
been possible only a few months ago. Lastly, I am
thinking of the establishment of a working group on
the involvement of women in the peace process, which
demonstrates the increased attention to that important
objective. Those various developments are all signals
that, in our view, reflect a sincere political will to step
up the pace of implementing the agreement. There is
therefore a positive momentum. It is now important to
build on it quickly enough for Mali to be ready for the
March deadline.
However, let us make no mistake. There is still much
progress to be made in order to meet the expectations
established by the Security Council, and there is very
little time left. It is therefore our responsibility to
continue to support the implementation of the agreement
by mobilizing all the tools available to the international
community to encourage the parties to move forward.
That is precisely the purpose of the sanctions adopted
by the Council on 20 December last year. In accordance
with the provisions of the agreement, they seek to show
that there is a specific price to be paid by those who
obstruct the peace process on the ground, in particular
through their links with terrorist groups or trafficking
activities. Such actions have serious consequences
whether in the form of a travel ban or, more broadly,
complete exclusion from the peace process. France has
therefore decided, in coordination with several of its
partners, to suspend all contact with the listed persons
until the measures taken against them are lifted, for
which precise criteria have already been defined. We
are also ready to propose the adoption of new listings
in due course if the Council’s expectations are not met.
The continuing deterioration of the situation in the
centre of the country is a source of growing concern.
The almost daily attacks by terrorist groups, as well
as the dangerous increase in intercommunal tensions,
pose a serious threat to the civilian population and the
stability of the region. Restoring a State presence and
authority in that area, in all its forms, is at the heart
of the response to the current crisis. We welcome the
recent visits by President Keita and the Prime Minister
to the region and their hard work in that regard. It is
essential that such efforts continue and increase.
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

It is also crucial that the international community
provide all necessary support to the Malian Government
in its integrated strategy to regain control of the
centre. In particular, we expect the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) to continue to support the efforts
undertaken within its means and in the context of its
mandate. In that regard, we believe that it is necessary
in the coming weeks to reflect on the appropriate
balance between the resources available to the Mission,
its mandate and the needs that exist in the central part
of Mali.
Finally, France would like to emphasize the fact that
the stabilization of Mali and the region can be achieved
only through the complementary and coordinated
action of the various security forces on the ground,
which all share the same objective of supporting the
implementation of the agreement. The support provided
by Operation Barkhane to MINUSMA during the attack
on the Ber camp, the cooperation among the various
security forces in combating improvised explosive
devices and protecting access and, on another level,
the operational and logistical support regularly shared
among the various actors illustrate the great importance
of that partnership approach. Resolution 2423 (2018)
sent a clear message in that regard: every entity must
play its individual role within the limits of its mandate,
but all must coordinate and support one other on the
ground in the prevailing difficult circumstances. Let us
not forget that the enemies of peace have not waited for
us to start cooperating among themselves.
As we collectively expressed in the adoption of
resolution 2423 (2018), the urgency today is to fully
implement the peace agreement. The six-month period
for implementing the priority measures identified by
the Council will very soon come to an end. Everyone in
Mali must be aware of that and should fully mobilize in
order to succeed. France will issue a press statement to
that effect at the end of this meeting.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacekeeping Affairs, for
her valuable briefing on the most recent developments
in the Republic of Mali. I would also like to thank
and commend Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
for his efforts to reduce political tension among all

S/PV. 8445

relevant parties and to facilitate the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. I
also join my colleague, the representative of France,
in welcoming the presence and participation of Her
Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Mali. That is the first time that she has come to the
Security Council, which reflects the interest shown
by the Government of Mali in supporting the peace
process in the country.
I would like to address three important aspects of
the subject under discussion today: the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, the
security situation and humanitarian issues.
With regard to the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation, we welcome
the most recent positive steps in the implementation of
the peace agreement, in particular the establishment
of interim administrations in the Kidal, Ménaka and
Timbuktu regions and the progress made concerning
the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process, as well as the holding of the
second high-level meeting on the implementation of the
security and defence aspects of the agreement. We also
welcome the decision made by His Excellency President
Keita to establish a dedicated ministry in order to
follow-up on the implementation of the agreement.
We welcome as well the role played by His Excellency
Prime Minister Maiga in ensuring that progress is made
by the Government. In that regard, we urge all parties to
continue their efforts to achieve the desired peace and
security. We hope that there will be no further delay
in implementing the peace process, as we have seen
in the past. We also expect to see the implementation
of the provisions of the agreement, in particular those
in paragraph 4 of resolution 2423 (2018), including
progress on the decentralization process and the full
operationalization of the mixed units of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism.
We would like to recall the road map adopted
by all parties on 22 March 2018, which relates to the
implementation of several aspects of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation. We call on all parties to
comply with the provisions of that agreed document.
We reiterate our position with regard to the fact
that the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation remains the best option for resolving
the ongoing conflict in Mali. We look forward to the

19-011925/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

report of the Secretary-General requested in paragraph
6 of resolution 2423 (2018), to be issued six months
after the presidential inauguration. That report would
contain the most recent developments with regard to the
implementation of the agreement and the benchmarks
of the Pact for Peace signed by all parties. It would also
contain the proposals put forward by the SecretaryGeneral on the reconfiguration of MINUSMA in the
absence of significant progress.
We also call on all parties to cooperate and to
take essential decisions for the benefit of all of them.
Establishing trust is a key element in implementing
the peace agreement. We look forward to the holding
of legislative elections later this year and we hope that
all parties will participate. We are pleased to see that
the preparations for those elections have already begun
and that the Mission is playing a supportive role in
that regard.
With regard to the security situation, we are
concerned about the deterioration in security in a
number of cities in Mali, particularly in the centre of the
country, as Ms. Keita noted in her briefing. The central
part of the country has suffered the majority of the
attacks — 24 out of 64 — during the reporting period.
That region also saw the massacre of 37 civilians on
1 January, in addition to more than 500 civilians who
were killed in the region in 2018. That situation must be
addressed in a comprehensive manner that deals with
the security threats, improves governance and enhances
infrastructure in the region to bring stability to central
Mali and handle the root causes of the situation there.
In that context, we welcome the Government’s latest
plan to address the situation in the central part of
the country, as well as the recent visits by President
Keita and Prime Minister Maïga to the region, which
are indicative of their interest in achieving stability in
that region.
We appreciate the role played by all the military
stakeholders in Mali who are working to combat
terrorism and realize stability and security in the
country. We also appreciate the efforts of the national
and regional military forces to address the security
threats in Mali and the region. We support the regional
initiatives to confront the challenges in the region, and
in that regard we urge the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)to pursue its work in
combating terrorism and to make use of the assistance
provided by MINUSMA, in accordance with Council
resolution 2391 (2017). At the same time, we appreciate
6/23

16/01/2019

the importance of providing sustainable funding for
the Joint Force. We express our readiness to discuss
the various ways in which funds can be provided to the
Joint Force.
Concerning humanitarian issues, we appreciate
the role played by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to mitigate the suffering of the
people, notwithstanding the continued deteriorating
security situation as well as the increasing floods in the
country. The humanitarian situation remains difficult,
affecting more than 7 million people in Mali. There
are difficulties in delivering basic services such as
health care, water and education services. Moreover,
humanitarian workers face the additional challenge
of being targeted by the armed groups operating in
the region.
In order to resolve the humanitarian crisis,
development activities must be undertaken. We are
pleased to note efforts made at the regional and
international levels to support development in Mali
and the region, in particular the G-5 Sahel priority
investment programme, which raised €2.4 billion in
pledges during Nouakchott conference on 6 December
2018; the African Union’s Agenda 2063; and the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
In conclusion, we look forward to the upcoming
report of the Secretary-General in preparation
for the renewal of MINUSMA mandate in June,
making the Mission more efficient in the current
difficult environment.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing and
wish her well in her new role, as this is the first time that
I have seen her since she took it up. I also welcome the
presence of Her Excellency Foreign Minister Camara in
the Security Council.
I will focus largely on the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in my
statement. The year 2018 saw renewed commitments by
the Government of Mali and the signatory armed groups
to the expedited and full implementation of the 2015
agreement. In March, we saw the parties commit to a
road map for the implementation of priority actions. In
October, the Pact for Peace was signed, recommitting
to the swift and inclusive implementation of the
agreement. The United Kingdom welcomes recent
progress, notably the launching of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

process and the establishment of a working group on
the participation of women in the peace process. We
welcome the efforts of the Malian Prime Minister
in support of the implementation of the agreement,
including the establishment of a new Ministry.
Those developments are welcome and underscore
the genuine importance that the Government
attaches to the process. Having heard the Minister
speak with passion and conviction, I know that she
is also personally committed. However, there must
be considerable and rapid further action in order to
achieve the full implementation committed to by all
parties to the agreement. For example, as noted in
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1174),
progress is being made to establish 10 district-level
interim administrations, but steps must now be taken
to operationalize those interim administrations. Of
the 72 civil administrators appointed in June last year,
only 7, we understand, have been deployed to their duty
stations. It has been three and a half years since the
agreement was signed. Timelines in the March 2018
road map have passed unfulfilled.
We are encouraged by the Government’s plans
for 2019, and we hope that those will be successful
so that the Malian people can enjoy a more peaceful
and prosperous future. As Assistant Secretary-General
Keita recalled and the parties to the agreement will
recall, the Security Council decided last month to place
three individuals on the sanctions list compiled by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017) for impeding the peace process. The parties will
also recall our expressed readiness to take further such
measures if needed. The United Kingdom therefore
reiterates its previous calls on the Government of
Mali, the Platform coalition of armed groups and the
Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad to redouble
their efforts and take the additional steps needed for
the immediate implementation of the agreement.
As Assistant Secretary-General Keita said, there is
impatience around the table concerning the missed
milestones that we have heard about meeting after
meeting in the Council.
Turning to the situation on the ground, we recognize
the challenging circumstances in which the Malian
Government and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
operate. The United Kingdom unequivocally condemns
recent attacks against MINUSMA personnel and
supporting contractors. We express our condolences

S/PV. 8445

to the families of those who have tragically lost their
lives, and we thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and all of his staff for their
important work in very challenging circumstances.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about the
large numbers of civilians who continue to be affected
by targeted terrorist attacks and intercommunal clashes,
particularly in the centre of Mali. We welcome the steps
taken by the Government of Mali to re-establish a State
presence by the integrated security plan for the centre.
However, in order to ensure that the root causes of
instability in the centre are sustainably addressed and
enable MINUSMA to provide complementary support,
the United Kingdom encourages the Government to
also develop a comprehensive political strategy for
the centre.
The human rights situation remains concerning.
However, the United Kingdom welcomes the progress
that has been made in the prosecution of members of
the Malian defence and security forces who have been
accused of perpetrating human rights violations. In order
to increase the people’s confidence in those defence
forces, it is critical to thoroughly investigate all human
rights violations and ensure justice and accountability.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom welcomes the
recent steps that have been taken to foster stability in
Mali. Now is the time for further action. Rapid progress
is needed with regard to the implementation of the peace
agreement in a full, effective and inclusive manner,
while political security and development efforts,
particularly in central Mali, are intensified. The United
Kingdom stands ready to support such progress. We are
increasing our diplomatic presence in Mali, the Niger
and Chad. We have deployed Chinook helicopters to
support Operation Barkhane, which provide logistical
support for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel. Our Department for International Development
has spent $317 million across the Sahel in the past four
to five years, and we will significantly increase our
development assistance in coming years.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): For Germany, Mali is
very important. We have been deeply involved in the
peace process and supporting it and the country since
the crisis erupted in 2012. Today, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) includes the biggest deployment
of German soldiers in terms of United Nations troops,
which shows our dedication to the country.

19-011927/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

We also fully recognize the international
engagement of other countries. I want to commend
especially our French friends, as well as what France
and Operation Barkhane are doing for the sake of the
Country’s security and development. I also would like to
welcome Assistant Secretary-General Keita and totally
support what she said, namely, that MINUSMA plays an
essential role in the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. MINUSMA is
therefore a key actor for achieving stabilization in Mali,
together with other civilian and military actors there,
such as the European Union training mission, which
Germany is currently is commanding.

16/01/2019

still has to deal with all of that. But to repeat myself
once again, we recognize what the Prime Minister and
the Government are undertaking, and we of course
understand the difficulties inherent in implementing
all of it.

With regard to the political process, as with
any peacekeeping mission anywhere in the world,
MINUSMA itself cannot supply substitutes for
national political solutions but can only support
their implementation. I also want to underline the
positive developments that Ms. Keita enumerated in
her briefing, such as in the accelerated disarmament
process. However, still more progress must be made
in the areas of decentralization and constitutional and
security-sector reform.

With regard to MINUSMA, we would first like to
welcome the progress that has been made in increasing
peacekeepers’ safety and reducing casualties. We
acknowledge what the Secretariat has done to
implement Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos
Santos Cruz’s report on Improving security of United
Nations peacekeepers. A lot has been done in that
respect, and Germany supports the implementation
of the Cruz report on a bilateral level. MINUSMA
remains a key security umbrella for the humanitarian
development and stabilization efforts that are needed in
the north. When we discuss the renewal of its mandate,
we must focus on ensuring that it is realistic, achievable
and capable of securing the gains that we have made in
the north. We believe we should also do a better job of
capitalizing on MINUSMA’s civilian-military nature
and better connecting it to civilian peacebuilding. That
holds true for all missions.

I would also like to commend the positive steps that
have been taken to involve women in the peace process.
However, as my British colleague just said, more must
be done. In that context, I would like to warmly welcome
the very dedicated and passionate Foreign Minister of
Mali to the Council. It is wonderful to have her here,
and I would like to commend her and her Government
for the efforts they have been undertaking.

With regard to any peace effort in Mali and the
Sahel we have to look at all risk factors. The Council
has probably been expecting this, but I must reiterate
that the security-related effects of climate change
in Mali are obvious, with herders and farmers there
clashing in the wake of droughts and climate change.
More conflict is being driven by climate change, and
that is unfortunately also the case in Mali.

It is important that State capacity be strengthened,
particularly in the centre of the country. I know that
the Malian Government has already done a lot there
but, as Assistant Secretary-General Keita said in her
briefing, the security situation in the central regions
remains serious. There is a great deal to do, but as
others here have said, we also need a leap forward
to restore trust between the population and the
Government authorities. Here I want to repeat what I
have said on other occasions regarding the challenge
that terrorism poses to countries. I always point to the
United Nations Development Programme’s 2017 study
Journey to Extremism in Africa: Drivers, Incentives
and the Tipping Point for Recruitment, which clearly
states that the reasons that drive young people to join
extremist terrorist groups include bad governance,
lack of education, poverty and unemployment, which
are all drivers on the journey to extremism, and Mali

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation
of Mali, to today’s meeting, and thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing.

8/23

We are pleased that on the political front, the
situation in Mali has remained generally stable. We
welcome the efforts by Bamako and the Platform
coalition and Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad
signatory groups to implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We hope that in the runup to the assessment of the parties’ implementation
of the peace agreement planned for March that they
will take additional steps, particularly regarding the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants and the issue of territorial and administrative
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

restructuring reform. If that is successfully achieved,
the parliamentary elections postponed to the summer of
2019 will be held in much more favourable conditions.
We note Bamako’s efforts to restore Government
institutions in northern Mali. The establishment of 10
interim district-level administrations in Kidal, Ménaka
and Timbuktu is unquestionably a big step forward. In
our view, using the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
to support the effectiveness of the work of these
transitional structures would also be very helpful. The
Government and MINUSMA should be more active
in their outreach efforts to explain the essence and
meaning of the peace agreement and the role and tasks
of the United Nations Mission to the people. As time
has shown, the signing in October 2018 of the Pact for
Peace between Bamako and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General has played a positive role
in events in Mali. The fact that representatives of
the Platform coalition and the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad have joined it has given extra
impetus to the implementation of the peace agreement
and the road map.
However, we want to point out that introducing
more and more new sanctions will hardly help to
genuinely consolidate the Malian parties around the
agreements. While we acknowledge the obvious positive
advances in the Malian settlement, we feel obliged to
point to other trends there that are unfortunately less
encouraging. We are concerned about the continuing
increase in the numbers of terrorist acts and we mourn
the peacekeepers who have died in Mali. Human
rights violations are ubiquitous, and inter-ethnic and
intercommunal conflicts continue to simmer in central
Mali. The presence of the authorities will be crucial to
ensuring that they are fully resolved. In that connection,
we take note of the results that the United Nations
Mission has achieved in reconciling warring parties.
We are also worried about the worsening
humanitarian situation. The numbers of people
requiring assistance have gone up almost one and a half
times over the past year. That is not normal. We call
on all outside donors to fund the humanitarian appeal
immediately. We should remember that in conditions of
despair the only option that remains for Mali’s young
people is joining the ranks of terrorist, extremist or
criminal groups. In that regard, it will be extremely
important to ensure that efforts to stimulate economic

S/PV. 8445

activity and restore social services in the central and
northern areas of the country do not slow down.
We welcome the Government of Mali’s eagerness
to take the process into its own hands and actively
advance on a path to political normalization and
economic stabilization. However, we want to point
out that the situation in Mali is an important factor in
African security as a whole. Achieving peace there
would be easier if the situation in the region as a whole
were normalized. The Libya factor continues to play
a negative role in this. The ties between the terrorists
operating in Mali and in the region as a whole are
becoming increasingly clear. In that regard, we support
the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel in
taking concrete steps to form a Joint Force to combat
terrorism and organized crime and hope that their role
in ensuring regional security will grow.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We would like at the
outset to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. We wish also
to express our sincere appreciation to Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing
on the situation in Mali. It was enlightening and also
highlighted the significant progress made and the
amount of work that still needs to be embarked upon.
We also welcome the presence here with us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Ms. Kamissa
Camara, and look forward to her briefing.
I would like to focus my intervention on the four
key pillars that underpin the peace process in Mali:
the political process, the security situation, regional
cooperation and economic development.
First, on the political process, we are encouraged
by the positive developments that have been undertaken
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, as registered in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1174) and described
in the briefing we heard today from Ms. Keita. We
would also like to commend President Ibrahim Keita
for his leadership and Prime Minister Maïga for his
mobilization in support of the implementation of the
agreement. These are positive indicators of a direction
towards peace.
The Council should make a positive appraisal of
these encouraging developments in Mali and accompany

19-011929/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

16/01/2019

the country in keeping a very tight time frame towards
normalization and elections later this year.

cooperation between a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and a regional peace operation in Africa.

In this regard, South Africa calls on all parties to
make every effort to fully implement the 2015 Mali
peace agreement and the recently signed Pact for Peace,
which provides an opportunity to reinvigorate the peace
process in the country. As we know, this is not the first
peace process in Mali, and we as the international
community should provide the necessary support by
creating an enabling environment to sustain peace.

Thirdly, regional cooperation is a critical element
in the case of Mali given the challenges it faces in terms
of transnational crime and terrorist threats, which
further highlights the fact that this is not only a Malian
crisis. Threats to the broader region are imminent if
the current challenges in Mali are not addressed and
curtailed urgently. Consequently, the solidarity of the
region is a critical ingredient in the creation of lasting
peace throughout the Sahel.

We wish to recall that at its thirty-first Summit
in Nouakchott, in July 2018, the African Union
(AU) Assembly welcomed “the gains made in the
implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation” and urged “speedy progress as the only
way to durable peace and security in the country”.
The Assembly also welcomed the progress made by
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5) Joint Force and
reiterated the AU commitment to assist in the regionally
coordinated response within the framework of the
Nouakchott process and other regional frameworks.
Secondly, on the security pillar, we are encouraged
by the progress made in the launch of the acceleration
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process as well as security-sector reform. Furthermore,
we commend the measures taken by the Malian
Government in improving the working conditions of the
security services. My delegation is of the view that it is
vital that Mali’s security forces be given the necessary
capacity, equipped and strengthened in order to address
the challenges faced by the country. We believe that
this will bring sustainable peace and stability to the
country. Furthermore, the Force should garner the trust
of the Malian people as a whole.
South Africa also recognizes the important work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and
the troop-contributing countries in supporting the
implementation of the peace agreement as well as
providing capacity-building to ensure the gradual
restoration of State authority and services throughout
Mali, including in the centre of the country.
Moreover, my delegation fully supports the unique
partnership between MINUSMA and the G-5 Joint
Force in the process of restoring peace and stability in
Mali and the wider Sahel region. As has been recognized
by the Council, that partnership represents positive
10/23

The G-5 represents a concrete example of
neighbouring countries contributing to the peace and
stability of their own region. Therefore, every effort
should be made by the United Nations, including the
Council, and its Member States to ensure that the G-5
Joint Force is fully capacitated so that it can effectively
implement its mandate. In addition, we take note of and
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation that
the Council establish a United Nations support office
for the G-5 Joint Force.
The situation in Mali illustrates the severe
asymmetrical threat faced by United Nations
peacekeepers. In the context of these threats, such as
terrorist attacks against United Nations personnel, the
Security Council must ensure that these operations
are, first, fully resourced; secondly, entrusted with the
appropriate mandate to respond to the context-specific
environments in which they are deployed; and, thirdly,
adequately equipped to protect themselves and defend
their mandate.
Fourthly, and lastly, I would like to underscore the
need for economic development so as to sustain the
peace we are trying to bring about in Mali. The people
need to benefit from the peace dividends that result
from the agreement. Ordinary people need to feel the
change and be able to earn their livelihood.
It is key, therefore, that the international
community support the people of Mali through
economic and infrastructure investment that would
help them to overcome the challenges currently facing
them. This will contribute not only to a stable Mali and
a stable region, but also to a peaceful and prosperous
African continent.
We thank France for the press statement and
reiterate that, as always, it has our support.
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence of Foreign Minister Camara.
We also thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for
her briefing.
Since taking office, President Keita has remained
actively committed to pursuing the peace process in
Mali. China commends the fact that Government and
the people of Mali have made considerable efforts to
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and achieved positive progress. That said,
in northern and central Mali the security situation
continues to worsen, with rampant terrorist activities
having a serious impact on the peace process in the
country. The international community should continue
to support peace and development in the country.
First, we should assist all parties in Mali in the
implementation of the peace agreement. We hope
that the signatory parties will consolidate the current
positive momentum, continue to strengthen mutual
trust and implement all provisions of the agreement
so as to jointly engage in Mali’s development and
reconstruction. The international community should
help Mali build its capacity in the areas of development
and governance, on the basis of respect for Mali’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
The Council’s sanctions regime in Mali should aim
to support the political process in strict accordance
with the Council’s mandate.
Secondly, we must assist Mali in enhancing
its security capacity-building, as a response to the
increasingly complex security challenges in northern
and central Mali and as requested by the Malian
Government. The international community should
continue to support and assist the Government in
redoubling its security and counter-terrorism capacities
so that the Government can gradually assume the
responsibilities for ensuring nationwide security.
Peace and security in Mali are closely linked with
the overall security situation in the surrounding region.
It is imperative to take a comprehensive approach and
engage in regional cooperation with a view to curbing
terrorist activities within and around Mali. China
welcomes the efforts of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel to take ownership in the fight against
terrorism in the region, as well as other security threats.
We commend all the work done by the United Nations
and MINUSMA to support the Joint Force.

S/PV. 8445

Thirdly, we must support the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) in its ongoing work. MINUSMA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif have played an important role and made
tremendous efforts to maintain Mali’s stability and
strengthen its security capacity. They have done much to
assist Mali’s peace process. We are keen for MINUSMA
to continue to stay engaged and work closely with the
Government and make its active contribution.
China takes note of the vigorous measures taken
by the Secretariat and MINUSMA to better guarantee
the safety and security of peacekeepers. We encourage
MINUSMA to continue to strengthen the security of its
personnel and to ensure that all materials to guarantee
security are in place, while communicating more with
the troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and donors
so that MINUSMA is well-equipped and sufficiently
funded to fulfil its mandate and practice self-defence.
China is a firm supporter of Mali’s peace
and development. China is an important TCC to
MINUSMA, with more than 400 Chinese peacekeepers
discharging their duties in MINUSMA across a broad
range of functions, such as health workers, engineers,
security guards and so on. Their ability to perform their
duties has been widely praised. China will continue to
work with the international community to contribute to
peace, stability and prosperity in Mali.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in French):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
thank Assistant-Secretary-General Bintou Keita for
her briefing. Similarly, we welcome the presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa
Camara. We are grateful for her presence, which
signifies the support of her Government for the
peace process.
(spoke in Spanish)
We acknowledge the recent strides made in
Mali, including the establishment of provisional
administrations at the district level and the
implementation of an accelerated process of
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration. We also highlight the establishment of
the Ministry of National Reconciliation and Social
Cohesion. Peru believes that the full implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
should remain the priority for the Malian Government

19-0119211/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

and people, with the support of the international
community. On the basis of that progress, it is essential
that all parties pool their efforts around three core
objectives, which we believe are important to prioritize.
First, with respect to the political process, we
believe that it is necessary to work without delay on the
political and institutional reforms required to improve
governance, security and socioeconomic development,
as set forth in resolution 2423 (2018) and in the Pact for
Peace. It is also urgent to move forward with reforms
related to the constitutional review, decentralization
and upholding the rule of law. Those elements are
central to the development of peaceful, transparent
and inclusive legislative elections, as well as to lead to
greater social cohesion.
Secondly, with regard to the fight against insecurity,
we note with alarm the situation of ongoing violence and
instability in various parts of the country, especially
in central Mali, which is evidenced by a precarious
humanitarian situation. We support the efforts being
made to strengthen the Malian armed forces in order to
equip them with the technical and training capabilities
that will enable them to confront terrorist and rebel
groups, while also counting on the trust and support
of the population. It is equally important to strengthen
national control over the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, which triggers a continuous spiral of
violence. We believe that it is also key to complement
those actions with the establishment of an independent
judicial system that can address human rights violations,
as well as contribute to the fight against impunity and for
accountability for various crimes, such as kidnapping,
sexual violence and intercommunal violence.
Thirdly, in relation to the promotion of sustainable
development, we highlight the efforts of the Malian
Government in developing the strategic framework for
economic recovery and sustainable development, and
the support provided by the Peacebuilding Commission
Fund to carry out projects aimed at building a peaceful
and inclusive society. However, we are concerned about
the inequality in economic performance between the
capital Bamako and the other regions of the country.
The attainment of sustainable peace will be possible
only through a comprehensive approach that includes
improvements in security, political dialogue and the
rule of law as essential requirements to address the root
causes of the conflict.
12/23

16/01/2019

We also believe that it is indispensable to promote
measures that include greater participation and
empowerment of women. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment of a working group on women’s
participation in the peace process, under the leadership
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). In the
same vein, we believe that the involvement of young
people in defining and building the future of their
country is crucial.
In conclusion, we would like to acknowledge the
role of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
in strengthening the regional response to terrorism and
transnational organized crime, as well as the courageous
work of the MINUSMA forces in particularly difficult
operational environments and situations. We reaffirm
our strong support for the efforts undertaken by the
Council and other regional and international actors
for sustainable peace in Mali, which will be possible
only with the decisive and firm leadership of the
Malians themselves.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would also like to
thank Assistant-Secretary General Keita for her
comprehensive briefing on the most recent situation in
Mali, and I would also like to extend our appreciation to
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as well as to all
MINUSMA personnel for their work in maintaining
peace and stability in Mali. I furthermore welcome to
the Chamber the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali,
Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara.
In line with resolution 2423 (2018), allow me
to highlight three pertinent points with regard to
supporting the peace process and development in
the country.
First, Indonesia welcomes the progress achieved
in the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The establishment of interim
administrations in northern Mali and the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
integration process marked the good intentions of all
signatory parties to deliver their obligations under the
agreement. That aside, Indonesia believes that the pace
of progress should be accelerated if the March 2019
deadline is to be achieved. Focus should be placed
on key provisions, including the effective functioning
of interim authorities, territorial and administrative
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

restructuring, the operationalization of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism and the development of the
northern development zone.
We took note of the postponement of legislative
elections to 2019 and hope that the elections will
proceed in a peaceful, inclusive, transparent and
credible manner. We cannot overstate the importance
of a political process in achieving national
reconciliation and reconstruction. We therefore hope
that all parties will continue to show political will to
ensure the implementation of the agreement within the
specified timeline.
Secondly, we remain concerned over the security
situation in Mali, as detailed in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1174). We note with
concern the continuous targeting of MINUSMA by
asymmetrical attacks from armed groups, as stated in
the Secretary General’s report, as well as the increased
use of incidents involving the use of improvised
explosive devices. We view it to be of crucial importance
to strengthen capacities, address equipment shortfalls
and ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. We pay tribute to and our prayers are with
the peacekeepers who lost their lives, as well as those
who continue to risk their lives on a daily basis, even
as we speak. We in Indonesia take pride in having our
peacekeepers on the ground to assist our brothers and
sisters in Mali.
In addition, it is important for the international
community to enhance the capacities of Malian law
enforcement, including police personnel, inter alia,
through training and capacity-building. We appreciate
efforts to promote technical assistance to the Malian
specialized unit tasked with combating terrorism and
transnational organized crime, as described in the
report of the Secretary-General. It is also our view that
State capacity should also be enhanced to ensure the
presence of State authority in all areas, establish a safe
environment for civilians and limit the influence of
violent extremism and terrorism.
Indonesia is also deeply concerned about the
humanitarian and human rights conditions in Mali,
which remain precarious and continue to deteriorate.
Given the interlinkage of issues, we believe that it is
of crucial importance to adopt a more integrated and
comprehensive approach, including by addressing the
root causes of conflict and security challenges in Mali.
In that regard, assistance for development and economic

S/PV. 8445

recovery is much needed and we call on the international
community to provide support to Mali’s development
agenda so as to enable it to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals. Economic development is in line
with sustaining peace and that is an important step in
helping Mali to become safe and secure.
Thirdly, peace and stability in Mali have a direct
impact on the rest of the region. That is evident given
the cross-border nature of many issues, including the
activities of armed groups, as well as illicit arms and
drug trafficking. Therefore, it is our view that lasting
peace and stability in Mali can be achieved only through
strengthened cooperation among all countries of the
region. It is equally important to support regional and
subregional organizations, as they are better positioned
to address regional peace and security issues. The
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations must be enhanced to that
effect, including with the members of the Group of Five
for the Sahel.
With regard to United Nations engagement in Mali,
we welcome the development of an integrated strategic
framework. We believe that considerations concerning
any future engagement by the United Nations in Mali,
including the possible adjustment of MINUSMA,
should take into account Mali’s national priorities and
institutional capacities. We believe that this is important
to ensure that the progress thus far achieved can be
maintained, while ensuring the long-term stability of
the country. Indonesia remains committed to playing
a constructive role in the achievement of lasting peace
and stability in Mali.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin my statement today by
expressing our strong rejection and condemnation of
the terrorist attack that took place at the Dusit complex
in Nairobi, which left at least 14 people dead and
many injured. We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Government and the people of Kenya for the lives lost
and convey our condolences to the families affected.
As this is the first time that I am taking the floor
since the Dominican Republic began its presidency, I
should like to personally congratulate you, Sir, on your
skilful guidance of the work on the Security Council’s
agenda this month. I again commend the delegation of
Côte d’Ivoire for the very able and successful manner in
which it presided over the Council in December. I also
welcome the newly elected members of the Council

19-0119213/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

that have joined us in our noble work to maintain
international peace and security.
We welcome Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa
Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali, to New York.
(spoke in French)
I wish her every success in her post that carries
great responsibility and a pleasant stay in New York. I
thank her very much for her briefing.
(spoke in Spanish)
As the delegations that have taken the floor before
me have underscored, the loss of State authority in
central and northern Mali continues to have security
consequences. Despite strong international support
and mobilization for the full implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, the
situation in the country remains very worrisome.
The security situation in northern and central Mali
remains critical. There is ongoing intercommunal
violence among ethnic groups, in particular the Fulani,
the Bambara and the Dogon. A unilateral ceasefire
announced in October 2018 by the Dogon Dan Nan
Ambassagou militia was not upheld and clashes
continued. Terrorist groups take advantage of such
tensions to increase recruitment and attempt to gain
legitimacy in their communities.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would again like
to strongly condemn the ongoing attacks perpetrated
against the Blue Helmets, United Nations personnel,
the Malian armed forces and, above all, civilians. We
express our gratitude and pay a well-deserved tribute
to all defence forces — national and international
alike — that take part in the heroic effort to combat
terrorism and transnational organized crime in Mali
and throughout the Sahel. It should be emphasized
that, since the establishment of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali in 2013, 106 peacekeepers have lost their lives,
alongside members of the Malian army and the civilian
population. In spite of the challenging conditions,
we welcome the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and highlight its determination to build peace and
promote social cohesion by funding and implementing
various projects, such as the recent construction and
development of agricultural infrastructure in the
Gao region.
14/23

16/01/2019

Given the discouraging context I have described,
we encourage the Government of Mali, the Platform
coalition of armed groups and Coordination
des mouvements de l’Azawad to accelerate the
implementation of key provisions of the peace
agreement, which are emphasized in resolution 2423
(2018). In that regard, we welcome the implementation
of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and integration process, which should
allow the army to be better prepared and equipped
to boost security in northern and central Mali, where
jihadists operate. We also welcome the establishment
of the Ministry for Social Cohesion, Peace and
National Reconciliation, which faithfully reflects the
political will of Bamako to institutionalize its efforts
to ensure the full implementation of the agreement.
We call on the international community to support the
efforts of the Government because the solution to the
current situation in this brotherly country lies in fully
implementing the peace agreement, which is the key.
On the path to peace and stability in Mali, it is
important that all political actors and other signatory
parties understand that now is not the time for
backtracking or undermining the progress achieved
following so many years of conflict. They must instead
be resolved to prioritize and support all initiatives aimed
at ensuring a prosperous future for the people of Mali.
In that regard, it is essential to recall that the Pact for
Peace expresses the commitment of the parties to giving
powerful momentum to the implementation of the peace
agreement and serves as a catalyst for strengthening the
inclusive nature of the political process. We therefore
emphasize the importance of including all political
and social agents associated with the signatory armed
movements in the decision-making processes on
political and institutional reforms.
We believe that it is always appropriate, when
considering the situation in Mali and in the Sahel, to
emphasize the nexus between security, governance
and development, among other factors, because in the
long term terrorism will be totally defeated only by
addressing its root causes.
In accordance with the press release issued by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union on
17 December 2018, we reaffirm the multidimensional
nature of the challenges facing Mali and the region,
because counteracting the terrorist threat requires a
comprehensive approach that pools efforts in the field of
security and ongoing development and the improvement
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

S/PV. 8445

of the socioeconomic conditions of the populations of
the regions that are facing terrorist activities, which
feed on fragile conditions and difficulties, especially
among young people, in the context of efforts to address
the root causes of extremism.

development. Therefore, we call on all parties to
redouble their efforts to implement key provisions of
the agreement so as to improve security conditions and
establish sustainable development, including access to
basic social services.

We reiterate the crucial role of women’s
empowerment and girls’ education programmes in longterm efforts to combat violent extremism and terrorism.

The full and timely implementation of the agreement
will require strong support across Malian society.
In that regard, we welcome the broad endorsement
for the Pact for Peace signed by the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali and the Government. We call on all stakeholders
to join the Government in its efforts to move forward on
the critical political and institutional reforms necessary
for improved governance and sustaining peace. The
meaningful inclusion and participation of individuals,
especially women and youth, remains essential to
securing the progress already made.

I conclude by paying a sincere tribute to the hard
and commendable work being carried out by His
Excellency President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and the
Government of Mali for the return of stability and
State authority to Mali. One result of this effort is
the situation in Kidal, in the north of Mali, where all
political parties were able to come together during the
latest presidential elections to carry out their political
proselytizing in total peace and harmony.
(spoke in French)
We also wish to express our gratitude and
appreciation to France for Operation Barkhane, which
is working with Mali in these efforts.
(spoke in Spanish)
In that regard, we thank and commend Ms. Keita
for her briefing and her endeavour, alongside the
peacekeeping operation, to restore peace to Mali.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Assistant-Secretary-General Bintou Keita for her very
informative briefing on recent developments in Mali.
(spoke in French)
I also welcome the presence among us of Her
Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali.
(spoke in English)
I would like to focus my intervention around three
issues: the political process, the security situation and
the human rights and humanitarian situation.
First, on the political process, we commend steps
taken by the Government of Mali and the Platform and
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad to deliver
on their remaining obligations under the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, including the creation
of the Ministry for Social Cohesion, Peace and National
Reconciliation. However, lasting peace and stability
cannot be established without inclusive and sustainable

Secondly, we remain seriously concerned about the
security situation in Mali, particularly in the centre.
This situation needs to be urgently addressed through
a more integrated and comprehensive approach so as to
prevent further deterioration. Therefore, we call on the
Government to step up its efforts to address the root
causes of conflict and security challenges in affected
areas. We hope that the implementation of adequate
national strategies and plans — including the integrated
security plan for the centre — will prove its efficiency
in this context.
We strongly condemn the attacks against civilians
in the village of Koulogon Peul in Mali and call for the
perpetrators to be held accountable. If the situation in
Mali is to improve, the effective implementation of the
peace agreement will be crucial. We express our deep
condolences to the families of the victims.
Thirdly, with respect to human rights, we remain
seriously concerned about the human rights situations,
particularly in the centre of the country in the Ségou
and Mopti regions, as well as along the border of
the Timbuktu, Gao and Ménaka regions, where
serious human rights violations and abuses continue
to be reported. Let me reiterate that all national and
international military forces operating in Mali must
ensure that their operations comply with international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
No effort should be spared to hold the perpetrators of
human rights violations accountable.
We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation. Access to basic services and

19-0119215/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

assistance, such as food, water and sanitation, shelter,
as well as education and health care, remain limited
and challenging. Therefore, we call on the signatory
and other armed groups to engage in dialogue with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahamet Saleh Annadif, and the United Nations
country team to improve humanitarian access.
In conclusion, there is no doubt that Mali’s stability
remains key to that of the whole Sahel region. Therefore,
Poland commends Special Representative Annadif for
his excellent leadership and all United Nations civilian
and uniformed personnel for their continued hard work
in a challenging environment.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, and like the delegation of Equatorial Guinea,
allow me to offer my delegation’s condolences to
the Government and the people of Kenya following
yesterday’s
terrorist
attack,
which
claimed
numerous victims.
My delegation welcomes the presence among us of
Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, to whom we extend
our warmest congratulations on her appointment to her
high office, as well as our ardent wishes for success in
the lofty mission that has been entrusted to her.
We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
for her excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the status of implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
(S/2018/1174), as well as the multifaceted support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Mission for
Stabilization in Mali (MINUSMA) in pursuit of lasting
peace and stability in that country, in accordance with
resolution 2423 (2018).
The Secretary-General’s report inspires my
delegation to comment on the political, security and
humanitarian situations in Mali.
Côte d’Ivoire notes with interest the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment of the actions take by the Malian
parties towards the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation emanating from the
Algiers process, which remains essential to achieving
a sustainable end to the crisis in Mali. In that regard,
it welcomes the creation of the Ministry for Social
Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation as an
institutional tool that will lead to better coordination
16/23

16/01/2019

of Government action in the operationalization of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. My country
urges Malian political actors, as well as civil society, to
further coordinate their efforts to bring about a lasting
return to peace and stability in Mali, particularly in the
northern and central regions.
The Pact for Peace, signed on 15 October, which
calls for a more inclusive approach to the peace
process, as well as the commitment of the signatory
armed groups to adhere to an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process and
the integration process of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, are
encouraging signals. In that context, it is essential that
the efforts of local actors receive the continued support
of the international community, including the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States and the independent observer, who must maintain
their level of engagement in support of peace in Mali.
My country encourages the Malian authorities to
capitalize on the positive momentum of the presidential
election, with a view to organizing legislative elections,
which will further entrench democracy in Mali.
On the security front, Côte d’Ivoire shares the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General on the
situation in the northern and central regions of Mali,
in particular where attacks by extremist groups and
recurrent episodes of community violence undermine
the social balance that is the foundation for peaceful
coexistence among the people of the region. Human
rights violations by extremist groups and the emergence
of self-defence groups unquestionably undermine
all efforts by the Malian Government and the
international community to restore peace and stability
to those regions.
That situation requires urgent action by the Council
to redeploy police and judicial institutions in order to
enable the Malian State to fully assume its sovereign
functions. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls for continued
MINUSMA support for the capacity-building of
the Malian armed forces and police, as well as their
redeployment to ensure the protection of civilians in
affected areas. Those measures must be accompanied
by strengthening judicial institutions, particularly
those specializing in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime.
It is also important to give greater impetus to the
DDR process and security sector reform, which are
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

essential for reducing violence and building a Malian
army as a tool for peace and stability. To that end, my
country welcomes the launch, on 6 November, of the ad
hoc accelerated DDR process, which has enabled the
integration of combatants from the signatory groups. In
turn, they will ensure the security of the DDR process,
under the control of the Technical Commission on
Security, and will participate in armed action against
terrorist groups.
The difficult humanitarian situation, which,
according to the Secretary-General’s report, could
affect 7.2 million people in 2019, remains a matter of
serious concern. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes
the assistance provided by specialized agencies.
However, we remain convinced that multifaceted
responses to humanitarian challenges must be part of an
approach based on promoting economic development,
including combating poverty and unemployment — the
underlying, general causes of insecurity and instability
in the Sahel. In that connection, it is fitting to welcome
the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel and the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, which aim to
intensify and better coordinate support to the States
of the region in order to bring about shared prosperity
and a secure environment in northern Mali and the
Sahel region.
My country commends the combined efforts of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) member
States and international donors, which made it
possible, at the conference held in Nouackchott on
6 December, to mobilize €2.4 billion to finance the
40 key projects included in the 2019-2020 Priority
Investment Programme.

S/PV. 8445

end, it requires coordinated efforts by all regional and
international actors.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the unity of the Council
and the continued mobilization of the international
community in support of MINUSMA, as well as its
logistical and operational support to the G-5 Sahe1 Joint
Force, in accordance with resolution 2391 (2017). We
reiterate our call for the Security Council to strengthen
its support for the Malian Government.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its conviction
and confidence in the Malian people and Government to
make the Malian people’s yearning for peace, stability
and prosperity a reality. We support the press statement
proposed by France.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her briefing
today. I would also like to thank Foreign Minister
Camara for participating in today’s meeting.
Sadly, this has been a very difficult reporting period
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Over the
past three months, the Mission saw two peacekeepers
killed and 42 injured, and three contractors killed and
nine injured. That is a sobering reminder to those of
us in the Chamber that MINUSMA remains the most
dangerous peacekeeping mission in the world. The
United States recognizes the risks that the soldiers and
civilians of MINUSMA face, and we pay tribute to
those who have paid the ultimate price and to all the
soldiers, civilians and their families who sacrifice daily
to bring peace and stability to the people of Mali.

MINUSMA, an essential pillar of the current
security framework in Mali and the region, deserves the
continued support of our Council. The complementarity
of its actions with the various forces involved, namely,
the Malian armed forces, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
Operation Barkhane and the European missions, is a
major asset in the fight against terrorism and organized
crime throughout the region. We therefore consider it
imperative to enhance its capacity to react effectively
and even anticipate attacks against its civilian and
military personnel.

In addition to those attacks against the United
Nations mission, we continue to witness heinous acts of
violence against civilians and security forces, especially
in the centre of the country. The United States strongly
condemns the terrorist groups and the so-called selfdefence groups for that growing violence. While we
welcome the Government’s efforts to address the
deteriorating security situation in the centre, we call on
the Government of Mali and MINUSMA to hasten their
efforts to protect civilians, work to end intercommunal
conflict and quickly hold accountable and bring to
justice those responsible for these violent acts.

The terrorist attacks spreading to neighbouring
countries are a reminder that, well beyond Mali’s
borders, the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime is a regional security issue. To that

Every civilian, peacekeeper and security force
member killed and injured underscores the need to fully
implement the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali and swiftly implement the provisions of

19-0119217/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

resolution 2423 (2018). The United States recognizes
that some progress has been made since the presidential
elections last summer. We commend the establishment
of 10 district-level interim administrations and greater
coordination between the Government and the signatory
parties. We also commend the accelerated disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and integration process
of the Operational Coordination Mechanism elements
in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu. However, we understand
there have been some issues regarding living conditions
and next steps for those units. We look forward to
hearing more about the Government of Mali’s plans for
utilizing the newly integrated armed group fighters to
secure northern Mali.
We are frustrated and disappointed that more is
not being done to quickly implement the provisions
specified in paragraph 4 of resolution 2423 (2018). In
October, we made it very clear (see S/PV.8376) that
resolution 2423 (2018) demands that signatory parties
must show significant progress, or face changes to
MINUSMA after the expiration of the mandate. We
repeat that today. There is more to be done.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): At the outset, I wish to thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing, all the more
valuable as it was informed by her recent visit to
Mali. I would also like to welcome the Malian Foreign
Minister, Ms. Kamissa Camara, who is participating in
a Security Council meeting for the first time.
I would like to begin by paying tribute to the
memory of Malian and foreign staff and soldiers who
lost their lives in Mali, whether they were civilian
victims or died while deployed on mission.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, signed in Bamako in May and
June 2015, is the cornerstone for a sustainable solution
to the crisis in Mali. That commitment undertaken
by Malian parties, supported by the international
community, must lead to a comprehensive, goodfaith implementation of the various provisions of
the agreement. Belgium is greatly concerned about
the delays in its implementation, which undermines
peace, stability, development and reconciliation
in Mali. Worse still, it allows violence to spread, be
it in central Mali or the subregion. In accordance with
their own commitment in the road map of last March,
I therefore solemnly call on the three Malian parties
18/23

16/01/2019

to the agreement, but also all stakeholders, to redouble
their efforts and show courage to ensure that the
provisions of the agreement become a reality, despite
the difficulties and obstacles, which, I am aware, are
sometimes significant.
At the same time, I would like to welcome all
the progress made since 2015, including the most
recent, such as the establishment of the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and the redeployment of part of the territorial
administration in the north of the country. I also
welcome the establishment of a working group on the
participation of women in the peace process, under
the leadership of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
which is a step towards more inclusive implementation
of the agreement. It is also essential to ensure that
the measures taken in implementation of the peace
agreement are sustainable and receive the necessary
funding to ensure their sustainability.
Finally, given the centrality of the peace agreement, I
would like to stress that Belgium welcomes the sanctions
imposed on those who hinder the implementation of the
agreement. Belgium will not oppose new sanctions in
the future if they prove necessary.
Let me stress two essential conditions for the return
of lasting peace: respect for human rights and, more
specifically, the fight against impunity.
Part of the Mopti and Ségou regions, in central
Mali, remain affected by violence that shows no signs
of waning. In addition to terrorist acts, intercommunity
violence appears to be on the rise. That phenomenon
is worrisome in a country such as Mali, which is
historically a country of diversity and peaceful
coexistence. Terrorists and aggressive militias must
not be allowed to take root. I therefore encourage the
Government to exercise its sovereign authority by
ensuring the security of its population with the strictest
respect for human rights, as Mali undertook to do in
January 2018 during its Universal Periodic Review
before the Human Rights Council.
With the courage and responsibility they assumed,
which deserves respect, the Malian authorities publicly
acknowledged, on 19 June 2018, the existence of mass
graves involving certain members of the Malian armed
forces and announced the opening of a judicial inquiry.
We call on Mali to continue its efforts to open and
conclude the investigation. I also welcome the fact that
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

the International Commission of Inquiry has begun
its activities, and I encourage all parties involved
to cooperate fully with its work. I also hope that
MINUSMA — within the limits of its mandate — will
act in support of the authorities and also protect civilians
from the violence.
More generally, as the Council regularly points out,
the solution cannot be related only to security, although
that is essential. The aspirations expressed in terms of
governance and social services deserve to be heard.
Living together, the refusal to stigmatize specific
ethnic groups, local mediation and combating impunity
must all support the security response. Only Malians
hold the key, and MINUSMA must support them in
those efforts.
Belgium welcomes the development of an
integrated strategic framework by MINUSMA and
the United Nations country team. We call for its
finalization as soon as possible. It is essential that the
resources available to the United Nations as a whole in
Mali be used to the fullest and in the most efficient and
integrated way possible. Similarly, Belgium remains
attentive to the integrated nature of MINUSMA and
encourages all pillars to work together closely. Finally,
allow me to commend the efforts of all Mission staff,
and in particular Special Representative Annadif.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Dominican Republic.
First of all, I would like to thank Ms. Bentiu
Keita, Assistant-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, for her briefing. We urge her
and all the actors on the ground to continue their efforts
in the search for peace and stability in the Republic of
Mali. Those are the conditions that will make it possible
to lay the groundwork for the country’s economic and
social development. We would also like to thank Her
Excellency Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali, for
being with us.
We know that the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has faced major
challenges in establishing the necessary conditions for
peace and lasting stability in the country. However, we
must acknowledge that renewed commitment by the
parties has made it possible for the adoption of certain
measures, including the establishment of an accelerated
process of disarmament, demobilization, reintegration

S/PV. 8445

and integration and the establishment of the Ministry
of Social Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation.
That has made it possible to undertake initiatives aimed
at increasing the participation of women in the peace
process. All those political and institutional measures
and other measures to strengthen security are aimed at
accelerating the implementation of a peace process that
is more inclusive and that is in full compliance with the
peace agreement.
We would like to commend the people and the
Government of Mali, as well as MINUSMA and other
stakeholders, for achieving that progress. However,
it is also important to address the increase in attacks
that occurred in the country during the last few months
of 2018. The attacks illustrate the deterioration of the
security situation in the central part of the country and
the need to take immediate steps. We are particularly
concerned by the increase in attacks launched by
extremist groups in the central and northern regions
of the country against MINUSMA, against the
Malian defence and security forces and against other
international forces.
In addition to those attacks, we are seeing acts
of intimidation, kidnapping and selective killings
of civilians and members of armed groups that
are signatories of the peace agreement, especially
in the centre of the country. Also, we are seeing
intercommunal violence and fighting in the central
parts of Mali. We emphatically condemn all attacks
on civilians, especially on women and children.
We express our condolences to the families of the
victims. We would also like to state our rejection of all
violations of international human rights standards and
international humanitarian law. We will make all the
necessary efforts to ensure that those responsible for
violations are brought to justice.
Furthermore, we acknowledge the importance of
the work of France, the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the European Union and
MINUSMA, as well as the Malian defence and security
forces. Their efforts to protect civilians, neutralize
armed groups and prosecute those responsible for
the crimes I mentioned. We urge the international
community to provide financial support to the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and ensure that its troops are well equipped.
We commend MINUSMA for its commitment and
dedication to protecting civilians, even under difficult
circumstances, as well as the technical assistance
provided to the legal authorities of Mali in terms of

19-0119219/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

combating terrorism and transnational crime, logistical
support and support in investigating and training police
and human rights training.
We also continue to be concerned about the
humanitarian needs of the population. According to the
2019 humanitarian response plan, it is estimated that,
owing to the armed conflict, crime and severe flooding,
approximately 7.2 million people will be affected, of
which 3.2 million will require humanitarian assistance.
We call for continued support for the humanitarian
response plan in order to improve access to humanitarian
assistance and basic services for the most vulnerable.
The Dominican Republic would like to express its
concern about the effects of climate change regarding the
deterioration of lands and food insecurity, which have a
direct impact on stability in Mali. As expressed by the
Security Council, such land deterioration undermines
the means of subsistence and leads to a struggle for
available resources. We believe that climate change
has become one of the main challenges both for the
population and for the Government. In that regard, we
reiterate the need to tackle the adverse effects of climate
change, environmental changes and natural disasters. It
is also important that the Government of Mali and the
United Nations take into account the appropriate risk
assessment and risk management strategies regarding
those factors in order to overcome that major challenge.
In conclusion, we reiterate that the immediate
implementation of the basic provisions of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is essential to
prevent conflict and to uphold human rights. We
urge the parties, the entire population of Mali and the
international community to continue this dialogue to
ensure that the parties live up to the responsibility of
complying with the road map and make Mali a country
where peace, stability and the development of its
people prevail.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Kamissa
Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of Mali.
Ms. Kamissa (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to extend to you, Mr. President, the warm
congratulations of the delegation of Mali on the
assumption by your country, the Dominican Republic,
to the presidency of the Security Council for the
20/23

16/01/2019

month of January. I assure you of my delegation’s full
cooperation in that regard. I would like to reiterate my
warm congratulations and best wishes to South Africa,
Germany, Belgium, Indonesia and the Dominican
Republic in the execution of their terms as new
members of the Council. I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the delegations of Bolivia,
Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, the Netherlands and Sweden and
to thank them for their valuable contributions to the
pursuit of international peace and security.
This meeting gives me the welcome opportunity
to reiterate to all members of the Security Council,
Secretary-General António Guterres and all United
Nations staff who deal with Mali the deep appreciation
of the President of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency
Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita, and the Government and
the people of Mali for their continued commitment to
peace and security in Mali, the Sahel and the rest of
the world.
The delegation of Mali takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/1174) under consideration.
I congratulate Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, on
her brilliant briefing and updates since the issuance
of the report. I also take note of the comments and
high expectations that Council members have just
expressed. I would now like to share the observations
of the Government of Mali on the report in terms of
progress made, the major challenges encountered and
the prospects for the coming months in the context of
the process of ending the crisis in our country.
I would therefore like to begin by affirming that
the President of the Republic of Mali, the Government,
the Coordination des mouvements de l’Azawad and
the Platform coalition of armed groups remain fully
committed to the diligent and inclusive implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
emanating from the Algiers process. Today, I am
pleased to say that the Government and the signatory
movements are now a single Malian party, which speaks
with one voice and is determined to ensure peace for
the benefit of our people, who have suffered six years of
a multifaceted crisis. That common will of the Malian
parties to ensure peace in our country continues to
demonstrate real progress, and I am pleased that the
report under consideration has acknowledged those
encouraging advances.
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

As part of the political and institutional reforms,
the period was therefore marked by the reaffirmation
of the Head of State’s resolve to revise the Constitution
in order to assume responsibility for certain relevant
provisions of the agreement and to adapt our institutional
practices to the current realities. In order to achieve
that, at the Council of Ministers on 20 December 2018,
the Head of State instructed the Prime Minister, Head
of Government, to initiate the constitutional review
and the necessary institutional reforms as part of a
consensual and inclusive process.
In accordance with that presidential instruction,
the Prime Minister set up a committee of experts to
undertake the constitutional review. In that regard,
we plan to hold the referendum on the revision of the
Constitution in the first quarter of 2019, the legislative
elections in May/June 2019 and the local elections in
July 2019. I should say that, in order to achieve reforms
acceptable to our people, the Government has also
started consultations with political and societal actors,
including the signatory movements, with a view to
reaching a consensus on those reforms.
At the same time, consultations on the territorial
division project continue in order to bring our
administrative structures closer to our people and their
needs. I am pleased that the Secretary-General has
noted that the percentage of civil administrators and
other State representatives in the northern and central
regions has slightly increased over the reporting period,
from 31 per cent to 34 per cent.
In the area of defence and security, I am pleased to
note that the ongoing security sector reform has resulted
in the registration of combatants of armed movements,
with a total of 32,908 troops and, in terms of weapons
and ammunition, 5,943 submachine guns, 3,736 rifles,
990 machine guns, 473 pistols, 225 rockets, 490 heavy
weapons, 6 122-mm missiles, 39 improvised explosive
devices, 3,177 grenades, 201 shells and more than
85,000 munitions.
That operation was followed by the accelerated
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process of the Operational Coordination Mechanism
elements, launched on 6 November 2018 with the
support of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
The operation made it possible to register and to
disarm 1,423 of the planned 1,600 combatants from two
signatory movements and other armed groups. Those

S/PV. 8445

disarmed combatants will go through an upgrading
phase before being redeployed to take on the tasks of
the Operational Coordination Mechanism, namely,
ensuring the security of the rest of the DDR process in
a climate that, as members know, is difficult. I welcome
the cooperation of MINUSMA, which has contributed
significantly to the success of the process.
On the same topic, I would like to underline that the
security sector reform process also led to the holding
of a high-level workshop on security sector reform in
Bamako from 12 to 14 December 2018, during which
the key issues that had remained outstanding for three
years were addressed in order to obtain a consensual
response that would allow for progress. That relates
in particular to the concepts of a reconstituted army,
special units and territorial police. The exact details
and the specific content of those concepts have been
established. There are also modalities for the return of
the Malian armed forces to the northern regions, which
were decided upon in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the agreement and the texts and principles
governing the defence and security forces of Mali. The
draft decrees on the conditions of graduation and the
conditions for the return of former elements of the
Malian armed forces are now available. In the same
vein, the Government decided to establish a border
guard to better monitor Mali’s seven borders.
With regard to economic and social development,
during the period under review the Government
allocated an additional $6 million to enable the interim
authorities to finance projects envisioned in their
priority action plans, including the water supply system
for the city of Kidal, the construction of six schools
and six water points in the Ménaka region and the
establishment of three camel meat and milk processing
plants in the Taoudenni region.
In the context of the national reconciliation,
the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission
is pursuing its mission throughout the country,
particularly in the regions affected by the crisis. Since
January 2017, more than 10,000 people have testified
before the Commission.
Needless to say, the progress made in the
implementation of the agreement has not led us to lose
sight of the worrying security situation in the centre
of Mali. Terrorist groups are fuelling and fanning the
flames of intercommunal violence in the Mopti and
Ségou regions, against the backdrop of assumptions and

19-0119221/23

S/PV.8445

The situation in Mali

tensions over water resources, animal routes to grazing
areas and the fields of farmers practicing sedentary
farming. Considering the full scope of the gravity of
the situation, which unfortunately continues to inflict
losses on our people, the President of the Republic
visited the bereaved families in the village of Koulongo
on 4 January following several such visits by the Prime
Minister to those two regions.
Rapid and robust measures have been taken to halt
such intercommunal clashes, including dynamic efforts
tied to the implementation of the integrated security plan
for the centre, with particular emphasis on strengthening
security arrangements in those regions, especially
through the 2018 deployment of 13,000 men, half of
whom were deployed in the centre of the country; the
creation of 16 new security posts; the enrolment of more
than 600 young people from those regions in a special
programme for reducing intercommunal violence,
including a tailored disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration component, which has so far led to
the recovery of 444 weapons; the disarmament of all
militias by late January; and development activities and
the provision of basic social services for the benefit
of our people, with a view to achieving a lasting
resolution of the crisis. Similarly, the Government is
working to improve the management of pastoral routes
so as to minimize the risk of tensions among herders
and farmers.
The tragic events of Koulongo, like the other
crimes committed in the central part of Mali, will
not go unpunished. As of now, I can inform the
Council that seven people have been arrested for their
alleged involvement in the Koulongo massacre, and
investigations continue to identify and bring to justice
all those responsible and their accomplices. I must add
that, during the same period, an additional 24 people
were arrested in connection with a similar attack in
Bobosso, a neighbouring village of Koulongo. However,
we are aware that security measures alone will not
suffice, especially in an environment in which terrorist
groups are working relentlessly to destroy social
cohesion and weaken the State with a view to expanding
their territorial domination. We have therefore also
planned to focus on political, administrative and social
work with the involvement of all the vital forces of our
country, including political, traditional and religious
leaders and national frameworks so as to build a
national consensus, first, to identify those who benefit
22/23

16/01/2019

from such crimes, and, secondly, to find solutions in
which the entire Malian nation can participate.
With regard to the human rights situation, Mali
welcomes the decrease in the total number of cases of
human rights violations. The Government is aware of
its primary responsibility to protect the population. It
will therefore continue to make the efforts necessary
to ensure the safety of the people and their property
throughout the entire country. The 14 per cent of human
rights violations attributed to the Malian defence and
security forces, as indicated in paragraph 36 of the
report of the Secretary-General, have already been
subject to administrative and disciplinary measures,
and relevant investigations are under way to attribute
responsibility and bring the alleged perpetrators to
justice so that they can be held accountable before the
competent national tribunals.
As the Council is aware, a lasting solution to the
crisis cannot be limited to security considerations
alone. In that regard, it is necessary to pursue efforts
aimed at dealing with development issues so as
to improve the living conditions of the population
throughout the country. The legal and institutional
framework of the sustainable economic development
fund is now complete, providing a relevant tool for
the implementation of the economic component of
the agreement, without which the peace dividends
benefiting citizens would be negligible. That measure
will enable structuring investments, the financing
of the local economy and basic social services under
the project ownership of the communities concerned,
administered by interim authorities and transitional
institutions set up under the peace agreement, pending
the holding of local and regional elections and following
the planned institutional reforms.
As Council members are also aware, the crisis in
Mali entails repercussions for the region that fall under
the mandate of the Sahel Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), the current operational level
of which is very encouraging. Like the other G-5 Sahel
countries, Mali will continue to provide its full support
to that organization, which is enjoying increased support
from its partners, as was demonstrated by the holding
of the conference in Nouakchott on 6 December 2018,
at which pledges totalled €2.4 billion — €500 million
more than originally sought. While reiterating the
gratitude of the Government of Mali for that show of
solidarity, I echo the call of the G-5 Sahel Heads of
State and the Secretary-General for a robust mandate
19-01192

16/01/2019

The situation in Mali

under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
and for predictable and sustainable funding for the
activities of the Joint Force, including through the
United Nations.
As Council members can see, the Malian parties are
focused on the diligent and inclusive implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
emanating from the Algiers process. We will continue
to work together to provide appropriate follow-up to
the relevant provisions of resolution 2423 (2018), in
particular paragraph 4, so as to achieve further progress
in view of the Secretary-General’s next report and the
Security Council’s planned visit to Mali in March.
In conclusion, I firmly reiterate that the
implementation of the agreement continues to
progress meaningfully, although I am aware that
the achievements are fragile and that the challenges
facing our peace process are immense. The security
situation in the Mopti and Ségou regions remains today
a priority concern of the President of the Republic,
the Government and all the vital forces of the Malian
nation. The measures I have just presented are likely
to bring lasting peace and stability to the northern and
central regions of Mali.
On both fronts, Mali and its people require the
support and solidarity of the international community.

S/PV. 8445

On both fronts, Mali and its people require the continued
support of the Secretary-General and the Security
Council. I know that the members of the Security
Council have contributed enormously to the peace
process under way in my country, particularly through
MINUSMA. I take this opportunity to commend the
outstanding work that MINUSMA is doing on the
ground under the able leadership of Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Mali and Head of MINUSMA, and to
convey the same sentiments to all the women and men
of MINUSMA, who are working in conditions that, I
know, are very difficult. I pay tribute to all the civilian,
military, foreign and Malian victims of the Malian
crisis, who have fallen on the field of honour in our
country. I reiterate the gratitude of the Government and
the people of Mali to the French forces of Operation
Barkhane, to the troop-contributing countries of
MINUSMA and to all the multilateral and bilateral
partners for their unwavering support for a lasting and
definitive settlement to the Malian crisis.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

19-0119223/23
