General Assembly-Thirty-first Seuion

78

(d) The reallocation to development aid budgets
of both interest and amortization receipts derived from
development loans;
4. Recommends that developed countries give serious consideration to the establishment of a development
tax to be earmarked for international development assistance;
5. Further recommends that appropriate policies be
developed further to increase flows of private capital
to developing countries, including the examination and,
where appropriate, the revision of rules and regulations concerning access of developing countries to private money and capital markets to the extent that the
situation in each country permits;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a
progress report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session and decides to consider the report at that session
under a separate item.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976

31/175.

Effective mobilization of women in development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3505 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 on the integration of women in the development process,
Recalling further the United Nations regional seminar on the theme "The participation of women in
economic social and political development: obstacles
that hinder their integration", held at Buenos Aires
from 22 to 30 March 1976,96
Reaffirming the importance of the role of women
in all aspects of economic and social development ap.d
their contribution to the establishment of the new mternational economic order,
Recognizing that women, especially those at the
lower socio-economic levels, are among the most disadvantaged groups of society,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the integration of women in the development process ;97

2. Urges Member States to implement the recommendations set out in General Assembly resolution 3505
(XXX), to facilitate the equal participation of women
with men in all development efforts and, in particular,
to ensure that women have equal access to political
parties, trade unions, training, especially in agriculture,
co-operatives, and credit and loan systems, as well as
equal opportunities to participate in policy-making in
the economic field, in commerce and trade and in the
advanced efforts of industry;
3. Further urges the relevant organizations of the
United Nations system to strengthen their support of development programmes or projects relating to women;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive report for submission to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session on the effective
mobilization of women for development, particularly
96 See ST /ESA/SER.B/9.

97 A/31/205 and Corr.1.

in the areas referred to in paragraph 2 above, in collaboration with the relevant organizations within the
United Nations system-especially the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, the
United Nations Development Programme, the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the International
Labour Organisation, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health
Organization, the World Bank and the regional commissions-and the relevant non-governmental organizations, which should include an evaluation of the extent
to which their programmes benefit women.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/176.

Tripartite World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social
Progress and the International Division
of Labour

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3509 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 relating to the Tripartite World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social
Progress and the International Division of Labour,
Recalling further its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24
October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1
May 1974 containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Taking note of the information contained in chapter
V of the report of the Economic and Social Council118
and of Council decision 182 (LXI) of 5 August 1976
relating to the Tripartite World Conference,
Bearing in mind that the fundamental objectives of
the United Nations include the creation of conditions
of economic and social progress and development, the
securing of higher standards of living, full productive
employment and universal respect for the observance of
human rights and fundamental freedoms,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the Declaration
of Principles and Programme of Action adopted by
the Tripartite World Conference on Employment, Income Distribution, Social Progress and the International Division of Labour, held at Geneva from 4 to 17
June 1976;99
2. Requests the International Labour Organisation
to submit a special report to the Economic and Social
Council on the measures which it has taken and which
it envisages for the implementation of the Programme
of Action;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate steps, through the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, with a view to promoting and
co-ordinating active participation by the various spe98 Official

Records of the G,-neral Assemhl_v, Thirty-first

Session. Surr/pn,rnt No. 3 (A/31/3).
119 See

El5857.

V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

cialized agencies and other bodies of the United Nations system in the implementation of the Programme
of Action and to report to the Economic and Social
Council;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
undertake an appraisal of the activities of the organizations of the United Nations system in the light of the
Programme of Action, taking into account, in particular, the relevant discussions and decisions of the
Governing Body of the International Labour Office,
as well as the reports referred to in paragraphs 2 and
3 above, and to report to the General Assembly at
its thirty-second session.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/177.

4. Appeals to all international organizations and
financial institutions, as well as potential donor countries, to provide the necessary financial resources in
order to make the Fund operational during the interim
period;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to convene the
pledging conference as envisaged in article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute;
6. Calls upon Member States and the entire international community to contribute generously to the
Fund.
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
ANNEX
Statute of the United Nations Special Fund
for Land-locked Developing Countries

Statute of the United Nations Special
Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
RecaUing its resolution 3311 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 in which it requested the SecretaryGeneral to submit to it at its special session devoted to
development and international economic co-operation
a comprehensive study on the transit problems of the
land-locked developing countries and a complete study
on the establishment of a fund in favour of the landlocked developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1755 (LIV) of 16 May 1973 in which the Council defined the scope of a complete study on the
establishment of a fund,
Recalling further the decision taken at its seventh
special session 100 and its resolution 3504 (XXX) of 15
December 1975, in which it decided to establish immediately a special fund for the land-locked developing countries to compensate for their additional transport and transit costs,
Reaffirming that the land-locked developing countries, as a result of their geographical limitations, are
doubly disadvantaged, especially with regard to their
additional transport, transit and transshipment costs,
Having considered the draft statute of the United
Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing
Countries contained in the note by the SecretaryGeneral prepared in pursuance of General Assembly
resolution 3504 (XXX),101
l. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral and the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development for the preparation of proposals on the
organizational arrangements of the United Nations
Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries,
including the draft statute;
2. Approves the statute of the Fund, annexed to
the present resolution;
3. Requests the United Nations Development Programme, in close collaboration with the secretariat of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to manage the Fund during the interim period
and report on its activities to the General Assembly
at its thirty-second session;
100 Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventh Special
Session, Supplement No. I (A/10301). p. 10. item 7. subpara. (a).
101 A/3 l /260, annex.

79

INTRODUCTION

The United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries (hereinafter referred to as the Fund) shall
operate as an organ of the General Assembly in accordance
with the provisions set forth below.
Article I

Pmu>oss
In order to compensate the land-locked developing countries
for their additional transport and transit costs, the Fund shall:
(a) Provide resources to offset the disadvantages created
by the additional transport and transit costs facing the landlocked developing countries;
(b) Provide financial and technical assistance for projects
aimed at reducing the transit and related transport costs incurred by the land-locked developing countries, and at other
improvements in the transit and related transport facilities
and arrangements for these countries;
(c) Provide financial support for studies, to be carried out
by appropriate United Nations organs, of existing transit and
related transport facilities and arrangements for land-locked
developing countries, and of ways of improving them;
(d) Co-ordinate its activities with:
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

The programme of studies and technical assistance
concerning the transit and related transport needs of
land-locked developing countries being carried out
by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the regional commissions;
Related programmes in the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat
and other United Nations bodies;
Programmes of technical and financial assistance on
behalf of land-locked developing countries in the
United Nations Development Programme and other
multilateral and bilateral assistance agencies.
Article 2
GUIDING PRINCIPLES

1. The provision of assistance shall be in conformity with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
2. Assistance from the Fund shall not serve as a means
for economic and political interference in the internal affairs
of recipient countries and shall not be influenced by considerations relating to the nature of their economic, social and
political systems.
Article 3
RESOURCES

1. The resources of the Fund shall consist of voluntary
contributions in cash or in kind by Governments. The Fund
