S/PV.9149

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9149th meeting

Tuesday, 11 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adamo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Mr. Mythen
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including the work of the United Nations Office to the African Union
(S/2022/643)
Letter dated 3 October 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/736)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-62308 (E)
*2262308*

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank Gabon for hosting this important meeting on
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union. I also welcome my dear friend Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, to the United Nations.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
African Union
Report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union on issues
of peace and security in Africa, including
the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2022/643)
Letter dated 3 October 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/736)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Egypt,
Germany, Japan, Morocco, Namibia, Senegal and South
Africa to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, to participate in the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/643, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including the
work of the United Nations Office to the African Union;
and to document S/2022/736, which contains the text
of a letter dated 3 October 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
2/29

11/10/2022

I am pleased that we can take this opportunity to
celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the creation of
the African Union. In 2002, African leaders pledged to
work together to prevent conflict and promote peace,
development, human rights and the rule of law. They
wished to enable Africa to play its rightful role in the
international arena, thus leading to a fairer and more
effective system of global governance.
Since then, the African Union has demonstrated
its determination to achieve integration, peace and
prosperity. Agenda 2063 and its flagship initiatives,
the African Continental Free Trade Agreement, the
Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative, and the Africa
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention are the latest
examples. In the past 20 years, the United Nations and
the African Union have developed a unique partnership
rooted in the principles of complementarity, respect
and African ownership, to the point of becoming a
cornerstone of multilateralism.
My annual report (S/2022/643) presents the latest
developments in this cooperation, including the joint
launch with the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the Group of Five for the Sahel,
of the independent assessment led by His Excellency
Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou to improve overall action
on security, governance and development across
the Sahel; joint initiatives with ECOWAS for a rapid
return to constitutional order in Burkina Faso, Guinea
and Mali; a sustained commitment to a negotiated
settlement through an African Union process of the
conflict in Ethiopia; close cooperation, also with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
in the Sudan, to restore civilian-led democratic
governance; joint efforts in Somalia with IGAD and
other partners that contributed to successful presidential
elections, support for Somali security forces and the
newly established African Union Transition Mission
in Somalia; continued support, in cooperation with the
African Union, for the transition process in Chad; and
joint arms collection campaigns in Madagascar, Niger
and Uganda.
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It is clear that our cooperation has never been
stronger, but equally major challenges remain. They
can only be met by a local and adapted approach and
strong determination from the international community,
including within the Security Council. First, the use of
force is too often seen as the only method of resolving
disputes. Unconstitutional changes of government
are on the rise. In the Sahel, Da’esh and its Al-Qaida
affiliates continue their deadly onslaught and seek to
extend their reach. In the Horn of Africa, in Ethiopia,
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali,
the Sudan and Libya, protracted conflicts and a dire
humanitarian situation are plunging populations into
despair. Violence against women — and in particular
against human rights defenders — is a bone of
contention. We also see an increase in misinformation
and hate speech often used as a weapon of war.
In accordance with the United Nations Charter, the
Constitutive Act of the African Union, and the Silencing
the Guns initiative, States must develop the capacity to
detect and pre-empt conflicts at the earliest signs. It
is equally important to address the governance deficit,
including restrictions on human rights and freedoms,
which undermine stability and sustainable development.
With regard to peace and security missions, our two
organizations have worked together on the compliance
framework for African Union operations to ensure that
they meet international human rights and humanitarian
standards. At the same time, the Security Council
must ensure predictable funding for African Union
operations authorized by the Council. As requested by
the Council, we are preparing a joint progress report
on the financing of these operations, which is due in
April 2023. It is up to us to put in place an innovative
architecture that supports African peace operations in
an effective and sustainable manner.
(spoke in English)
Secondly, we are heading straight off a climate
cliff. For many Africans, this is not a distant threat,
but a daily reality. Africa barely contributes to global
greenhouse-gas emissions, yet it is paying an outsized
price. This is a textbook case of moral and economic
injustice. In the Horn of Africa, for example, people
are facing the threat of famine after four consecutive
failed rainy seasons — a first in over 40 years. In the
Sahel, drought and land degradation are exacerbating
tensions between farmers and herders. At the same
time, communities in southern Africa face hurricanes

S/PV.9149

and flash floods. I commend the many African States,
regions and municipalities that are taking bold steps to
combat climate change despite the serious challenges.
As we prepare for the twenty-seventh session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP27) in
Egypt next month, I urge leaders, especially those of the
Group of 20 (G-20) countries, which are responsible for
80 per cent of greenhouse-gas emissions, to finally take
the urgent action needed. Developed countries must
make good on their commitments, starting with their
pledge to provide $100 billion a year for developing
countries, and double funding for adaptation. COP27
must also deliver concrete action on loss and damage.
That is not just a matter of trust between developed and
developing countries. For many countries, particularly
in Africa, it is a question of survival.
Thirdly, the social and economic conditions
around the world are a major concern. The coronavirus
disease pandemic and the war in Ukraine, among
other challenges, have fuelled an unprecedented costof-living crisis. Despite some relief provided by the
Black Sea Grain Initiative, millions of people are
facing soaring food and energy prices, crushing debt
burdens, skyrocketing inflation and a lack of access to
financing. That is particularly serious on the African
continent. Without a solution to the crisis of fertilizer
availability, next year’s harvest may not be enough to
feed the world. We have been working tirelessly to
ensure that Russian fertilizers have unhindered access
to the international market.
Once again, the most vulnerable are suffering
the most. That is unacceptable, and that is why, three
weeks ago, I called for a Sustainable Development
Goals stimulus, led by the G-20, to massively boost
development assistance. International financial
institutions and multilateral banks must remove
the barriers that prevent developing countries from
accessing the financing that they need. We also need an
effective global debt relief mechanism. Many African
countries have an urgent need for such a mechanism
to work. Sustainable development, guided by the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063, is our best chance to address the
root causes of conflict and leave no one behind.
Nelson Mandela once said: “Resentment is like
drinking poison and then hoping it will kill your
enemies.” Twenty years ago, African leaders decided

22-623083/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

11/10/2022

to learn from the past and inspired the world by
establishing the African Union — a Union based on
cooperation and solidarity among African peoples,
with the ambition to become an even more important
actor in the international arena. I pay tribute to the
dedication of the African Union and the perseverance
of all who work every day for an integrated, peaceful
and prosperous continent. I call on all leaders — in
the Security Council, on the African continent and
beyond — to spare no effort in supporting the African
Union in achieving those goals.

The African continent’s issues are at the forefront of
debates at the United Nations. Yet Africa is the only
true continent excluded from the benefits of permanent
membership of the Security Council. Africa has made
gains in intelligence, talent, awareness and ambition.
How many billions of dollars are spent on United
Nations missions in Africa? What results have been
achieved? Africa is seeking an answer. The Council
cannot avoid the question by letting it fall on deaf ears
or refusing to provide a response satisfactory to the
universal conscience.

The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

Africa is striving to make sacrifices for its peace
and security imperatives and objectives. The African
Peace and Security Architecture — not least the African
Union Peace Fund — is being put in place. However,
the denial of Africa’s decisive and primary role in
meeting its challenges remains patently obvious. What
we need is something more than ceremonial statements.
Let us set a specific time frame to discuss and decide
on Africa’s role in this forum for world peace that has
brought us together today. Let us ensure that African
missions are established according to the immutable
principle of the primacy of the mandate to establish
and safeguard peace in Africa. Let us ensure that all
the funds and financial structures for preventing and
combating pandemics materialize. Let us make sure
that in Africa the portion of financing and investment
directed to climate-related issues is no longer a small
one. Let us make sure that the unlimited universe of
science and new technologies is generously opened
to Africa. Let us ensure that one half of the planet no
longer labours under the burden of its affluence while
the other half cries out in hunger and deprivation.

I now give the floor to Mr. Faki Mahamat.
Mr. Faki Mahamat (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Gabon on its presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October, which is
a clear indicator of the role that Gabon has always played
within Africa and on the world stage. The theme that
your presidency has chosen, Sir, lies at the heart of the
issue of promoting peace, security and stability, which
are the pillars of the strategic partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union.
As we are all aware, our continent is buckling under
the weight of terrorism, instability, unconstitutional
changes of Government, food insecurity and all
kinds of health- and environment-related crises and
precarity. The war in Ukraine, with its devastating
global consequences, has significantly aggravated such
challenges and has increased the risks of instability,
violence and war in every fragile area across
the continent.
Enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
from the Constitutive Act of the African Union to the
Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union, our strategic
partnership with the United Nations has been framed
by a series of pertinent and technically perfect texts.
The issue is therefore no longer a matter of normative
mechanisms. Rather, it is founded on decisions taken
at two different levels — first, those considering the
profound transformations that have occurred throughout
African development, and secondly, the conservatism
that has governed the doctrine in force at the United
Nations since the end of the Second World War.
Africa is now home to 1.4 billion people, as well as
to 70 per cent of United Nations peacekeeping missions.
4/29

If the Security Council chooses that path, it will
find the entire continent mobilized around it. If it
does not, its credibility may suffer irreversibly. Africa
refuses to accept the prospect of resignation. I know
that my friend António Guterres, who carries Africa
in his heart, will spare no effort to ensure that Africa
is heard, respected, included and placed at the centre
of the global processes of peace, security, development
and inclusive and democratic transformations. I am
certainly pleased with what we have done and what we
are doing together, but that is no reason to ignore the
shortcomings. We still need to deepen our partnership
between our specialized agencies, our special envoys
and especially the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council. The business of
peace in Africa is too complex not to widen the channels
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

for finding solutions for all of us in respect, equality,
solidarity, inclusion and sharing.
I am by nature an optimist. I dare to believe that
soon the voices of the true friends of Africa will be
raised so that together we can join hands for a genuine
renaissance of multilateralism, which is now deeply
scarred, belittled, biased and in dangerous decline. May
the Council echo this call from the depths of Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Faki
Mohammed for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Gabon.
I would like to thank Secretary-General António
Guterres for his comprehensive briefing on the
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) in maintaining international peace
and security.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security in Africa (S/2022/643) provides an excellent
opportunity to take stock of such cooperation and
to reaffirm our commitment to a leading role for
regional and subregional organizations in addressing
international crises and conflicts.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is a standing item on the Security
Council’s agenda because it is key to the effectiveness
of the international peace and security agenda and
because the international community should ensure
that the necessary complementarity and subsidiarity
that flow from the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union are enhanced.
That partnership is crucial to the Security Council
because Africa takes up more than half of the Council’s
agenda. As we all know, almost 50 per cent of the
issues on the Council’s agenda and 70 per cent of those
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
concern Africa.
Since the signing of the Joint Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security in
2017, followed by the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
in 2018, the scope of cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU has continued to expand. It now

S/PV.9149

encompasses a broad range of issues, in particular
conflict prevention, early warning, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, disarmament,
combating terrorism and violent extremism, combating
maritime piracy, the protection of human rights and
the coordination of humanitarian assistance, including
promoting economic and sociopolitical development.
Periodic meetings between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council play a
leading role in developing coordinated strategies.
The interconnectedness of agendas and programmes
shows not only a similarity in emphasis, but also a
clear willingness to work together to address the major
challenges of the continent and the aspirations of the
peoples of the world, and Africa in particular.
In that vein, the Silencing the Guns in Africa
initiative of the African Heads of State and the African
Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps for Silencing
the Guns in Africa by 2020 have been supported by
the United Nations, particularly by providing technical
assistance in the areas of mediation and disarmament,
by helping to establish the African Women Leaders
Network and by investing in youth empowerment
activities, including peace education.
In addition, hybrid peacekeeping operations, such
as the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, which ended in 2020, or the African Union
Mission in Somalia, led by the AU and supported by
the United Nations, which became the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia, are notable examples of
the value and dynamism of that partnership.
But we can go much further, and we must do so
without delay, because the magnitude of the threats
and challenges demands it. Given the changing
nature of terrorism in Africa, the resilience of armed
groups, the recurring crises fuelled by climate change,
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
the plundering of natural resources, geopolitical
rivalries and identity-based divisions, we must further
strengthen the partnership between the African Union
and the United Nations through greater synergy and
more effective coordination of initiatives.
Now more than ever, Africa aspires to assert its
approach and solutions to the many crises and conflicts
that plague the continent and darken the horizon of
African peoples’ aspirations for security and dignity. In
advocating African solutions to African problems, the
African Union and all its members stand firmly as full-

22-623085/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

fledged actors in assuming ownership of the destiny of
our peoples and fully shouldering our responsibilities.
We are, of course, aware that the primary responsibility
for international peace and security lies with the
Security Council.
Africa cannot be satisfied with being a mere issue of
power with regard to the numerous armed conflicts and
crises that are bloodying and destabilizing several of its
regions, particularly the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the
Great Lakes region and Central Africa. Africa cannot
stand idly by as the hordes of mercenaries and terrorist
and armed groups successively destroy the foundations
of its nations, plundering its resources and exacerbating
the plight of its people through violence.
Africa remains more than ever committed to
providing solutions to its problems. The repositioning
of African troops and the deployment of peacekeeping
missions under the auspices of the AU or regional
economic communities in some theatres of operation
are the result of that unwavering resolve to assume
responsibility for peace and security.
The will and efforts of the African Union deserve
to be supported. The support required must be
commensurate with what is at stake and must be based
on the primary responsibility of the United Nations for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
In most area of recurring crises where peace must
be established, it is important to rebuild peace missions
with more robust operational mandates and adequate
and predictable funding. It is also important to provide
the necessary logistical support to the mechanisms
put in place by African countries at the regional and
subregional levels to strengthen their operability.
In that respect, the Central African Early Warning
Mechanism can be a valuable tool lever in preventing
crises in that subregion.
Of course, peace and security in Africa cannot be
achieved without the involvement of Africans. To that
end, we welcome the Secretary-General’s appointment
of Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily as his new Special
Representative for Libya, and we are grateful for his
sensitivity to the situation of African countries.
Beyond fostering synergies between the United
Nations and the African Union, one of the major tools
that will make that partnership more inclusive and
better aligned with today’s global realities remains
the need for Africa to occupy its rightful place on the
6/29

11/10/2022

Security Council. The urgent call for a Council that is
more representative of current geopolitical dynamics
has clearly reached a pivotal moment, with many voices
recognizing that it is high time to translate words into
action. It is intolerable to see Africa in the Council
Chamber without hearing its full voice around the table
on a permanent basis, despite its legitimate claim to a
seat as expressed in the Ezulwini Consensus and the
Sirte Declaration. As President Bongo Ondimba clearly
stated in his recent address to the General Assembly
(see A/77/PV.6), Africa has waited a long time and will
wait no longer to assume its responsibilities.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize the urgent
need to further strengthen and lend new impetus to
the partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union in order to ensure that it is capable of
fulfilling the commitments and responsibilities to be
assumed with regard to peace and security. That aim
is embedded in the presidential statement submitted
for consideration by the Council, for which I seek all
members’ support.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on Her Excellency Mrs. Linda ThomasGreenfield, Permanent Representative of the United
States and Member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank you, Sir, for presiding over
this high-level event. I also want to thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for joining us today and welcome
the participation of Chairperson Faki Mahamat in
this meeting.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
the African Union (AU), this is a perfect moment to
highlight the strong partnership between the AU and
the United Nations. It is also an opportunity to look
for ways to build on our progress. The United States
shares the Secretary-General’s belief that our collective
action on conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding is absolutely vital. As part of today’s
discussion, we must acknowledge the range of factors
that are contributing to rising insecurity, including the
most significant global food-security crisis in decades,
the adverse effects of climate change and one of the
worst droughts in the history of the Horn of Africa.
Those challenges must not deter us but must rather
bolster our commitment to working together and
addressing them head-on.
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In that regard, we strongly support the United
Nations-African Union Joint Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which
is aimed at mobilizing the collaboration between the
AU and the United Nations, starting with the earliest
indicators of potential conflict, and which is critical to
conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction.
Peace in Africa cannot wait. We applaud African
leadership in its efforts to resolve crises and conflicts
in Ethiopia, the Great Lakes region, the Sudan, the
Sahel, Mozambique and Somalia, and we appreciate
the United Nations providing its full support to those
efforts. We are also encouraged by the growing
partnership between the AU and the United Nations in
addressing the crisis of children and armed conflict in
Africa. We must do absolutely everything in our power
to advance that work, which also means strengthening
protection for children affected by conflict, an issue
that the AU has been leading the charge on.
Today let us also recognize the collaborative efforts
of the United Nations, the AU, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the European Union and
the Federal Government of Somalia. Those joint efforts
led to the establishment of the AU Transition Mission in
Somalia in April. Together, we set ambitious goals for
the reconfiguration and transition of the peacekeeping
Mission in Somalia, and we must redouble our efforts
to achieve those goals. The bottom line is that with the
United Nations, the AU and regional peace operations
active in some of the most fragile parts of Africa, we
have a shared interest in aligning our doctrines, policies
and directives. That is exactly how we can make those
efforts as effective as possible.
That also means protecting and upholding human
rights in every AU initiative and mission across
the continent. We applaud the progress that the AU
has made in developing its own human rights and
international humanitarian law frameworks, as noted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/643), and we
encourage the AU to continue implementing compliance
frameworks for peace support operations in key
areas such as international humanitarian law, human
rights and conduct and discipline, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. Efforts to strengthen training,
monitoring, reporting and accountability are central to
that work. The implementation of those frameworks,
as well as other oversight mechanisms outlined in
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), remains a
key consideration for any discussions about the use of

S/PV.9149

United Nations assessed contributions. That includes
any actions undertaken by regional organizations under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.
The United States also appreciates the efforts of the
United Nations, the AU and the Economic Community
of West African States to support the region and we
look forward to the joint strategic assessment that is
under way to review the security, governance and
development challenges in the Sahel. But let us not
sugar-coat it. The challenges we face in that region are
grave. In particular, we are deeply concerned about
the spread of violent extremism across the Sahel and
into parts of coastal West Africa. Terrorist groups
have taken thousands of lives and displaced millions
of people. If we are going to tackle those challenges
together — and we have to — then I believe we need
predictable and sustainable funding options for AU
peace support operations. That will give the AU the
flexibility it needs to address those evolving threats,
and we are committed to seeing that through.
At the same time, we believe our institutions must
evolve to reflect today’s world. As President Biden
stated during the General Assembly debate last month
(see A/77/PV.6), the United States supports increasing
both the permanent and non-permanent membership of
the Security Council. That includes, for the first time
ever, permanent seats for countries in Africa and in
Latin America and the Caribbean. To that end, we look
forward to forging a consensus around reform proposals
with the aim of having a Security Council that is more
effective, representative and credible.
During my most recent trip to Africa, I made it clear
that peace in Africa must come from African leaders
and from the African people themselves. Our job here
at the United Nations is to serve as partners and allies.
We must continue that close cooperation to advance
peace and security for the next 20 years and beyond.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I thank
you, Sir, and Gabon’s leadership on convening this
timely debate at such an important moment. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Guterres and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Faki Mahamat, for their commitment to a strong
relationship between the African Union (AU) and the
United Nations.
As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the
African Union, it is high time that we took stock of the
important relationship that the AU has with the United

22-623087/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Nations, as well as the impact it has had on peace and
security in Africa. There is no doubt in our minds that
we should be working harder together to identify ways to
strengthen that partnership, notably by building on the
2017 United Nations-African Union Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
on the 2018 African Union-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. In a context
of emerging multipolarity, the African Union, and
indeed the agency of African stakeholders, has to be
embraced and leveraged. Both are effective examples
of multilateralism in action that continue to showcase
that new forms of cooperation are indeed possible, and
they are more effective, dynamic and impactful on
the ground. When the Council met earlier this year to
discuss capacity-building in Africa (see S/PV.9106), the
United Arab Emirates drew attention to the fact that
in today’s interconnected and rapidly evolving world,
African challenges have both origins and effects that
extend well beyond the continent’s borders. We also
emphasized that African solutions, not just challenges,
equally have global dimensions. Those key messages
bear repeating today. Put simply, we are in this together.
With that in mind, I would like to share three elements
for further strengthening the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations.
First, there is a clear need to reflect on what a
successful collaboration between the AU and the
United Nations could look like, in a true demonstration
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations in
action. Looking at recent examples, the initiatives on
which the two organizations have closely collaborated
have had a direct impact on change on the ground.
The trilateral mechanism in the Sudan brought the
comparative advantage of regional and subregional
organizations, along with those of the United Nations,
in facilitating talks among Sudanese stakeholders. In
the Central African Republic, the United Nations used
its Mediation Support Unit to work with the AU and
subregional actors to help facilitate a comprehensive
peace agreement for the sustainable disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups.
In Somalia, the sustained engagement of the United
Nations and the AU, alongside the Government of
Somalia and others, facilitated the transition from the
African Union Mission in Somalia to the African Union
Transition Mission in Somalia. Those are just a few of
the examples of the Council’s work that can be drawn
on when considering further cooperation.
8/29

11/10/2022

Regional organizations also have a lot to learn from
each other, particularly when there are clear areas of
overlap and shared priorities. That is why, as a member
of the League of Arab States, the United Arab Emirates
continues to advocate for strengthening trilateral
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations, the AU and the Arab League.
Secondly, as with any good partnership,
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations
should be based on trust, mutual respect and open
communication. Our institutions are fundamentally
meant to support and reinforce one another. For the
Council, that means signalling our faith, in deeds
and not just words, in the wisdom and capabilities of
African regional and subregional organizations, by
endorsing their leadership and particularly their efforts
to resolve African conflicts. And as the United Arab
Emirates has emphasized in the Security Council
before, constructive partnership also means providing
space, time and support to the measures that African
organizations deploy from their diplomatic toolkit.
Furthermore, as the Council acknowledges, there
is a need to secure predictable, sustainable and flexible
resources for Security Council-authorized AU-led
operations — a position strongly voiced by our African
colleagues and which the United Arab Emirates
supports. The Council must strive to achieve consensus
soon around that important matter. In addition, the
AU and the United Nations can provide a clear signal
of unity through the increased use of joint missions,
briefings, reports and declarations to demonstrate
progress towards a common understanding of critical
issues and a common approach to addressing them.
Thirdly, the United Nations and AU should seek
to demonstrate unity of purpose in combating the
most pressing challenges for Africa and the world,
particularly the growing threats of terrorism and climate
change, as highlighted by the Secretary-General. As
the Council has heard, including at the Arria Formula
meeting on transnational activities of terrorist groups,
organized by Kenya and the United Arab Emirates in
August, several prominent voices from Africa and the
Middle East continue to caution the Council about that
threat. The picture they paint is one of a vicious cycle,
where terrorists exploit existing vulnerabilities in our
counter-terrorism architecture, which in turn further
exacerbate the humanitarian situation on the ground for
the most vulnerable people on the ground. On addressing
challenges related to climate change, external support
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9149

must be aligned with continental priorities and on
a scale that matches the level of urgency required by
those who live in climate-vulnerable situations across
the continent. We look forward to hearing more on
African perspectives at the meeting on climate and
security in Africa tomorrow.

Sahel of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission. France wishes
every success for the Independent High-level Panel on
Security and Development in the Sahel, led by President
Issoufou, and hopes that its work will lead to concrete
and ambitious proposals.

As others have acknowledged, there is space to
grow our partnership, and the Council would indeed
benefit from stronger African representation on the
Council. The renewed commitment around that topic
is a welcome development, and we hope it leads to
concrete outcomes.

Beyond the Sahel, we reiterate our call for permanent
and sustainable resources to be mobilized to support
African peace operations, including through mandatory
United Nations contributions. The negotiations that
have begun between the Council and the African Union
should be resumed as soon as possible. We must also
act to reform the Security Council so that Africa is
better represented, including among the permanent
members. France supports that, and we would like to
begin text-based discussions as soon as possible, that is,
at the next session of intergovernmental negotiations.
We call on all who sincerely wish to see the Council
reformed, as we do, to support the principle of textbased negotiations.

In conclusion, regional efforts require international
support, which implies being deliberate in listening,
engaging and supporting the AU and other subregional
organizations. The role of the Council is to encourage
those synergies for our common objectives of peace,
security and stability.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Gabon for organizing this debate, and I thank
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission for their briefings. On this
twentieth anniversary of the African Union (AU), I will
focus on two points.
First, I would like to commend the progress made by
the African Union, thanks to the efforts of its member
States, but also through its partnership with the United
Nations and other regional organizations, particularly
the European Union. The European Union-African
Union Summit on 17 and 18 February reaffirmed our
joint desire for a renewed partnership. In that regard,
I would like to recall that the European Union remains
the largest contributor to the African Union’s budget.
The African Union has become the benchmark
player in preventing and resolving conflicts on
the continent. It has embodied the principle of
non-indifference, as we saw at the AU extraordinary
summit held in Malabo in May, which underscored
the opposition of the continent’s Heads of State to
unconstitutional changes of Government and mobilized
African Union support for mediation efforts between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
The role of the African Union in the resolution of the
conflict in northern Ethiopia and in overcoming the
political crisis in the Sudan also comes to mind.
My second message is a call to action. In that
regard, I would like to welcome the initiative on the

Beyond the major issues of governance, the
participation of women and young people, education,
development and combating climate change, I would
also like to focus on the new challenges we are facing.
First, we must counter propaganda and
misinformation. It is easy to create troll factories
spewing torrents of hate. That is a threat to African
societies, States and citizens and to the peacekeeping
missions deployed there. We have allocated nearly
$1 million in 2022 to combat disinformation and
to strengthen strategic communication for peace
operations. France will continue to work hand in hand
with States and civil society to strengthen access to free
and reliable information from multiple points of view.
Secondly, we must address global food insecurity
and malnutrition, which have been aggravated by
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. The European
Food and Agriculture Resilience Mission initiative
aims to provide vulnerable countries a concrete and
supportive response. We call on all relevant public and
private actors to join that initiative, which is part of
the Secretary-General’s efforts and is coordinated with
other international initiatives. Right now addressing the
shortages of fertilizer is urgent. With a view to coming
up with concrete solutions to that crisis, France, in
collaboration with its partners, has launched a Harvest
Rescue Operation in the General Assembly.

22-623089/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, we must tackle the challenge of
mercenaryism. The Wagner Group does not support
States. Instead, mercenaries keep in power a person
or a clan in exchange for control over natural
resources. Their presence is accompanied by a
systematic retreat from democracy, the weakening
of the host State’s sovereignty, the closure of the
public space and massive violations of human rights.
We cannot accept that. France is following with interest
the work of the African Union on the revision of the
1977 Convention for the Elimination of Mercenaryism
in Africa.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank the presidency of
Gabon for putting this debate on the agenda at a time
when Africa is facing many challenges and crosscutting crises, including unconstitutional Government
changes, flourishing terrorists and armed groups, the
presence of private military groups, human rights
violations and abuses and the adverse effects of climate
change. Those issues affect us all, and they therefore
require an effective response from us all.
I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union (AU) Commission
for their continued engagement in strengthening
the relations between the United Nations and the
African Union.
We join other members in commemorating the
twentieth anniversary of the African Union. We believe
that the United Nations should count on the fundamental
contribution of regional organizations, since they are
in the best position to detect early-warning signals and
deploy preventive tools before tensions escalate.
Albania believes that the United Nations should
act as the anchor and catalyst of joint efforts, while
promoting greater cooperation and coordination among
all actors, including specialized agencies, regional and
subregional organizations, national institutions and
civil society representatives.
We call for enhanced cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union. In that vein,
we need to keep the momentum going. The sixteenth
Annual Joint Consultative Meeting between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council is a unique opportunity to reinforce
our strong partnership — both at the headquarters level
and on the ground.
10/29

11/10/2022

Concerning the situation on the ground, Albania
commends the willingness of the United Nations,
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States to promote the democratic model
of governance in West Africa. Albania welcomes
the call of the Secretary-General and the AU for an
independent high-level panel on security, governance
and development in the Sahel. We look forward to
their recommendations.
In addition, we support the African Union’s efforts
to tackle the devastating consequences of the conflict in
northern Ethiopia. Progress has been made in tackling
humanitarian issues; however, more needs to be done to
bring conflicting parties to the table in order to engage
in peace talks.
In recent years, natural disasters have been
compounding the challenges of an already fragile
continent. Natural disasters are depleting Africa’s
energy, food and security resources. In that vein,
Albania calls for a renewed commitment to address the
growing food insecurity.
We also share the concern about the dangerous
impact that disinformation, extremism, fake news
and hate speech can have in crisis contexts, including
through new digital Internet technologies and in social
media. To tackle all those alarming challenges, a
holistic and sustainable approach is required now more
than ever.
In conclusion, we are of the view that all actors
involved must continue finding practical ways to
cooperate effectively in renewing existing policies and
programmes and sharpen their focus in addressing the
root causes of conflicts and crises.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and the Chairperson of the African
Union (AU) Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, for their briefings.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s efforts to
strengthen the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the AU. Our cooperation is happening in
the context of a dangerous global crisis in Europe that
is causing serious harm to Africa’s food security and, as
a result, its political stability. Even as we celebrate the
growing collaboration between these two organizations
over the past few years, we must pay greater attention
to ways in which that framework can be a plus for
international peace and security.
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The Constitutive Act of the AU faces the world even
if it primarily focuses on the challenges, opportunities
and obligations within Africa. In the coming months
and years, its outward-facing dimensions will need to
be crafted into a platform of engagement that responds
to the profound and growing risks to Africa from
Europe’s broken security order.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of the AU
Chairperson and the Commission’s Chair to encourage
dialogue and humanitarian responsiveness in the
context of the war in Ukraine. Their efforts reflect
Africa’s global responsibilities and linkages and also
assist African countries in this moment of great need.
We urge them to maintain their effort to reach out and
to continue doing so while strongly supporting the
principles underlying the Charter of the United Nations
and the AU’s Constitutive Act.
As we rightly focus on Ukraine, it may be time for
more collaboration with regard to Haiti, which is also
facing a profound crisis. Haiti is part of the African
Union’s sixth region, and there is room for the AU
and the United Nations to explore, side by side and in
response to the people of Haiti, how we can do more
together in order to help them.
A major part of stabilizing the global security
order requires reform. It is by now clear that the current
structure of the Security Council is not effective in
maintaining international peace and security. We can
continue to make every effort to make the collaboration
between the United Nations and the AU more effective,
but we will achieve real and sustainable results only
when the Council is more balanced by permanent
African membership. I welcome the openness for
reform expressed by delegations this morning. Let
us now move to the concrete actions that will deliver
the change.
Before that welcome watershed moment is reached,
we can do more to make the Council inclusive and
responsive to Africa through reforms to its methods
of work. Penholdership, for instance, needs to change
in response to African responsibility, knowledge and
ownership; it would bring extra life to the Chapter VIII
linkage to the African Union.
We are debating on the eve of the seventh
informal joint seminar and the sixteenth Annual Joint
Consultative Meeting between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council. This debate
provides a great opportunity for us to advance the

S/PV.9149

realization of a strategic partnership that focuses on
the real delivery of peace, security and development
in Africa.
The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, including in
Africa. Crises in Africa deserve the same attention and
priority as situations in other parts of the world. It is
inconceivable, for instance, that AU-led peace support
missions should perennially be pleading for adequate,
predictable and sustainable financing. And yet those
operations are essentially being undertaken on behalf
of the international community and the United Nations.
The Security Council should adequately and sustainably
facilitate such missions through assessed contributions
to ensure that they remain fit for purpose.
In addition, the Security Council should reconsider
how it undertakes peacekeeping in Africa. We suggest
enhanced cooperation with the African Union such that
more African countries would contribute troops in order
for Africa to own such mission, and since they have a
better understanding of the operating environments.
We also call on the Security Council and the
United Nations, in general, to scale-up efforts to place
Africa’s subregional organizations at the centre of its
peace efforts. They have a huge stake in the peace and
stability of their regions and in the past have delivered
timely and decisive interventions. A good example of
that is the current effort being led by the East African
Community, at the invitation of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to seek a peaceful
resolution of the security situation in the eastern
part of the country. It is critical for such efforts to be
supported by international partners, including through
the provision of the necessary resources as well as
technical and logistical capacities.
Finally, we recommend that our partnership
appreciate the transboundary nature and geopolitical
dimensions of crises and conflicts. In some cases,
African countries are grappling with a confluence of
extraregional actors and interests that are increasingly
complicating peace efforts and even aggravating
insecurity. Neighbours and countries of the region
should be consulted in order to ensure that these
conflicts are contained, particularly when insurgent
and terrorist organizations are involved. The Security
Council also needs to be bold enough to address clashes
of external interests so that they do not undermine the
search for sustainable peace in Africa.

22-6230811/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to all
efforts to build a more ambitious collaboration between
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations in the pursuit of peace, security and
prosperity for Africa and its peoples.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Gabon for its initiative in convening
today’s important meeting and to welcome Foreign
Minister Adamo in presiding over it. I thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Chairperson Faki Mahamat.
In recent years, the African Union (AU) has been
steering Africa’s development and revitalization,
maintaining peace and stability on the continent and
firmly defending multilateralism in a demonstration of
African strength and wisdom. The strategic cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations has continued
to deepen into one of the world’s most dynamic and
fruitful partnerships. During this year’s general debate
in the General Assembly, we heard every African
leader call for continued and deepened solidarity and
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations in
order to collectively respond to our global challenges.
China welcomes and supports further enhancement of
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
AU in order to better promote peace and development
in Africa.
First, we should increase cooperation in the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa. Traditional
hotspot issues in Africa are heating up alongside
increasing challenges related to terrorist activities, arms
trafficking, maritime security and public health, which
requires the United Nations, the African Union and
the countries of the region to work together to address
them. The countries of the region should establish a
common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable
security concept and promote national and regional
security through dialogue and cooperation. United
Nations peacekeeping operations should keep up with
the evolving dynamics on the ground, coordinate the
positioning of peacekeeping operations, optimize their
mandates and invest resources and energy according to
the needs of the countries concerned and the expectations
of the local populations. China is in favour of having
more Africans serve as Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General on hotspot issues in Africa. For its
part, the Council should support more African members
serving as penholders on African issues.
12/29

11/10/2022

Secondly, we should foster cooperation designed to
enhance capacity-building in Africa. If we are to achieve
long-term peace and security in Africa, we must identify
points where breakthroughs can be made and focus on
steadily scaling up investment. Capacity-building is a
key component of those efforts. The Security Council
held an open debate on capacity-building in Africa
in August (see S/PV.9122) and issued a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2022/6) calling for support for
African countries in strengthening capacity-building in
governance, law enforcement, sustainable development
and talent training and development. Council members
and the wider international community should work
together to implement the outcomes of that meeting
with the aim of providing more tangible assistance for
Africa’s capacity-building. The United Nations and
the African Union have signed the framework for a
10-year capacity-building programme for the African
Union, and the two organizations should continue to
make capacity-building a pillar of cooperation and
support the AU in strengthening its capacity in early
warnings of conflict, conflict prevention, mediation
and preventive diplomacy.
Funding shortages are a key constraint on the
African Union’s ability to operate in peace operations.
Secretary-General Guterres has suggested funding AU
peace operations through the United Nations regular
budget or peacekeeping assessments, an idea that we
believe merits serious consideration by the Security
Council. The relevant United Nations agencies,
peacekeeping missions and resident coordinators should
support African capacity-building in accordance with
their respective mandates in an effort to create synergy.
Thirdly, we should increase our cooperation in
promoting sustainable development in Africa. At the
end of the day, development is what truly matters.
Regions such as the Sahel, the Horn of Africa, the
Great Lakes and Central Africa are grappling with both
security risks and development difficulties. Without
greater investment in development, it will be difficult
to break the vicious circle of instability and poverty.
During the General Assembly’s high-level week, China
and African countries co-hosted a ministerial meeting
of the Group of Friends of the Global Development
Initiative, announcing seven results-oriented initiatives
and proposing concrete action in areas such as food
security and clean energy. Those initiatives are in line
with Africa’s development needs and highly compatible
with the African Union’s Agenda 2063. China is willing
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

S/PV.9149

to work with African countries to ensure the timely
outcomes of those initiatives so they can generate
more resources and create better conditions for the
sustainable development of African countries.

nearly 70 per cent of Chapter VII mandate resolutions
pertain to Africa. The fact that peace and security are
an important pillar of Agenda 2063 of the African
Union (AU) has further strengthened that cooperation.

Fourthly, we should increase cooperation in
promoting international governance reform. Africa is
generally at the middle or lower end of the international
industrial and supply chains. Any spillover of global
risks tends to bring about greater and more serious
economic losses for Africa, and can reverse countries’
development gains. The United Nations should take
systematic measures to give Africa a greater say
in the international governance system and further
reflect Africa’s overall needs and interests in terms of
rule-making and resource allocation. The international
community, especially developed countries and
international financial institutions, should fulfil its
responsibilities in terms of development assistance
and technology transfer, and should work to ensure
that attention to and investment in Africa is not shortchanged by other, competing issues. Countries should
uphold openness, inclusiveness and mutual benefit in
their cooperation with Africa and should not interfere
in African countries’ internal affairs, let alone force
them to choose sides.

The Council will agree that no one can understand
Africa better than our African brothers and sisters
themselves. History has shown us that offering
external solutions to African problems without African
involvement has not served the interests of the African
people. Meaningful and effective engagement with
African subregional organizations and mechanisms
should therefore constitute an integral component of
United Nations-AU cooperation. The East African
Community, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Southern African Development Community
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
inter alia, have also bolstered the efforts of the African
Union in preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts.

China has always worked to cooperate with
Africa while upholding the greater good, shared
interests and the principles of sincerity, genuine
results, friendship and good faith. We have firmly
supported and contributed to the process of achieving
revitalization and prosperity for Africa. No matter how
the international situation changes, China will always
stand with African countries and the United Nations
to contribute to the realization of lasting peace and
common development.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): Let me begin by thanking
Gabon for organizing today’s debate on such a
significant topic. I also thank the Secretary-General for
his invaluable insights.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is a cardinal principle of the
maintenance of international peace and security,
enshrined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. The Charter also provides a broad framework
for the Security Council’s cooperation with the regional
organizations. That partnership assumes further
significance in the context of Africa, considering that
more than half of the issues on the Council’s agenda and

My country supports enhancement of cooperation
between the United Nations and AU that could mutually
benefit both organizations in a meaningful way. In
this context, let me flag the following issues for the
Security Council’s consideration. First, the activities of
the United Nations, the African Union and subregional
organizations should complement each other, while
keeping their respective core mandates intact. Collective
efforts should be geared towards regional diplomacy,
mediation, reconciliation and security sector reforms in
order to secure lasting peace on the continent.
Secondly, terrorist outfits, like armed groups,
deserve the Council’s priority attention in its response
to addressing security threats confronting Africa today.
In the Sahel and throughout the Lake Chad basin region,
as well as in Somalia and beyond, African States face
persistent threats of terrorism from groups affiliated
with Al-Qaida and Da’esh. National and regional
security forces are the prime responders in efforts
to combat terrorism. However, capacity constraints
and lack of financial resources have become major
impediments in the fight against terrorism. Initiatives
such as the African Union Transition Mission in
Somalia, the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force,
the Southern African Development Community
Mission in Mozambique and the Multinational Joint
Task Force need more encouragement from the
international community.

22-6230813/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Thirdly, the Security Council needs to work with
the African Union Peace and Security Council to
strengthen financing mechanisms for African Union-led
peace support operations that have been authorized
by the Security Council. We endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s call to support African Union-led peace
support operations and regional counter-terrorism
operations with sustained financing, including through
assessed contributions.
Fourthly, peacebuilding initiatives in Africa
deserve the unwavering attention of the international
community. Major donors, in particular developed
countries and the international financial institutions,
should ramp up their overseas development assistance
commitments and eliminate barriers to concessional
financing to the economies of Africa so that they
can indeed achieve the development goals enshrined
in the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development as well as Agenda 2063.
Fifthly, United Nations peacekeeping operations
and special political missions in Africa need to
be appropriately mandated and resourced. Our
experience in peacekeeping in Africa shows that such
missions often struggle to implement ambitious yet
underresourced mandates. Furthermore, peacekeeping
missions should have a clear and well-thought-out exit
strategy, prepared in consultation with national and
regional stakeholders.
Sixthly, the Security Council needs to move way
beyond mere lip service to meet Africa’s concerns.
Africa’s continuing denial of representation in the
permanent category of membership in the Council is
a historical injustice that needs to be corrected sooner
rather than later. India has consistently called for
urgent Security Council reforms to ensure that Africa’s
aspirations, as outlined in the Ezulwini Consensus and
the Sirte Declaration, are honoured.
India and Africa share a unique, historical and
time-tested friendship. Since the 1960s, Indian
peacekeepers have so far served in 22 missions in
Africa. Currently, Indian peacekeepers are serving in
eight peacekeeping missions on the African continent.
India has also contributed to the training and capacitybuilding of peacekeepers from Africa.
India believes that Africa’s rise is essential for
true multipolarity in the global order to which we
are committed. We have always worked with Africa
in accordance with Africa’s priorities, both through
14/29

11/10/2022

bilateral and multilateral mechanisms. Even as we meet
our own development targets, this tradition of SouthSouth solidarity continues to strengthen. For India,
partnership with Africa is and will remain a top priority.
In enunciating his 10 guiding principles in an
address to the Ugandan parliament in 2018, the Prime
Minister of India said,
“... if this is to be an age when the light of
opportunity dawns on all humans; if this is a time
when our planet has a more hopeful future; then
all of this magnificent continent of Africa must
walk in step with the rest of the world. India ... will
stand in solidarity with [Africa’s] endeavours, in
transparency, with respect and on the principle of
equality. We will speak for you, and with you.”
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for your continuing leadership of
the Security Council during this month’s Gabonese
presidency. I also welcome the briefings by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Chairperson Moussa
Faki Mahamat at this important annual debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union (AU).
Strengthening the links of cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union is required
to sustain peace and security on the continent, but
also to address the multifaceted dimensions of the
socioeconomic and other challenges that negatively
affect Africa. In our determination to reverse the roll
back of democracy in five countries on the continent,
silence the guns in Africa and develop the resilience of
many societies experiencing strain caused by climate
change and other contexts that engender fragility, it is
clear to us that while the African Union should take a
leadership role on the basis of its normative frameworks
for peace and security, and in terms of governance,
the responsibility and support of the United Nations
should not be curtailed and will continue to be critical.
We therefore underscore the importance of Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter and the need to
deepen the cooperation and partnership between the
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council across the peace continuum, from
conflict prevention and peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, as well as the need to address
the request for sustainable financing of AU-led peace
support operations.
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

To ensure the cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in furtherance of durable peace
and security on the continent, we would want to
highlight a few additional points. First, we emphasize
the need for consultations between the United Nations
and the African Union to be deepened and for there
to be proactive focus on reinforcing capacity for
homegrown solutions to deal with the continent’s
complex security challenges. In this regard, we urge
that such consultations should, for instance, include
support arrangements for the 2021-2025 workplan
on the enhancement of the African Standby Force,
which is soon due for submission to the African Union
Specialized Technical Committee on Defence, Safety
and Security.
Secondly, we encourage the further implementation
of joint briefings, missions and assessments on issues
of peace and security on the continent, including the
ongoing joint independent assessment of security and
development in the Sahel led by the former President
of the Niger, Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou. We are
optimistic that the mandate of the Independent Highlevel Panel on Security, Governance and Development
in the Sahel, which is undertaking that assessment,
would emerge with a more sustainable approach to
addressing the multidimensional crises in the region
and on the continent at large. We encourage that such
joint approaches be extended to the assessment of the
performance of a number of peacekeeping missions
on the continent that have yet to fully deliver on
their expected objectives and mandates, while also
focusing on resolving the concerns over predictability,
sustainability, and flexibility of financing for African
Union-led peace support operations.
Thirdly, in the light of the increasing incidents
of terrorist attacks in many parts of the continent,
we cannot approach our collective response to such
threats in a business-as-usual manner. As the African
Union proceeds with its implementation of the Malabo
Declaration on Terrorism and Unconstitutional
Changes of Government in Africa of 28 May 2022, it is
important that the United Nations be a partner in that
process. In this regard, it would be important that, in
addressing terrorism and governance challenges on the
continent, United Nations-African Union cooperation
addresses the root causes of instability on the continent
while also addressing the impact of climate change, the
coronavirus disease pandemic and other aggravating
geopolitical situations. The role of women and young

S/PV.9149

people in sustaining peace and development should
be elevated.
Fourthly, it is important for the cooperation
between the two bodies to continue to harness the rich
experiences built over the years in the area of preventive
diplomacy and mediation. As we have consistently
maintained, prevention is always better than curing,
and early support for regional preventative measures
would go a long way in maintaining international peace
and security and in realizing the AU Silencing the Guns
by 2030 initiative.
In conclusion, Ghana believes that there is no better
way to address the myriad security and development
challenges in Africa than through the enhancement
of home-grown interventions, coupled with deeper
cooperation among the United Nations, the AU and
other interregional arrangements. The political will and
commitment of Member States, including the Security
Council, will continue to be essential in sustaining
peace in Africa. We also heard renewed support for
the permanent representation of Africa in a reformed
Security Council. The time to move past words into
action is now.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking Gabon and Your Excellency, Mr. Minister,
for organizing this debate and for the commitment to
keeping cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union as a central topic of the Security Council’s
agenda. I also thank Secretary-General Guterres and
Mr. Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, for their invaluable reflections.
Our statement focuses on two major aspects.
The first one is the link between security and
development, especially in Africa. A helpful point of
departure is Agenda 2063 — that pioneering report
published by the African Union Commission, whose
subtitle is “The Africa We Want”. The study reiterates
how the people of Africa and its diaspora committed to
acting together towards achieving two main aspirations:
on the one hand, “a prosperous Africa based on inclusive
growth and sustainable development” and, on the other,
“a peaceful and secure Africa”.
The people of Africa and its diaspora recognize
that a prosperous, integrated and united Africa, based
on good governance, democracy, social inclusion and
respect for human rights, justice and the rule of law, is
a necessary precondition for a peaceful and conflict-

22-6230815/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

free continent. Therein lies the very core of the link
between security and development, which are not only
closely interlinked, but also mutually reinforcing.
We deem it vital that the United Nations and the
African Union always strive to adopt comprehensive
and integrated approaches to addressing the economic,
political and social dimensions of conflict-affected
African countries. We must acknowledge the reinforcing
relationship between peace and socioeconomic
development. There can be no development without
peace, and no lasting peace without development.
Sustainable
peace
requires
comprehensive
approaches, which could benefit from the support
of the Peacebuilding Commission. Given its unique
composition and bridging mandate, the Peacebuilding
Commission is well placed to put forward coordinated
efforts within the United Nations system and create
sustainable cycles of peace and development.
My second point is on the coordination between the
United Nations and the African Union to address security
challenges. In their efforts to achieve lasting peace and
sustainable development, conflict-affected African
countries have long faced complex and multifaceted
challenges beyond the military and traditional security
realms. That intricacy is a major reason that we should
analyse each conflict’s political, economic and social
dimensions, while looking for adequate responses. In
that regard, a reform of the Security Council is long
overdue. The representation of Africa is a central point
in tackling African and global challenges.
We commend the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security for its continued significance
amid evolving challenges across Africa. The joint
framework constitutes a structured dialogue. We
recognize how it provides a predictable platform for
increased coordination between the two organizations.
We also commend how the joint framework strengthens
multilateralism and the core values that the United
Nations and the African Union share.
Let me conclude with a quick comment on the
African Union theme for the year 2022, “Strengthening
resilience in nutrition and food security on the African
continent”. It is crucial to once again underline
that security and development are not only closely
interlinked, but also mutually reinforcing. Local,
resilient food production with sustainable practices, for
instance, is key to nutrition and food security.
16/29

11/10/2022

We commend the efforts to enhance the United
Nations-African Union partnership, which is vital to
strengthening food-security resilience in Africa. Aside
from that, we call on the international community to
scale up its support for, on the one hand, nationally
defined development and peacebuilding priorities
and, on the other hand, comprehensive and integrated
approaches to conflict prevention, conflict resolution
and peacebuilding in Africa.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Gabon for organizing today’s debate,
and we welcome your participation, Mr. Minister, in
today’s meeting. We are grateful to Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing. We welcome the
briefing by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Faki Mahamat.
United Nations cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations is an integral element of
the current international agenda in general and the
Security Council in particular. We consistently support
the development of such cooperation on the basis
of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular
Chapter VIII. We see that, in recent years, there has
been increasing will and greater opportunities to seek
regional solutions to emerging problems. The African
Union, subregional organizations in Africa, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and other regional bodies have
been much more assertive. That is a response to today’s
geopolitical realities and challenges, and it is a genuine
sign of strengthening multilateralism. It is a move in the
right direction because, first, the countries of the region
are the main beneficiaries of peaceful solutions and,
secondly, they are more aware of the specifics of the
current contexts. However, it is clear that the activities
of regional bodies must be consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter and that peaceful means
must be given priority in the settlement of disputes.
In the past 20 years, since its transition from the
Organization of African Unity, the African Union has
indeed come a long way in terms of building a regional
peace and security architecture. Today Africans have
locally tailored conflict-prevention and conflictresolution mechanisms on the continent that coherently
complement the efforts of the world Organization within
its area of ​​responsibility and mandate. That enhances
the influence of African voices in both the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole. We very
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

much appreciate the work of the three African members
of the Security Council in defending the interests of
their neighbours on the continent.
We particularly want to note the importance
of efforts by the African Union and subregional
organizations to prevent disputes and mediate their
resolution. Unfortunately, there have been numerous
occasions when African mediation efforts have been
relegated to the background or intentionally thwarted
by external actors. One clear example was the blocking
of African Union mediation in Libya and Western
countries’ subsequent use of force there, leading to a
tragedy whose consequences are still being very much
felt far beyond that country’s borders. In that regard, we
welcome the appointment, 10 years later, of an African
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily.
The road map adopted for the implementation of
the African Union’s flagship initiative to end armed
conflicts in Africa, which has been extended until
2030, is a major undertaking. It is also important for
the African Union to take advantage of the current state
of global affairs to develop its own partnership and
cooperation mechanisms independent of any external
forces and without pressure, coercion or blackmail.
The dialogue between the African Union and the
United Nations has also been the subject of some steady
dynamics. What matters is that that cooperation has a
strategic nature today. Joint work is being conducted on
the basis of the framework documents for strengthening
partnerships for issues of peace and security, as well as
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the AU’s Agenda 2063. Joint meetings
are held annually through the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council, the next series of which
will take place in New York this week.
Yet despite all of those achievements, the situation
on the African continent today remains problematic.
Security challenges and socioeconomic problems have
escalated, spreading instability and expanded terrorist
activity. There are still many difficulties in the area
of governance. We urge our friends to examine those
challenges in depth, evaluate all their factors and
causes, including in a historical context, and take
into account the ethnic and cultural characteristics of
individual States. It is futile to attempt to manage the
symptoms of a disease when the problems created by

S/PV.9149

its underlying causes, many of them rooted in Africa’s
colonial past, have not been dealt with.
First of all, a swift response is needed to the
widespread practice on the continent, in violation of
the Charter of the United Nations, of illegal unilateral
sanctions and political blackmail, including threats to
stop the provision of humanitarian and socioeconomic
assistance with the collusion of the Bretton Woods
institutions. The cynicism of such actions is obvious.
The restrictions hit the civilian population hardest,
obstructing their access to essential goods, including
medicines, vaccines and food. The situation is
compounded by the lack of political freedom in a
number of African States with regard to fundamental
national issues, including in the security sector. It is
time to pay particular attention to that problem.
Secondly, we consider it reasonable for African
States to raise the question of the provision by the
United Nations of material and financial assistance
for their efforts to maintain international peace and
security. We look forward to an agreement on a common
African position on modalities for financing African
peacekeeping operations and the use of African Union
Peace Fund resources for that purpose. We are ready
to engage in constructive dialogue on the issue. In that
connection, we would like to specifically emphasize
that the key to the success of regional efforts is a shared
assessment by the countries of the region of existing
threats and ways to overcome them, as well as their
willingness to bear the risks involved and to create a
coherent and effective command-and-control system.
As far as funding methods are concerned, regardless
of which of them are appropriate to the situation, it is
important that initiating countries be able to retain the
space to make their own policy decisions to counter
threats rather than having them imposed by others.
Finally, we believe that the growing terrorist threat
in Africa requires special attention. We are ready and
willing to share our experience in counter-terrorism
with our African partners and to implement projects
for building the capacity of their countries in the fight
against terrorist and extremist threats.
In conclusion, we want to reiterate Russia’s
readiness to continue cooperating with its African
partners on an equal footing, focusing on strengthening
their potential. We also continue to devote considerable
attention to training personnel on the continent. Joint
work on the flagship initiative of the African Union

22-6230817/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

to end all armed conflicts on the continent by 2030
is included in the 2023-2025 draft action plan for
cooperation between the Russian Federation and the
African Union, which we expect to adopt at the second
Russian-African summit scheduled for next summer in
St. Petersburg.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): Let me begin by thanking
Gabon for convening this important discussion,
which coincides with the twentieth anniversary of the
African Union (AU). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and Commissioner Faki Mahamat
for their briefings.
Global threats to international peace and security,
such as terrorism, climate change and the intersecting
food, energy and financial crises, are disproportionately
affecting the African continent. Enhanced coordination
and cooperation between multilateral organizations
such as the United Nations and the African Union
are essential tools in responding to those crises. In
recent years we have seen how deeper engagement
between the United Nations and the African Union
can enable positive developments in responding to
peace and security challenges facing the continent. In
the Sudan, a trilateral mechanism between the United
Nations, the AU and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development has been created to jointly facilitate
a solution to the ongoing political and security crisis
there. In the Sahel, the United Nations and the African
Union are undertaking a joint assessment aimed at
strengthening international coordination to address
the multidimensional crisis. On Ethiopia, we welcome
the close engagement between the African Union and
the United Nations to find a pathway to a negotiated,
durable resolution of that appalling conflict. We urge
the Security Council to remain closely engaged.
Those initiatives are positive, but all face
challenges. They must be strengthened and built on.
The African Union can draw on the expertise and
support of the United Nations where appropriate. The
United Nations must continue to help build the capacity
of the African Union and support its work in trying to
resolve some of Africa’s most serious challenges. There
remain a number of areas that would benefit from
greater collaboration.
First, we must work together to address the global
challenges affecting peace and security in Africa. That
includes the food, energy and financial crises that have
been exacerbated by Russia’s war of aggression against
18/29

11/10/2022

Ukraine. Those interlocking crises mean that urgent
action is needed to provide the countries affected with
immediate humanitarian assistance and to address the
issue of debt relief. We welcome the initiatives of the
African Union and those of regional organizations such
as the Economic Community of West African States
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
to address the global challenge of climate change. The
Security Council must play a greater role in supporting
Africa to respond to the threat of climate change, which
is driving insecurity and acting as a threat multiplier
across the continent. As the United Nations body
charged with the maintenance of international peace and
security, the Council must discharge its responsibilities
in this area.
Secondly, the Council must support efforts
to strengthen the African Union’s central role in
promoting good governance. The recent wave of coups
d’état across the continent, including most recently
in Burkina Faso, are a matter of grave concern. They
demonstrate the need to better support citizens and
civic movements across Africa in order to advance
inclusive and accountable governance. That includes
the full protection of freedom of expression and
assembly, and it also includes transparent elections and
the promotion of the rule of law. The multidimensional
crises in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa have proved
that a failure to address political and security crises
and their underlying causes leads to humanitarian and
economic crises.
Thirdly, Ireland recognizes the need for predictable
and sustainable financing for United Nations-authorized,
AU-led peace support operations. We hope that the
Secretary-General’s upcoming report on the issue will
prompt an open and frank discussion and provide a
window of opportunity to make concrete progress.
Finally, the challenges we face are too complex for
any one nation, large or small, to address alone. It is
only by working together that we can hope to resolve
them successfully. Ireland looks forward to continuing
its commitment to working across the United Nations in
order to support the vital efforts of the African Union
and of African subregional organizations towards the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): We thank you for your presence at this
meeting today, Mr. President, and we are grateful to the
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for their briefings.
Mexico congratulates the African Union and
its members on the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of that important organization. Its
cooperation with the United Nations is essential to
responding effectively to the challenges facing the
African continent. I would like to recall that at the United
Nations Conference on International Organization,
held in San Francisco in 1945, we, the Latin American
countries, made Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations possible, in our firm belief that disputes
should be addressed as a priority at the regional level. I
would like to focus today on two issues.
First, in the area of international peace and
security, we welcome the African Union’s leadership
in exercising its good offices, spearheading mediation
efforts and deploying regional peacekeeping forces. In
that regard, we appreciate the ongoing work to promote
dialogue between the Government of Ethiopia and the
Tigray People’s Liberation Front. The Security Council
should continue to support that mediation.
Another commendable effort is the African Union’s
support for the national reconciliation initiative in
Libya, which seeks to break the cycle of violence in
that country. Mexico will closely follow the conference
planned for that purpose and reiterates that stability in
Libya is key to the security of the Sahel countries and
that of the continent as a whole.
We also commend the actions undertaken to
promote the women and peace and security agenda in
the continent. The formation of the African Women
Leaders Network and the Network of African Women
in Conflict Prevention and Mediation are important
actions if we are to advance towards the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in their own
countries in their various political institutions.
Mexico believes that the African Union is a
fundamental ally in promoting the fight against
trafficking in small arms and light weapons. My country
reiterates that the United Nations should support the
efforts undertaken as part of the Silencing the Guns
by 2030 initiative in order to achieve its objectives.
Resolution 2616 (2021), which my country supported,
establishes some lines of action that the Council can
promote in order to strengthen the fight against the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in

S/PV.9149

Africa. Mexico will continue to contribute militarily
to the peacekeeping operations deployed in various
African countries.
Secondly, the unconstitutional changes of
Government that have occurred in recent months — or
even weeks — in Burkina Faso, Chad, Guinea, Mali
and the Sudan delineate a very worrisome trend that
must be reversed before it affects other countries of the
region. The international community must mobilize
in order to continue stressing the importance of
democratic governance on the continent and to prevent
political instability from exacerbating the situation of
violence in some parts of the Sahel and Central Africa.
We therefore call on subregional organizations to
harmonize their responses to breaches of constitutional
order in any given country. In that connection,
the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and
Governance sets out the criteria to be applied. It is in
everyone’s interest to avoid any signal that could be
interpreted as indifference or permissiveness in the face
of the violation of a country’s institutional framework.
That is equally valid for the Security Council, which has
not always been able to reach agreement on statements
by the President on such events.
In the face of the challenges arising from the
economic consequences of the pandemic, the rise in
food and fuel prices, as well as the previously mentioned
negative effects of climate change, cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union continues to
be paramount and could have very positive effects. We
hope that at the joint meetings between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, which will take place this week, we will
be able to agree on further action that will enable us to
strengthen cooperation between the two organizations
for the sake of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. But
above all, let us do everything we can in the Security
Council so that Africa does not once again become
the stage and victim of competition among the great
Powers. That competition is nothing more than the new
face of colonialism.
Mexico also supports Security Council reform that
gives Africa its rightful place on a more representative
Council of the international community. That reform
should not be limited to an increase in the Council’s
membership, however. Its working methods must be
reformed first. I am referring particularly to the use and
abuse of the veto. That is why, as Mexico participates

22-6230819/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

actively in intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform, with proposals that are in the interests
of all Member States, we will continue, alongside
France, to promote a restriction of the use of the veto
in situations of mass atrocities. We once again call
countries that have not signed on to that initiative to
support it.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this debate
during your Security Council presidency. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union (AU) Commission for their briefings.
On this the twentieth anniversary of the African
Union, strengthening the partnership among the United
Nations, the AU and African member States remains
indispensable as we strive towards a freer, safer and
more prosperous continent. That is why the United
Kingdom supports permanent African representation
on the Security Council. That is why the annual
consultations later this week between the Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council are so important.
I want to emphasize three points about this
important partnership.
First, coordination among the AU, the United
Nations and other international partners is vital for
finding political solutions to conflicts, including in
northern Ethiopia, the Sudan and Somalia. We therefore
welcome the planned AU-facilitated talks concerning
northern Ethiopia and urge the Ethiopian Government
and the Tigray People’s Liberation Front to engage in the
process. In the Sudan, we welcome cooperation among
the United Nations, the AU and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development to help facilitate a political
solution following the October 2021 military coup. As
a Council, we must continue to support the tripartite
mechanism’s efforts to deliver the freedom, peace and
justice that the Sudanese people have called for. And in
Somalia, the African Union Mission in Somalia and its
successor, the African Transition Mission in Somalia
(ATMIS), demonstrate the value of United Nations-AU
cooperation. The United Kingdom has long supported
that critical cooperation, including by contributing
£25 million towards ATMIS stipends this year alone.
Secondly, the United Nations-AU partnership is
important for tackling transregional challenges to
stability, such as terrorism, disease, climate and food
insecurity. At least 130 million people in Africa are
20/29

11/10/2022

experiencing crisis levels of food insecurity. The United
Kingdom is working with African partners to address
the heightened food, economic and wider humanitarian
risks in the region that have been exacerbated by the
war in Ukraine.
Finally, I note that today is International Day of
the Girl Child. We welcome AU efforts on children
and armed conflict, as well as recent meetings of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on women
and peace and security and gender-based violence. The
AU-United Nations partnership is important for making
progress on those issues. We look forward to working
diligently in order to implement the Transforming
Education Summit, in support of 12 years of quality
education for girls, and to strengthening cooperation on
preventing sexual violence in conflict. We hope that the
AU will participate in the international conference the
United Kingdom is hosting next month, which focuses
on prevention, justice and supporting survivors.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank the SecretaryGeneral and Chairperson Faki Mahamat for their
valuable insights. The global challenges we face are
disproportionately affecting Africa. We thank Gabon, as
well as Ghana and Kenya, for their efforts to ensure that
the effects on Africa are placed higher on the Security
Council’s agenda. For example, in May, the Council
discussed the sharp rise in acute food insecurity, hunger
and malnutrition (see S/PV.9036), a topic that was also
discussed at the African Union (AU) yesterday.
The climate crisis has also become increasingly
evident in the work of the Council because it affects
livelihoods, human security and people’s futures,
multiplies the risks of further conflict and drives
displacement. Next month’s meeting among world
leaders in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, is a critical
moment. Norway stands firmly by its commitments to
doubling its funding for climate finance. The links to
security are clear. More than half of the 20 countries
most vulnerable to climate change are also affected by
armed conflict. There can no longer be any doubt that
climate-related security risks must be integrated into
our efforts for peace, in Africa and beyond.
The shared goal of the African Union and the
United Nations is to prevent, mitigate and resolve
conflicts. Combining the AU’s situational awareness
with the mandates, tools and technical capacity of
the United Nations improves conflict resolution
and mediation — and we must do more of that. The
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

trilateral mechanism in the Sudan is an example of an
effective partnership between United Nations envoys,
AU representatives and subregional organizations.
Such partnerships should be further developed and
could serve as a model for effective cooperation and
coordination in other conflict situations as well.
There can be no peace without women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation and leadership, as was
recognized in the conclusions of the open session of the
African Union Peace and Security Council on women
and peace and security, held last week. We applaud the
AU’s continued work to strengthen the implementation
of the agenda, including through the active use of the
Panel of the Wise, FemWise-Africa, the network of
African women mediators and joint partnerships with
civil society on the ground.
Since 2002, the AU has assumed greater
responsibility for maintaining peace and security in
Africa, including through peace support operations. The
AU’s ability and willingness to mount counter-terrorism
and peace enforcement missions are increasingly
important in what are often rapidly changing conflict
dynamics, especially given the fact that such operations
fall outside the scope and borders of traditional United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Let me be clear. The
AU has made progress on a number of fronts. It has
taken significant steps to ensure that its Peace Fund is
now operational. It has also made advances on the AU
compliance framework project with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
including drawing up a code of conduct, developing
disciplinary processes and beginning to roll them out
in existing missions. The African Union Transition
Mission in Somalia and the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) are examples in
which the compliance frameworks are being tested
and implemented, and Norway is pleased to support
those efforts. We back the Secretary-General’s call for
a United Nations support office for the Joint Force of
the G-5 Sahel. Norway believes that the Council should
not shy away from serious discussions on predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding, including for AU-led
and regional missions.
Peace and stability are the most important building
blocks for realizing the ambitions for economic and
social progress in Africa, and African countries have
the critical experience and insights. Cooperation with
Africa is paramount in dealing with security issues on
the continent. That is why the Security Council must

S/PV.9149

also reflect the geopolitical realities of today. Norway
supports efforts to expand the Council and increase
the number of permanent and non-permanent seats
for Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Mr. Adamo, as
you preside over the Security Council on behalf of our
sister Republic of Gabon. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and my brother
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for their valuable briefings. I
commend the Gabon presidency for allowing the general
membership to take part in today’s important debate.
In line with its role as a founding member of the
United Nations and the African Union and its adherence
to multilateralism, Egypt prioritizes strengthening
cooperation and promoting integration between the
two organizations. A constructive relationship between
the United Nations and the African Union is in the
interests of peace, security and development in Africa.
The fact of the matter is that despite the fact that this
debate in the Security Council is an annual one, this
year it has special significance in the light of the
unprecedented challenges facing Africa. They include
the sharp polarization among the major Powers, the
escalating economic crisis, threats to food security and
the negative consequences of climate change in Africa,
especially as a result of the spread of drought and
water scarcity — as well as the spread of terrorism and
extremism, which know no religion or race. In addition,
some actors have been working to dismantle and divide
African States and push them into a quagmire of
identity and ethnic conflicts instead of enabling them
to build and strengthen their national institutions.
In the face of those challenges, Egypt affirms
that there is no shortage of obligations or agreements
between the United Nations and the African Union. The
relationship between the two organizations is clearly
based on Chapter VIII of the Charter. In the light of
the multiple partnership frameworks between the two
organizations in various areas of multilateral action,
Egypt believes that those obligations must be translated
into reality. We must move from drafting documents
and ideas to the implementation stage. In that regard, I
would like to put forward the following proposals.

22-6230821/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

First, addressing conflicts in Africa requires
a continuing response, from peacemaking and
peacekeeping efforts to peacebuilding and sustainable
peace. Egypt therefore reiterates its call for African
peace operations to be able to access their assessed
contributions to the United Nations budget. We also
stress the importance of providing the funding that
peacebuilding activities in Africa require. In that
context, we call on the general membership to swiftly
adopt the required funding for the Peacebuilding Fund
of the Peacebuilding Commission, in accordance with
the Secretary-General’s proposal.
Secondly, there is an urgent need to take
immediate steps to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union’s
Agenda 2063, including by ensuring States’ access
to adequate international financing, considering the
extremely difficult economic challenges that they
are currently facing. It should be noted in that regard
that underdevelopment remains the main cause of
conflicts in Africa, and we should therefore act now
to meet African needs through the forthcoming United
Nations 2023 Sustainable Development Goals Summit,
taking Africa’s complicated and special circumstances
into consideration.
Thirdly, despite the fact that we are not
responsible for the global increase in greenhouse-gas
emissions, Africa is the continent most affected by the
consequences of climate change, especially drought and
water scarcity, including through their repercussions
for peace and security. The single clearest example of
those repercussions in Africa is the lack of security
and stability in the Sahel region. Egypt therefore hopes
to see wide international participation in the twentyseventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be
held in Sharm el-Sheikh in November, so that we can
adopt measures to address climate change by further
strengthening Africa’s capacity for adaptation and
resilience through concessional financing.
Fourthly, Africa does not suffer from a shortage
of resources, but it needs more advanced science
and modern technology. The United Nations and the
international community must therefore shoulder a
special responsibility in promoting capacity-building
and knowledge-transfer programmes in African
countries and within the African Union and subregional
organizations in Africa. In that regard, Egypt calls
for the development of a specific programme by the
22/29

11/10/2022

United Nations to build the capacity of the African
Union Commission and subregional organizations
to implement the Silencing the Guns initiative and
Agenda 2063 for development in the continent, in line
with the integration benchmarks between the United
Nations and the African Union pursuant to Chapter
VIII of the Charter.
Fifthly, integration between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
does not mean that one will push responsibility onto
the other. Integration requires joint work and exploiting
each organization’s comparative advantages to
address conflicts, especially emerging ones, through
proactive steps and effective preventive diplomacy.
In that context, we should point out that establishing
a hierarchy in working with the African Union and
subregional organizations does not mean that the
United Nations would relinquish its responsibility as an
overarching organization under the Charter.
In conclusion, cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union is at a critical
juncture. African States are clearly frustrated by the
contemporary reality in which intense pressure from
multiple parties draws their attention rather than
making efforts towards achieving cooperation and
development. In addition, Africa does not receive
its fair share of development and international trade.
That is why we are talking today frankly and clearly
and proposing specific practical steps to promote
joint action between the United Nations and the
African Union with a view to meeting the demands
of our African peoples, who want justice and broader
African participation in the international governance
structure. Politically, this could be achieved through
a real reform of the Security Council based not on
piecemeal or gradual solutions, but on ending injustice
against the continent in accordance with the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, and economically
by restructuring the international financial institutions
so that they would be fairer in dealing with the needs of
African and other developing States.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting, and I am grateful
to all the speakers for their insightful remarks.
I would like to begin by congratulating the
African Union (AU) on the twentieth anniversary of
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

its establishment. The AU has made great progress in
the past two decades in its efforts to promote peace
and development across Africa, in collaboration with
subregional organizations. Despite those efforts, Africa
has not been spared from increasing global human
security crises caused by multiple factors, such as
conflict, terrorism, food insecurity, energy shortages,
the coronavirus disease pandemic and climate change.
Such trends have made it all the more important for the
United Nations and regional arrangements, particularly
the African Union, to enhance their cooperation in
order to tackle the root causes of crisis.
We need to make the best use of the comparative
advantages of each organization. The coming annual
consultation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council will serve
as a platform to further cultivate the vast potential for
closer cooperation between the two organizations. With
that in mind, I would like to highlight the following
three points.
First, effective approaches require strong regional,
national and local leadership and ownership in close
coordination with international partners. In other
words, international support needs to focus on building
and strengthening institutions and human capacities
at every level. With the aim of investing in people
and spurring quality growth, at the eighth Tokyo
International Conference on African Development,
Japan announced the investment of $30 billion as the
sum of public and private financial contributions over
the next three years. Furthermore, we will work towards
human-capacity development for 300,000 professionals
in a wide range of fields. Japan aspires to be a partner
growing together with Africa.
Secondly, we should continue to pursue a
holistic approach based on the humanitarianpeace-development nexus to synergize and mutually
reinforce the efforts of all actors. The United Nations
system in particular should strive to integrate the work
of its own agencies, funds and programmes so that they
can more effectively support the efforts of the African
Union and other regional arrangements. The United
Nations system should also enhance cooperation with
such other partners as the international financial
institutions, the private sector and civil society. The
United Nations peacebuilding architecture, in particular
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, should continue to play a key role to that end.

S/PV.9149

Finally, given the vital role of peace support
operations by regional organizations such as the
African Union, the issues related to various funding
and assistance options for such operations should be
thoroughly discussed from a broad perspective. For
its part, Japan has been contributing to the African
Union Peace Fund since 1996. Our contributions have
supported AU-led peacebuilding activities in the areas
of conflict prevention and mediation.
Growing threats to the rules-based international
order are a stark reminder of the urgent need to reform
the United Nations system, particularly the Security
Council. Increasing the legitimacy and effectiveness
of the Council with more balanced geopolitical
representation, including from Africa, is a critical
task that should not be put off any longer. In that
context, Japan strongly supports the Common African
Position enshrined in the Ezulwini Consensus and the
Sirte Declaration.
As an incoming member of the Security Council,
Japan remains committed to further supporting
effective collaboration between regional arrangements
and the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of South Africa.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We commend the
Gabonese Republic for convening today’s meeting. We
also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their briefings.
As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary
of the African Union (AU), South Africa reaffirms
its commitment to the ideals and spirit of the
Constitutive Act of the African Union and the Charter
of the United Nations in pursuit of a more just and
equitable world, founded on multilateralism and
international cooperation.
When the African Union was launched in Durban,
South Africa, in 2002, 20 years ago, it was understood
then and as it is understood even today that development,
peace and security are intertwined, and one cannot take
place without the others. That implies that sustainable
development will remain elusive in the absence of
peace, security and stability. It is for that reason that a
major role of the AU as a multilateral institution is to
promote development, peace, security and stability on,
and the integration of, the African continent.

22-6230823/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The AU has recognized that partnerships are
essential to advancing its objectives. One of the most
important partnerships that the AU has developed since
its inception has been with the United Nations in peace
and security. For South Africa, it is important that this
partnership is anchored on the principles of subsidiarity,
complementarity and comparative advantages.
The African Union-United Nations partnership
has yielded some positive outcomes over the years,
particularly in peace support operations. The African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which completed its mandate in December
2020, is an epitome of the cordial partnership between
the AU and the United Nations. UNAMID is a model
that can be replicated because peacekeeping missions
ought to serve the purpose of bringing about peace and
stability within a given time frame.
The African Union Transition Mission in Somalia,
formerly known as the African Union Mission in
Somalia, is a key undertaking of the AU. Against
all odds, that Mission has registered significant
achievements since its inception with the continued
support of international partners, notably the United
Nations and the European Union.
Moreover, our two organizations continue to work
together to promote democracy in Africa. That has
included supporting free, fair and credible electoral
processes, strengthening good governance, promoting
the protection of human rights and preventing electoral
violence across the continent. However, we believe that
more still needs to be done in those areas to ensure that
peace support operations are not deployed indefinitely,
and that peace holds in post-conflict situations.
Importantly, we should ensure that there are no
relapses from democratic processes, as evidenced by a
resurgence of unconstitutional changes of Governments
on the continent.
While significant progress has been made between
the AU and the United Nations, challenges remain at
the level of cooperation between the United Nations
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union. Although increased efforts of
engagement between the Peace and Security Council
and the Security Council have helped the organizations
to achieve greater strategic convergence on issues that
are of mutual importance, there is room for further
improvement. While acknowledging the work done
to ensure peace on the continent, the United Nations
24/29

11/10/2022

and the AU must strengthen their efforts to address the
root causes and drivers of conflict in Africa, including
development and governance issues.
To respond to those dynamics, we are pleased
that the AU continues to reform, as evidenced by
the alignment of the African Peace and Security
Architecture and the African Governance Architecture.
Transitional justice, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and development remain important in
building peaceful societies.
Another key challenge facing the AU-United Nations
partnership pertains to United Nations-mandated AUled peace support operations. The Security Council
should create the opportunity and a dispensation that
will allow Africa to access sustainable and predictable
funding from United Nations assessed contributions.
In that context, both organizations should strive to
implement the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security and the memorandum of understanding on a
United Nations-AU partnership in peacebuilding. Both
those frameworks provide a solid basis for AU-United
Nations cooperation in the advancement of peace
and security.
Fundamentally, there should be improved
engagement with all levels and segments of our societies
with the support of the United Nations and other
international partners. We must therefore ensure the
meaningful and active involvement in peace processes
of all segments of civil society and non-State actors,
including women, young people and the private sector,
in order to contribute to Africa’s development and the
silencing of guns by 2030.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our concern regarding
the much-needed reform of the Security Council.
Africa still has no permanent representation in the
permanent category of the Security Council, and only
three non-permanent seats are allocated to Africa. The
current composition of the Security Council does not
reflect the world in which we live. A partnership with
a global institution without democratic composition
and representation undermines the essence of such a
partnership. We hope that States Members of the United
Nations will proceed with the necessary urgency to
reform this important organ.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Mr. Niang (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of Her Excellency Mrs. Aïssata Tall Sall, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad, who was unable
to take part in this important debate due to scheduling
constraints, I would like to thank the sister Republic of
Gabon for holding this relevant debate, which is part of
a dynamic to enhance the Joint United Nations-African
Union (AU) Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. I would therefore like to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres and Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the AU Commission,
for the quality of their briefings, which highlighted the
challenges of that cooperation.
The international system for addressing conflicts
in Africa is no longer adequate. That is clear. That
state of affairs is linked to the nature of the conflicts,
which are more often intra-State than inter-State, the
multiple actors involved, the diverse means of violence
and the emergence of asymmetric security threats,
such as terrorism and organized crime. Those factors
have changed the approaches to peacekeeping that
once prevailed.
As strategic partners of the United Nations, the AU
and African subregional organizations have nevertheless
demonstrated their determination and capacity to
provide initial responses to African crises. There are
many examples to illustrate that reality. However, their
action has often been limited by constraints of various
kinds, including the thorny issue of funding. Indeed,
it is worrisome that the lack of adequate funding
for African peace support operations unfortunately
continues to be an issue at a time when the African
Union is increasingly shouldering responsibilities in
that area.

S/PV.9149

In the same vein, we call on all the members of
the Security Council to support the proposal for the
establishment of a United Nations specialized support
office, financed through United Nations assessed
contributions, in order to provide the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel with sustainable, predictable
and reliable funding commensurate with the gravity of
the security challenges that it faces.
It must be noted that, while there has been
considerable progress in the implementation of the Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework in terms of
mediation and technical electoral assistance, it is still
lacking in terms of peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction. In that regard, the focus should be on the
following aspects: addressing unconstitutional changes
of Government, the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, security
system reforms, national reconciliation and transitional
justice issues, accountability and strengthening judicial
systems, among other areas.
Such an approach to peacebuilding and conflict
prevention is precisely one of the issues on which
there is the greatest consensus within the international
community, even if that consensus is often expressed
more in theory than in practice.
The African Union’s readiness to play a leading
role in such areas must be met in the Security
Council Chamber. That is because the AU, which is
well acquainted with African political and cultural
realities, is better equipped to act more effectively on
early warning and prevention.

In the spirit of resolution 2320 (2016), my delegation
therefore once again echoes Africa’s call for predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding mechanisms for
African Union peace support operations authorized by
the Security Council under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations.

The Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council must therefore intensify their
dialogue in order to ensure a common understanding of
the security dynamics and challenges in Africa and to
define the best modalities for supporting African peace
and security initiatives. In that same vein, it is essential
that African members of the Council play a more
meaningful role in this body in which many decisions
concerning peace and security in Africa are taken.

Such efforts expected from the United Nations
are all the timelier given the African Union’s firm
commitment to addressing the security challenges on
the continent by taking a major step towards addressing
the issue of predictable funding and increasing its
contribution to the cost of its peace support operations
to 25 per cent.

Before concluding, I wish to echo some of the voices
that have spoken up in this Chamber regarding a reality
that has become untenable and unacceptable — namely,
the fact that the Security Council, as it exists, deals
with the world’s problems when it does not represent,
in its composition, the true range of powers that it was
meant to and should represent.

22-6230825/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

It is high time that Africa be afforded its due
representation as a permanent member of the Security
Council. It is high time the floodgates were opened.
The Council cannot continue to function as it does
now. It is important and imperative that we all devote
ourselves to this task. This is a heartfelt call and a call
to reason. This call to reason must serve the interests
of the international community, and I therefore wish
to join those who have preceded me here today in
emphasizing this.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I thank you, Sir, for
hosting this high-level event, which coincides with the
commemoration of the twentieth anniversary of the
transformation of the Organization of African Unity
into the African Union (AU). Allow me to also extend
my gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. António
Guterres, and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, for their
elaborate and informative briefings.
Embracing a multipolar world is synonymous
with embracing divergent views and appreciating
different contexts. The power dynamic in a setting that
accommodates multipolarity requires us to be cognizant
of that. The AU-United Nations partnership is symbiotic
in nature and has been beneficial on many scores, chief
among which is the alignment of development priorities.
The ability to seamlessly dovetail the priorities outlined
in Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development has been extremely beneficial. That
has greatly supported our ability to domesticate the
elements of both agendas simultaneously.
We are encouraged that the scope and depth of the
AU-United Nations partnership continues to grow in
stature. Despite that, the continent continues to face
a plethora of challenges and ever-present threats such
as terrorism, organized crime, violent extremism,
food insecurity and pronounced energy and climate
challenges. These challenges are not insurmountable.
They do, however, require concerted and coordinated
efforts to ensure that the AU-United Nations
partnership is leveraged for the benefit of the citizens
of all member States.
Last month, the African Union celebrated the fifth
annual Africa Amnesty Month to reduce the number
of illegally owned weapons. The threat posed by the
use, misuse and abuse of small arms and light weapons
26/29

11/10/2022

continues to have devastating consequences around
the world. The continued proliferation of small arms
and light weapons fuels conflict and has, in many
instances, had devastating effects on intimate partner
relationships, as those weapons are used to perpetrate
sexual and gender-based violence.
In that connection, Africa provided remarkable
leadership in the drafting of the Bamako Declaration on
an African Common Position on the Illicit Proliferation,
Circulation and Trafficking of Small Arms and
Light Weapons. That served as the precursor for the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, which has become an important global
instrument for monitoring the prevention, combating
and eradication of the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.
As a current member of the AU Peace and
Security Council and as Chair of the Southern African
Development Community Organ on Politics, Defence
and Security Cooperation, Namibia continues to
demonstrate its commitment to regional and continental
stability by advocating for the advancement of
infrastructure for peace, democracy and the protection
of human rights. With only seven years remaining until
the deadline to silence the guns on the continent, my
delegation places emphasis on partnership on an equal
footing, with due regard for the value of African voices,
not only in providing solutions to African problems, but
also in providing global leadership.
As long as the Security Council fails to reflect, in
stature and composition, the makeup of the multipolar
world, it can never adequately address global concerns.
While the spotlight may be on Africa today through
this focused open debate, we are reminded that we
remain guests in this Chamber, with no permanent
voice to represent the interests of the continent,
whose population of 1.3 billion people constitutes
approximately 17 per cent of the world’s population.
Sustaining peace on the continent requires strong
recognition of and support for the capacity of regional
organizations in providing leadership on regional issues.
Africa continues to evolve, and our resolve to build
institutional capacity and strengthen our governance
and peace and security infrastructure serves as our
commitment to building the Africa we want.
In conclusion, the Council’s agenda continues to
be dominated by African issues. Through stronger
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

partnerships, we are confident that inclusivity in
debates and decision-making on matters affecting the
lives of the people we represent in the Africa Union and
the United Nations would be strengthened. In Namibia,
we hold the belief that inclusivity spells harmony,
while exclusivity could lead to conflict. It is against
that background that my delegation welcomes the focus
of today’s debate on stronger cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. We believe that such partnerships will
foster greater inclusivity, breaking down the barriers of
inequality and exclusivity and bringing us closer to a
world in which no one is left behind.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Geisler (Germany) (spoke in French): Before
turning to the focus of today’s debate, allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your delegation’s recent
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council.
We welcome Gabon’s priorities and the importance
afforded to issues of peace and security on the African
continent. I would also like to thank you for allowing us
to participate in this important debate on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union,
which was perfectly introduced by the briefings given
by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission.
I intend to address three main points: the importance
of the African Union in maintaining international peace
and security; Germany’s support for the architecture
and efforts of the African Union; and the support
required to enable the African Union to meet the many
challenges it currently faces.
Since its establishment 20 years ago, the African
Union has rapidly become a central and indispensable
actor for conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. Its
principles and objectives correspond and are intrinsically
linked to the principles of the United Nations. The
African Union therefore plays an indispensable role
in defence of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of its member States.
The African Union’s numerous missions and
mediation initiatives, often carried out in partnership
with the United Nations, other African regional
organizations or the European Union, have contributed
to the mitigation and resolution of many crises. For
example, the African Union played an important role in
the peaceful transfer of power after the recent elections

S/PV.9149

in Zambia. In West African States that have recently
experienced unconstitutional changes of government,
the African Union works in close coordination with
the Economic Community of West African States to
achieving legitimate political transitions. In Somalia,
the African Union Transition Mission in Somalia and
its predecessor, the African Union Mission in Somalia,
have been contributing for many years to the fight
against Islamic terrorism and to the re-establishment of
State authority, with the logistical support of the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia.
In support of the concept of African solutions to
African problems, Germany and the European Union
have backed the African Union (AU) since its inception.
Between 2006 and today, the German Government has
contributed to the AU’s institutional development, its
governance and numerous initiatives amounting to
more than €600 million. Among other things, we have
contributed to the development and professionalism
of its peace and security architecture and domestic
governance. Our support for the African Union’s
border programme contributes directly to the structural
prevention of conflicts and the promotion of regional
and continental integration. We are particularly proud
of the progress and achievements of the African Women
Leaders Network, a platform that has brought together
and supported African women’s networks, particularly
in the area of peace and security, since 2017.
That being said, the many current challenges in
Africa — the political instability and insecurity caused
by threats of terrorism, proliferating and recurring
coups d’état and the global food crisis, and often
compounded by climate change — require a resolute
and multidimensional response, with the African
Union taking the lead and strong and reliable support
from the United Nations. Germany encourages and
supports the discussions on financing for African
missions. We are ready to discuss in concrete terms the
establishment of a mechanism that would enable a fair
and efficient division of tasks and costs between the
two organizations.
In the Sahel and the West African coastal States,
which are particularly affected by instability and
the threat of terrorism, a regional and cross-border
response seems essential and urgent. We welcome the
initiative taken by the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and the Secretary-General to develop
African regional solutions to the current crisis. We
stand ready to support any regional initiative resulting

22-6230827/29

S/PV.9149

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

from the deliberations of the Independent High-level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel, led by
President Issoufou.
Germany supports the allocation of permanent
seats to African Member States to ensure that they
are represented and that their voices are heard in the
Security Council, more than half of whose meetings
concern Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I am
particularly pleased to reiterate the Kingdom of
Morocco’s sincere congratulations to our brother
country of Gabon and to you personally, Sir, for your
presence among us, for the time you have taken to
preside over Council meetings and especially for your
wise leadership of the Council’s work for the month
of October. I also want to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their insightful briefings.
Morocco has always been linked to its African roots
by historical and secular relations of fraternity and
solidarity. The creation of the Organization of African
Unity, which later became the African Union, was
the result of Africa’s desire to liberate itself, develop
and prosper. Those ideals are guided by the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which
currently nourish and galvanize the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union. It
is in that spirit that Morocco, under the leadership of
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, remains committed
to collective and international African action together
with the United Nations to promote peace, development
and prosperity. In particular, we support committed
and complementary cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in every area, from
strengthening peace and security to dealing with
climate change and countering violent extremism,
especially in the Sahel and other parts of Africa.
Since rejoining the African Union, in 2017,
my country has continued to work to promote that
strategic and institutional partnership between the two
organizations to promote peace and security in the
world and especially on our continent, in view of the
fact that many of its countries are on the agenda of the
Security Council, a trend that we earnestly hope will
be reversed in the coming years. That will be possible
28/29

11/10/2022

only if the African Union, and especially the African
countries, are represented with dignity and if justice
is done by ensuring that they are properly represented
on the Security Council, so that they can convey the
words and commitment, as well as the actions, of the
African Union via permanent members who will also
be messengers of peace, of a continent that has a future
and is committed to peace, security and international
solidarity, especially considering that our world
everywhere is experiencing very difficult and deeply
troubling times and events. We want to ensure that
Africa’s voice and votes are expressed with regard
to every crisis around the world. Our African crises
are decided on and resolved without the participation
of African countries themselves, unless they are
non-permanent members of the Council such as those
here in the Chamber today.
Morocco welcomes the signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We believe it will
make it possible to promote peace and stability on
our continent in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. My delegation fully supports the
African Union peace operations authorized by the
Security Council on the basis of the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, in accordance with the Charter.
We call for adequate and predictable funding for
those operations through assessed contributions to the
regular United Nations budget. Morocco welcomes
the creation of the African Union Peace Fund, which
will finance the African Union’s activities related to
peace and security, including those related to conflict
prevention and resolution. It shows that Africa is taking
ownership of the maintenance of its peace and security
by allocating very significant resources to that fund
and implementing Africa’s commitment to financing
peace operations authorized by the Security Council.
Without peace, there can be no development or
security, and without development, there can be no peace
or security. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
establishment of the African Union-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Those
agendas, which are closely linked, are proof of the
cooperation between the two organizations in promoting
socioeconomic development, which is essential to peace,
stability and security in Africa. That framework is now
more important than ever as Africa faces the combined
22-62308

11/10/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

devastating effects of the coronavirus disease, climate
change and global conflicts. Our challenges in the
area of sustainable development also have to take into
account climate and environmental changes, which are
seriously affecting African populations and increasing
food insecurity, which in turn results in conflict and
massive population displacement. That alarming fact
must compel us to move from thinking to action. The
two organizations must work together to fight poverty,
eradicate hunger, promote good governance and
improve access to medical services in order to preserve
the dignity of African citizens and put an end to the

S/PV.9149

instabilities that have been threatening the continent
for decades.
Finally, the Kingdom of Morocco, which holds the
presidency of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union for the month of October, will continue
to work tirelessly to develop cooperation, symbiosis and
strategic partnerships between the African Union and
the United Nations in the interests and for the common
good not only of our continent but of our entire planet.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

22-6230829/29
