A /73/PV.19*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

19th plenary meeting

Friday, 12 October 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 140
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (continued)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/421)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee in its report (A/73/421) have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. Therefore, if there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, may I take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the report of
the Fifth Committee that is before the Assembly today?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
begin to take action on the recommendation contained
in the report of the Fifth Committee, I would like to
advise representatives that we are going to proceed to
take a decision in the same manner as was done in the
Fifth Committee.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution, entitled “Scale of assessments
for the apportionment of the expenses of the United
Nations: requests under Article 19 of the Charter”,
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 73/4).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 140.
Agenda item 116
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(d) Election of members of the Human Rights Council
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now proceed with the election of 18
members of the Human Rights Council to replace
those members whose term of office expires on
31 December 2018.
The 18 outgoing members are the following:
Belgium, Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia,
Panama, the Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
Slovenia, Switzerland, Togo, the United Arab Emirates
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In accordance with paragraph 7 of resolution
60/251 of 15 March 2006, these Member States are
eligible for immediate re-election except those that have
served two consecutive terms, namely, Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Germany, Kenya, the Republic of Korea, the
United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The 18 vacant seats should be distributed among
the regional groups as follows: five seats for the African

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-31768 (E)

*1831768*
* Reissued for technical reasons 28 February 2019.

A/73/PV.19

States; five seats for the Asia-Pacific States; two seats
for the Eastern European States; three seats for the
Latin American and Caribbean States; and three seats
for the Western European and other States.
In accordance with resolution 60/251, membership
in the Council shall be open to all States Members of
the United Nations, and the members of the Council
shall serve for a period of three years. The members of
the Council shall be elected directly and individually,
by secret ballot, by the majority of the members of the
General Assembly. Accordingly, 97 votes constitute
a majority in the General Assembly, which has a
membership of 193 States.
The following States will continue to be members
of the Human Rights Council: Afghanistan, Angola,
Australia, Brazil, Chile, China, Croatia, Cuba, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Hungary,
Iceland, Iraq, Japan, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia,
South Africa, Spain, Tunisia, Ukraine and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The
names of these States, therefore, should not appear on
the ballot papers.
I remind delegations that the names of the following
Member States should also not appear on the ballot
papers as they have served two consecutive terms and
are therefore not eligible for this election: Côte d’Ivoire,
Ethiopia, Germany, Kenya, the Republic of Korea, the
United Arab Emirates and the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela.
The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly on
elections. For this election, rules 92 and 94 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly shall be applied.
Consistent with the practice of the General
Assembly, if more than the required number of Member
States has obtained the votes of the majority of the
members of the Assembly on the same ballot, those
Member States that have obtained the largest number
of votes above the required majority will be considered
elected, up to the number of seats to be filled. Also,
consistent with past practice, when, in the case of a tied
vote, it becomes necessary to determine the candidate
to be elected or that will proceed to the next round of
restricted balloting, there will be a special restricted
ballot limited to those candidates that have obtained an
equal number of votes.
2/4

12/10/2018

May I take it that the General Assembly agrees to
these procedures?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Regarding the
candidatures of the respective regional Groups, the
Secretariat has been informed that, for the five vacant
seats for African States, the Group has endorsed five
candidates: Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Eritrea, Somalia
and Togo.
For the five vacant seats for Asia-Pacific States,
the Secretariat has received communications from five
candidates: Bahrain, Bangladesh, Fiji, India and the
Philippines.
For the two vacant seats for Eastern European
States, the Secretariat has received communications
from two candidates: Bulgaria and the Czech Republic.
For the three vacant seats for Latin American
and Caribbean States, the Secretariat has received
communications from three candidates: Argentina, the
Bahamas and Uruguay.
For the three vacant seats for Western European
and other States, the Secretariat has received
communications from three candidates: Austria,
Denmark and Italy.
I have been informed by the Secretariat that
voluntary pledges and commitments made by Member
States, in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution
60/251, were accordingly issued as official documents
of the seventy-third session.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order
on the actual conduct of the voting. In addition, ballot
papers will be given only to the representative seated
directly behind the country’s nameplate.
We shall now begin the voting process.
Ballot papers marked “A”, “B”, “C”, “D” and “E”
will now be distributed. Each ballot paper is assigned to
one of the five regional groups. I request representatives
to use only these ballot papers.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017, the names of the States that have
been communicated to the Secretariat, at least 48 hours
prior to the election today, have been printed on the
18-31768

12/10/2018

ballot papers for each of the regional groups. Also,
additional blank lines corresponding to the number of
vacant seats to be filled for each of the regional groups
have been provided on the ballot papers for inscribing
other names as necessary.
Representatives are requested to check the boxes
next to the names of candidates that are printed on
the ballot papers and/or write other eligible names on
the blank lines. The total number of checked boxes
and handwritten names may not exceed the number
of vacant seats to be filled as indicated on the ballot
paper. A ballot paper containing more votes than the
number of vacant seats indicated on the ballot paper
will be declared invalid. A ballot will also be declared
invalid if all the votes on that ballot do not belong to the
relevant region.
Accordingly, for the ballot paper marked “A”, for
African States, the total number of checked boxes and
handwritten names should not exceed five candidates;
for the ballot paper marked “B”, for Asia-Pacific States,
the total number of checked boxes and handwritten
names should not exceed five candidates; for the ballot
paper marked “C”, for Eastern European States, the
total number of checked boxes and handwritten names
should not exceed two candidates; for the ballot paper
marked “D”, for Latin American and Caribbean States,
the total number of checked boxes and handwritten
names should not exceed three candidates; and for the
ballot papers marked “E”, for Western European and
other States, the total number of checked boxes and
handwritten names should not exceed three candidates.
If a ballot paper contains one of the following
names of Member States, the ballot remains valid but
the vote for these Member States will not be counted:
names of Member States that do not belong to the region
concerned; names of Member States that are not eligible
for re-election; and names of Member States that will
continue to be members of the Council next year.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karem
(Iraq), Mr. Asuta (Kenya), Ms. Fareena (Maldives),
Ms. Velazquez Gamarra (Paraguay), Mr. Correia
Camilo (Portugal) and Mrs. Nipomici (Republic of
Moldova) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The meeting was suspended at 10.35 a.m. and
resumed at 11.50 a.m.

A/73/PV.19

The President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Group A — African States (5 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Burkina Faso
Togo
Cameroon
Somalia
Eritrea
Group B — Asia-Pacific States (5 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
India
Fiji
Bangladesh
Bahrain
Philippines

193
0
193
1
192
97
183
181
176
170
160
193
0
193
1
192
97
188
187
178
165
165

Group C — Eastern European States (2 seats)
Number of ballot papers:
193
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
193
Abstentions:
5
Number of members voting:
188
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Bulgaria
180
Czech Republic
178
Group D — Latin American and Caribbean States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers: 193
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 193
Abstentions: 4
Number of members voting: 189
Required absolute majority: 97
Number of votes obtained:
Bahamas 180

18-317683/4

A/73/PV.19

Uruguay 177
Argentina 172
Group E — Western European and other States
(3 seats)
Number of ballot papers: 193
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
193
Abstentions:
4
Number of members voting:
189
Required absolute majority:
97
Number of votes obtained:
Italy
180
Austria
171
Denmark
167
United States of America
1
Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes of the members of the
General Assembly, the following 18 States were
elected members of the Human Rights Council for
a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2019: Argentina, Austria, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Eritrea, Fiji, India,
Italy, the Philippines, Somalia, Togo and Uruguay.
The President: I congratulate those States that
have been elected members of the Human Rights

4/4

12/10/2018

Council, and I thank the tellers for their assistance in
this election.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of sub-item (d) of agenda item 116.
Announcement by the President
The President: I wish to make an announcement
concerning the membership of the General Committee
of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly.
Members will recall that for the seventy-third
session, the President, the twenty-one Vice-Presidents
and the Chairs of the six Main Committees were elected
on 5 June 2018. Subsequently, I would like to inform
Members that on 4 October 2018, His Excellency
Dee-Maxwell Saah Kemayah (Liberia) was elected
Chair of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee) at its seventy-third
session and is accordingly a member of the General
Committee for the session.
I congratulate the Chair of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) on his
election.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

18-31768
