asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6897

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6897th meeting
Thursday, 20 December 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Loulichki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Morocco)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Menan
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on Peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-65917 (E)

*1265917*

S/PV.6897

whose negotiation and mediation efforts help to
achieve and sustain political settlements; political and
peacekeeping missions, which assist in implementing
peace and transition agreements and lay the foundations
for sustainable peace; and the agencies, funds and
programmes whose efforts deliver peace dividends,
support recovery and kick-start development.

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Croatia, Denmark, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Japan, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, the
Republic of Korea, Senegal, Sweden, Switzerland,
Thailand and Turkey to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Abulkalam Abdul Momen,
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, to participate
in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2012/746, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and invite him to
take the floor.
The Secretary-General: I commend Morocco
for its initiative in convening this open debate.
Peacebuilding is one of the main objectives of the
United Nations. It brings together actors from across the
United Nations system, my envoys and representatives,

2

In my 2009 report (S/2009/304) on peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict, I identified
the first two years after the end of conflict as the key
window of opportunity to begin building sustainable
peace. I also laid out an action agenda for an improved
response by the United Nations system during this
period.
The United Nations has made significant progress
in advancing that agenda. United Nations missions
and country teams are working more closely together.
The United Nations has also become more agile in
deploying senior leaders, specialized experts and
staff to the field. We have strengthened and expanded
our partnerships, including with the World Bank and
regional organizations. And through the civilian
capacity initiative, we are broadening and deepening
the pool of institution-building expertise in key capacity
gap areas.
The outcome of these various efforts has been a
more coherent, timely and effective response to the
immediate post-conflict priorities. Our progress in
supporting the participation of women in peacebuilding
has been more mixed. There have been notable
achievements in the areas of conflict resolution, genderresponsive planning, financing and the rule of law.
However, there has been less progress in governance
and economic recovery. Much more remains to be
done to implement the seven-point action plan in my
2010 report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2012/466).
Despite the strides we have made, major
peacebuilding challenges remain. Many countries
continue to experience instability years after the end
of armed conflict, with high levels of relapse into
violence. Ninety per cent of conflicts between 2000
and 2009 occurred in countries that had previously
experienced civil war. The reasons for relapse vary by
country, but there is a common thread — a deficit of
trust in the wake of conflict between different political
parties and social groups, between State and society,
and between the State and its international partners.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

Experience has revealed three elements that are critical
to preventing relapse and producing more resilient
States and societies: inclusivity, institution-building,
and sustained international support.
Inclusive approaches to peacebuilding begin with
political settlements and convincing all parties to
a conflict that their core objectives can be resolved
through dialogue and negotiation, rather than through
recourse to violence. Inclusive processes anchored in
the rule of law also lower corruption and make public
administration more transparent and predictable, and
social service delivery more effective.
Our support to Yemen’s transition shows how the
United Nations is pursuing an inclusive approach. My
Special Adviser has engaged with a range of opposition
groups, youth, women and civil society organizations,
paving the way for their participation in the national
dialogue conference and laying the foundations for
subsequent stages of the transition.
Functioning institutions are essential for
establishing popular confidence in the State and
preventing violent conflict. For the international
community, a key challenge is balancing long-term
support for institution-building with the need to
demonstrate early and tangible outcomes that benefit
people. There is a vital need for an early focus on
restoring core administrative and financial management
systems, and on delivering social services.
Strengthening institutions means strengthening
the rule of law. Member States have recognized, in the
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels (resolution 67/1), adopted by the
General Assembly in September, the importance of rule
of law institutions that are accessible and responsive to
the needs and rights of all individuals, and that promote
trust, social cohesion and economic prosperity. Efforts
in this area should include ensuring full and equal
access to informal institutions, as well as strengthening
the interface between formal and informal institutions.
Good governance and the rule of law, as well as
effective, transparent, accountable and democratic
institutions, are critical for sustainable development.
Member States recognized that at this year’s United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, and
the current discussions on the post-2015 development
agenda offer an opportunity to take this recognition
forward.

12-65917

Building institutions and other peacebuilding
tasks can take a generation. This highlights the need
for sustained international political and financial
support. It also underscores the importance of mutual
accountability over the long term, which creates
a more balanced partnership between donors and
recipient Governments. This approach is reflected
in the Peacebuilding Commission’s instruments of
engagement and has been endorsed by the Group of
Seven Plus and its development partners.
Transition compacts can provide a basis for
improved trust and deeper partnerships between
countries emerging from conflict and the wider
international community. I encourage Member States
to support their development and use. For development
partners, this entails a greater willingness to use
national oversight and financial systems, and to assume
risk. Pooled funds, such as the Peacebuilding Fund, can
help to reduce such risk.
Post-conflict countries, development partners
and the United Nations all have their part to play in
translating these insights into practice. I stand ready to
report further on this pursuit so that, together, we can
get peacebuilding right.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for participating in this meeting
and for his statement. I reiterate our full appreciation
of his skilled leadership of the Organization and his
efforts in the service of its objectives and of furthering
the principles on which it is based. We wish him every
success.
I now give the floor to Mr. Momen.
Mr. Momen: I wish to thank you, Sir, for inviting
me to take part in this debate in my capacity as the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Commission is pleased to contribute to the Council’s
consideration of the Secretary-General’s report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746).
The Commission was briefed on 20 July on the
emerging findings and recommendations of the
Secretary-General’s report, and shared its views
on the areas that could be further emphasized. The
Commission then met on 26 November to discuss the
final report. We commend the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Peacebuilding Support, Ms. Judy ChengHopkins, for her efforts and those of her team.

3

S/PV.6897

The Commission took note with appreciation of the
Secretary-General’s report. The periodic reporting of
the Secretary-General to the Security Council and the
General Assembly on peacebuilding in the aftermath
of conflict offers an opportunity to take stock of how
the United Nations operational entities play a role in
supporting post-conflict countries in addressing the
root causes of and preventing relapse into conflict.
Delivering results on the ground, focusing on national
capacity development, and building institutions that
are necessary for recovery from conflict are all key
elements of this.
In this regard, the Commission noted the
importance of the main themes contained in this year’s
report: inclusivity, institution-building, sustained
international support and mutual accountability.
Through its political declaration adopted at the highlevel event on “Peacebuilding: Way towards sustainable
peace and security”, which took place on 25 September,
the Commission drew attention to these themes among
its broader membership at the highest political level,
and sought to reinvigorate the political commitment
to the overarching peacebuilding objectives in postconflict countries.
The Commission noted the analysis and
recommendations made in this year’s report with
respect to women’s participation in peacebuilding. In
its interaction with the Secretariat ahead of the release
of the report, the Commission emphasized the need for
programmes to be designed with a view to enhancing
the integration of women and youth as agents for
inclusive post-conflict recovery and reconstruction.
The Commission realizes that, while progress is being
achieved in mainstreaming a gender dimension in
peacebuilding, there is a need for additional efforts and
focus on investment in the socioeconomic and political
empowerment of women in post-conflict societies.
Experience-sharing, particularly through South-South
and triangular cooperation in specific thematic areas,
can contribute to achieving the objective of women’s
empowerment.
The Secretary-General’s report contains three
specific recommendations addressed to the Peacebuilding
Commission, which have been well-received. We
realize that those recommendations are also in line
with the recommendations of the 2010 Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, which the Commission has
been addressing through an annual road map of actions.

4

In that regard, I wish to briefly make some specific
remarks on each.
First, we have taken steps to strengthen our
approach to promoting and improving collaboration,
coherence and the alignment of partners behind
national peacebuilding strategies in the countries
on the Commission’s agenda. Our focus has been on
strengthening partnership with national Governments,
the World Bank and the African Development Bank. We
have also resumed consultations with the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States.
We are making progress in identifying specific areas
where the Commission can contribute to improving
alignment with those institutions. We believe that
such alignment, especially with the World Bank and
the African Development Bank, in support of newly
developed national poverty reduction strategies, will
help to channel much-needed resources to otherwise
underfunded peacebuilding priorities and bring
attention to country-specific challenges. Such efforts
could contribute to strengthening country ownership
and would enhance mutual commitments.
While continuing to strengthen and deepen the
partnership with the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, the Commission is also prioritizing
its outreach to foundations and private corporations.
Our immediate objective will be to identify practical
entry points that could help encourage these critical
actors to support peacebuilding objectives in the
countries on the Commission’s agenda.
Secondly, the Commission is also making
progress in identifying options for differentiated and
flexible forms of engagement with the countries on its
agenda, with a view to enhancing the Commission’s
impact on the ground. In that regard, we are taking
practical steps to enhance linkages with countrylevel actors and mechanisms, including Special and
Executive Representatives of the Secretary-General,
and to strengthen coordination among all actors.
We are increasingly focused on identifying areas of
complementarity, collaboration and coherence. Our
efforts are still a work in progress, but we are committed
to continuing to sharpen our tools in this area.
Thirdly, and lastly, the Secretary-General
encouraged the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission to build on the excellent and most
useful debate and interactive dialogue that took place
under the Colombian presidency this past July (see

12-65917

S/PV.6897

S/PV.6805). I express special thanks to Ambassador
Néstor Osorio, Permanent Representative of Colombia,
for his efforts. In a letter that I addressed to the
President of the Council, I summarized the practical
outcome of the July interaction to allow for follow-up
dialogue with the Council. We are thankful that the
Council has responded by requesting specific advice
from the Liberia and the Sierra Leone configurations
ahead of its September deliberations on the renewal of
the mandates of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone, respectively. In that connection, the
Commission is proceeding with the development and
formulation of its advice in collaboration with key
United Nations and non-United Nations actors in both
countries.
In November, the Commission’s Working Group
on Lessons Learned convened discussions with key
operational actors to look at where the Commission
could add value to Security Council discussions on
United Nations missions in transition. There are initial
and important findings that need to be put into practice,
following further discussions between the two organs.
The United Nations peacebuilding agenda is in
the normative phase. While not perfect, our efforts
are making a difference and are worthy of our
collective commitment and investment. For its part, the
Peacebuilding Commission is committed to enhancing
its impact in the field and to supporting United Nations
and global efforts to accompany the countries emerging
from conflict on an irreversible path to peace and
development.
Looking ahead, the Commission stresses the need
to draw on lessons learned from country-specific
experiences in terms of good practices, challenges
and opportunities. We invite the Secretary-General
to place particular emphasis in his future reports on
the practicality of his recommendations in terms of
impacts on the ground and the operational effectiveness
of the United Nations in post-conflict countries. That
would also allow us to set clear peacebuilding targets
and should also stimulate serious evaluation of the
Organization’s policies and tools in support of those
targets.
For its part, the Commission will continue to look
forward to working closely with the United Nations
and other non-United Nations partners, such as the
international financial institutions, in support of more

12-65917

coordinated and coherent response to those priority
areas, as relevant, in the countries on its agenda.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Momen
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): As this is most likely to be
the last public meeting of the Security Council in which
I will have the honour to speak as the representative
of Germany in the course of our current membership
in the Council, I would like to express my delegation’s
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and all the members
of the Council for the excellent cooperation we have
enjoyed during the past two years. Working with all
the members has really been a gratifying and great
experience. I also wish to express my delegation’s
sincere appreciation and thanks to the Security Council
secretariat, to the team led by Movses Abelian and to
all other staff members of the United Nations, without
forgetting the interpreters, who have worked behind
the scenes, for their professionalism and unwavering
support during that period. As we leave the Council,
we will continue to serve the United Nations family as
best as we can, based on the very same principles that
have guided us in the past two years. We express our
best wishes to the five new incoming members.
With regard to peacebuilding, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate and
for preparing the draft presidential statemement, which
we fully support. Let me also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul
Momen, respectively, for the insightful statement and
briefing this morning.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later in this debate on behalf of the European
Union.
We share the analysis contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/746) that progress has been
achieved — in strengthening and expanding United
Nations partnerships in the area of peacebuilding,
including with international financial institutions;
in launching the United Nations civilian capacities
initiative; in improving coordination between United
Nations missions and country teams on the ground; and
in providing timely support during critical phases of
transition through the United Nations Peacebuilding

5

S/PV.6897

Fund, just to mention a few areas. However, much more
needs to be done in order to deliver on commitments and
to further enhance the impact on the ground. We need
to continue to adapt our engagement in peacebuilding
to changing and evolving circumstances in countries
emerging from conflict. That also requires a regular
reassessment of the actual impact and effectiveness of
our engagement on a post-conflict country’s capacity
to achieve its national peacebuilding goals. In that
context, let me briefly highlight four points that seem
of particular importance to us.
First, with regard to institution- and capacitybuilding, we need to understand the term
institution-building in a very broad sense. This
is the approach my country adopts in its bilateral
development cooperation. Institution-building, or
rather State-building, is not only about constructing
Government institutions and State capacity. It is about
the whole social fabric of a society, about how a State
interacts with its society. Therefore, guaranteeing
the active participation of women, supporting the
establishment of a vibrant civil society or integrating
former child soldiers into their local communities can
equally be part of institution-building.
Also, we must think in medium and long-term
perspectives. We all know that building States from
scratch takes decades, not years. We therefore strongly
support the Secretary-General’s call on Governments
and their international partners to carefully pace,
sequence and adjust institutional reform programmes,
balancing long-term support for institution-building
with a need to achieve early and tangible outcomes
through the restoration of core Government functions
or service delivery. In that context, the United
Nations civilian capacity initiative is a crucial tool in
ensuring the transfer of knowledge on how to build
institutions and how to train the people who will run
those institutions. We welcome the establishment of the
online platform CAPMATCH, which connects those
seeking expertise with potential providers, fostering in
particular South-South and triangular cooperation.
Secondly, with regard to women’s engagement in
peacebuilding, each conflict is unique. There is no
one-size-fits-all approach. However, in all stages of
the peacebuilding process, including negotiating peace
agreements and introducing development programmes,
we need a stronger role for women. We take note of
the as yet modest progress on the implementation of
the Secretary-General’s seven-point action plan on

6

gender-responsive peacebuilding, bearing in mind
that ensuring women’s participation in peacebuilding
is, first and foremost, the responsibility of national
actors. It requires a sincere and long-term commitment
to the full inclusion of women in international policy.
We support the Secretary-General in his call on United
Nations entities and Member States to take more
systematic action to ensure women’s participation in
peace processes and to report to the Security Council
on the concrete results of efforts to ensure that genderrelevant provisions are included in ceasefire and peace
agreements.
Let me share with you the fact that the German
Government yesterday adopted the first German
national action plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security. It should
intensify and better coordinate our national efforts to
promote the role of women in peacebuilding.
Thirdly, on the role of the Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to reiterate that the PBC
must make better use of the political leverage of its
individual members. PBC member States need to
do better in assisting the PBC Chairpersons in their
important work. Members of the PBC Organizational
Committee and the PBC country configurations have
a responsibility to help the PBC have a true impact on
the ground. The PBC was designed to include members
of various United Nations bodies, including from
seven members of the Council, precisely for the reason
that those members bring their political weight and
experience from other bodies to the PBC’s activities.
The intergovernmental nature of the PBC needs to be
much better used in order to support the countries on
its agenda in achieving their peacebuilding priorities.
Furthermore, the PBC Organizational Committee
can take better advantage of its unique intergovernmental
structure. It could therefore potentially serve as an
ideal platform, a connecting tissue, to create stronger
links between developments that have taken place
outside of the United Nations, such as the activities of
the World Bank and initiatives such as the New Deal
for Engagement in Fragile States, agreed on in Busan
in 2011, and the United Nations peacebuilding agenda.
Fourthly and lastly, with regard to peacebuilding
and the post-2015 process, progress towards achieving
the Millennium Development Goals has been slow in
fragile and conflict-ridden countries. The outcome
document of the United Nations Conference on

12-65917

S/PV.6897

Sustainable Development (resolution 66/288, annex)
notes that countries in situations of conflict need special
attention in order to achieve sustainable development
and that that requires good governance, including the
rule of law and effective, transparent, accountable and
democratic institutions. Any post-2015 process will
also have to tackle the root causes of conflict. Germany
therefore welcomes the Secretary-General’s call on
Member States to support the incorporation of peace and
security considerations into the post-2015 development
agenda. The PBC could facilitate constructive dialogue
in that regard.
While several countries appear to be graduating
from fragility, there is room to maximize the impact
of peacebuilding efforts by further developing our
strategic approaches and bridging the gap between
policies conceived in New York and their successful
implementation on the ground.
Germany has supported the Peacebuilding Fund
with a new contribution of $6.5 million in 2012, thus
bringing our combined contribution up to $25 million.
My country stands ready to work to that end with
countries emerging from conflict, the United Nations
and all relevant stakeholders.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Let me start by thanking
the Moroccan presidency for taking the initiative
to promote this discussion on peacebuilding, the
importance of which is well reflected in the list
of speakers that we have before us. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his insightful
presentation and for his report (S/2012/746), and I
thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen for his
important contribution. Portugal, naturally, also shares
the positions that will be presented later on by the
observer of the European Union.
The debate we are having today and the various
other debates on peacebuilding in which we have
actively participated over the past two years constitute
solid evidence of the importance of post-conflict peace
consolidation in the various areas of United Nations
action. There is certainly much that we can improve,
but there is also a wide consensus across the United
Nations on the need to support the crucial transition
phase of peacebuilding between immediate postconflict peacekeeping and long-term development
assistance.
When we speak of support to peacebuilding
processes, it seems obvious that there is no one-size-fits-

12-65917

all formula that can be applied, regardless of the context.
The basic choices and the definition of priorities must
be made by the countries themselves, while the role
of the international community is essentially one of
support, not of replacing the State in the fulfilment of
its functions. In the end, a successful transition from
conflict into peace is the work and the accomplishment
of each State and its society.
Having said that, our experience of support to
various peacebuilding processes allows us to draw
some lessons and identify certain areas that are
particularly important in order to ensure that peace
gains are sustainable and that societies do not relapse
into conflict. In that respect, we very much share the
emphasis on institution-building and inclusivity in the
Secretary-General’s report. Without strong institutions
that can deliver basic services and ensure respect
for the rule of law, it will always be very difficult to
create a sustainable environment of confidence and
accountability, for both national and international
actors. It is also a crucial element for promoting
investment and the creation of job opportunities.
International coordinated support is therefore
required, bearing in mind that institution-building is a
long-term commitment. The United Nations certainly
plays a central role in ensuring sustained international
support in that area, working closely with other
peacebuilding actors and national stakeholders, while
taking into account the specific social and political
dynamics.
Equally important is the promotion of inclusivity
in the peacebuilding processes, that is, making sure
that the various sectors of society are represented, not
only in political institutions, but also in the definition
of the country’s core objectives, which is an essential
confidence-building measure, one that increases the
legitimacy of political transition. I would highlight
in particular the role of women and of youth in
peacebuilding strategies from the early stages of those
processes. Indeed, there is certainly much that can still be
done to raise awareness and empower women as agents
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as
in the fulfilment of development goals. That objective is
attained through the active encouragement of women’s
participation in decision-making, management and
education and their access to economic resources.
With regard to youth, it is necessary to promote
concrete policies for encouraging youth employment,

7

S/PV.6897

adopting measures and programmes that aim to
facilitate access of youth to the labour market,
particularly in post-conflict settings, as a way to bridge
the consolidation of peace and security with investment
in sustainable development.
Still on the issue of priority areas, we believe that
recent Security Council debates on cross-national
issues, such as those on transnational organized crime
in West Africa (S/PV.6717) or on the Sahel (S/PV.6882),
are very promising and represent an attempt to provide
a regional dimension to our work. It is important that
peacebuilding actors, including the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), also adopt such a regional approach
in their work and make good use of existing regional
instruments. Regional offices of the United Nations,
such as the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
can play a relevant role in that process.
Today’s debate takes place in the wider context of
the process of reflection on the relation between the PBC
and other organs of the United Nations, in particular,
the Security Council. Our discussions on the latest
PBC report and the interactive dialogue between the
Security Council and the chairs of the country-specific
configurations last July were valuable contributions
to such a reflection. Recent reports on peacebuilding
acknowledge some progress in the interaction between
the two organs and provide recommendations on how
their relations can be strengthened. We should work
collectively to improve our working methods in order
to allow us to draw regularly on the advice of the chairs
of country-specific configurations. There is certainly
room for the Council to seek and make better use of
the PBC’s advice, especially when discussing mandate
renewal, but also as an early warning for potential
setbacks in peace consolidation in specific countries.
As always, Portugal stands ready to engage in an
open and creative discussion on ways to advance the
peacebuilding agenda as part of more efficient and
integrated action by the international community
throughout the various post-conflict stages and the
stages of peace consolidation in the countries involved.
Indeed, the success of peacebuilding efforts represents
our collective success with regard to achieving
sustainable security, stability and development.
With that, I conclude my remarks on the issue
at hand. But since this is probably Portugal’s last
intervention in an open meeting of this Council as one

8

of its elected members, allow me a few but very sincere
final words.
First, I express, on behalf of my delegation and on
my own behalf, how privileged and honoured we felt to
have had the unique opportunity throughout the last two
years of participating in and contributing to the activity
and deliberations of the Security Council and all of its
subsidiary organs and working groups. I also offer a word
of thanks to all colleagues — permanent representatives,
fellow deputy permanent representatives, political
coordinators and experts of all delegations that shared
this table with us — for their cooperation, understanding,
professionalism and friendship. Here I also include the
delegations of Brazil, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria, whose mandates ended last year.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership, commitment and availability and advice.
I thank all the members of the Secretariat, especially
Mr. Movses Abelian and his able team, and the entire
hidden army that is essential for the functioning of the
Council — the interpreters, the translators, conference
officers, security agents, technicians. media people and
all staff without whom the functioning of the Council
would be impossible.
Finally, I offer a word of welcome and encouragement
to the new members of the Council that will embark
on this daunting endeavour — Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda. I
wish them every success in their work for the benefit of
international peace and security.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): First, let
me express our sincere appreciation for the cooperation
of outgoing members of the Security Council: Columbia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa. Each of
them has made a significant contribution to the work
of the Council over the last two years, and it has been a
pleasure working with them.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comments today and for all his efforts to
improve United Nations support for countries emerging
from conflict. I also thank Ambassador Momen for
his thoughtful briefing and his valuable efforts as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
We appreciate the important work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, and we are grateful
for the steady progress they have made in supporting
countries in transition.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

We have discussed peacebuilding often in this
Chamber, both in general terms and in addressing
countries on the Council’s agenda. We have agreed on
core issues — the imperative of national ownership, the
priority of building effective and credible institutions,
the need for international efforts to be flexible and
tailored to context and the necessity of incorporating
women and youth in our peacebuilding strategies.
The stakes are high. Without effective strategies to
consolidate and sustain peace, fragile settlements are
vulnerable to reversal and renewed violence. Governing
capacities are easily overwhelmed, economies cannot
restart and communities cannot rebuild.
Today, I would like to touch on three issues that
warrant greater attention and improvement in our
collective efforts: building institutions, genderresponsive peacebuilding and division of labour based
on core competencies.
While every transition is unique, post-conflict
authorities all struggle to build or rebuild effective
democratic institutions that can meet basic needs,
whether securing the streets, providing access to
justice, delivering public services or enabling economic
activity. That requires significant attention to public
sector capacity at all levels of Government and to the
institutional foundations of a vibrant civil society and
a healthy private sector. The international community
has made concrete progress assisting institutional
development, but we can do better.
The United States appreciates the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a more responsive approach to
balancing long-term support for institution-building with
the need to achieve early and tangible outcomes — the
restoration of core Government functions and service
delivery. We believe strongly that countries with their
own experience of transition from conflict or crisis
have valuable expertise and perspectives that can assist
others. We also welcome efforts in the Security Council
to explore ways to factor that critical issue into the
design and oversight of mandates.
Robust participation of women is crucial to
peacebuilding. We applaud the Secretary-General’s
candour about insufficient progress on the sevenpoint action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding,
particularly in the areas of governance and economic
recovery. Women’s needs and concerns must be given
greater attention in Government administration,

12-65917

particularly at the subnational level and especially in
the composition of and access to public services.
Women’s centrality to economic recovery — notably
their potential roles in the agricultural supply chain and
in small business — also deserves more focus. From
Haiti to Burma, the United Nations has a growing track
record of assisting women in post-conflict situations,
whether through disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts or training and employment
programmes. We encourage the United Nations,
together with other partners, to scale up those efforts
and good practices more systematically.
The issue of international roles and responsibilities
has been a constant theme since the Secretary-General’s
first report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304). We have urged the United Nations
system, together with outside partners, to develop a
division of labour in supporting post-conflict countries
that reflects comparative advantages. We appreciate
the Secretary-General’s charge to peacekeeping
missions and United Nations country teams to develop
partnerships on that basis.
We are pleased by the recent establishment
of the global focal point on the rule of law that will
bring the United Nations Development Programme
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
into closer alignment, and we look forward to the
forthcoming review of international efforts on public
administration. We commend the PBC’s recent
successes in strengthening partnerships with the
World Bank and the African Development Bank, and
encourage the PBC to explore further collaboration
with the private sector and philanthropic and other
non-governmental organizations. We welcome ongoing
dialogue with the PBC and other actors to reinforce
peacebuilding partnerships and the concept of dividing
labour according to comparative advantages.
Finally, the United States also thanks Bangladesh
for its leadership in convening the high-level event on
peacebuilding on the margins of the General Assembly
general debate in September. This event raised
the visibility of our common interests in effective
peacebuilding, and its resultant declaration reflects our
shared priorities going forward.
Healing the wounds of war and building peace in
the aftermath of conflict is one of the most complex
and compelling tasks we face in the Council, and
one we cannot neglect. The alternative is only more

9

S/PV.6897

violence, more suffering and more instability. Though
the challenges are formidable, there is too much at
stake for conflict-affected people, their neighbours and
the international community to neglect peacebuilding
processes. We must make every effort to accelerate
progress.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having made
sure to include the item of post-conflict peacebuilding
on the agenda of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador
Momen, for his work in leading the Commission and
for his extremely instructive briefing.
The Security Council has always promoted
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict, as
manifested by its initiatives in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and, more recently, Timor-Leste. The public debates
held recently and the resolutions and presidential
statements subsequently adopted speak eloquently of
this new direction in the Council’s action.
Although post-conflict peacebuilding is a longterm process that does not usually yield immediately
quantifiable results, it remains true that the efforts
made in that framework are vital to ensuring lasting
peace and security and providing opportunities for
sustainable development. Thus, since the 2005 World
Summit, the issue of peacebuilding has been at centre
stage in the United Nations work in countries emerging
from conflict.
Peacebuilding takes place after the re-establishment
of peace in order to make the United Nations presence
more visible and efficient. In that context, the United
Nations must consider in an integrated and consistent
fashion all the problems that arise from conflict or are
exacerbated by it. In coordination with the Government
of the country concerned, it must propose ways to build
a viable State that respects fundamental freedoms
and strives to ensure good democratic, political and
economic governance.
It is true that the international community’s recent
initiatives in post-conflict peacebuilding have met with
mixed success. That is because the approaches adopted
have often varied in accordance with the influence, and
above all the perceived value, of the country concerned.
As countries emerging from conflict are often unstable,
sometimes for years at a time, and some fall back into
violence, the peacebuilding approach must represent

10

the resolve of the international community to ensure
that the country emerging from conflict does not fall
back into violence due to lack of appropriate support
and means.
Togo therefore welcomes the progress made since
2010 on ensuring lasting peace in countries emerging
from conflict, even if the international community’s
expectations have not been met in certain countries,
such as Guinea-Bissau, given the repeated interference
of the military in political life. These results have
been possible partly because of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which, because of its structure and
mandate, plays a very important role in the political,
economic, social, security and human rights spheres.
However, if the Peacebuilding Commission’s actions
are to be sustained, the States concerned must exercise
national ownership over them. National ownership is
all the more necessary in that it enables a harmonious
implementation of the projects already begun and
obviates competition between the agencies of the
United Nations system and development partners on
the ground.
In a country that is rebuilding after conflict, the
political sphere must take priority in that it must help
reorganize and establish new institutions and prepare
for and organize democratic, free and transparent
elections. In other words, it must lay out and establish
a programme of good governance. We welcome the
fact that the United Nations is investing more and
more in the preparation and organization of elections,
since failure to organize elections well or a lack of
transparency often leads to violence that could give rise
to another conflict.
Peacebuilding in a country emerging from armed
conflict requires that the root causes of the conflict be
taken into account. These can be internal or external.
This is why, in pursuing peacebuilding, all stakeholders
in the conflict must be involved so that they can all
make their contribution to rebuilding a country that
has been torn apart by conflict. In that respect, my
country welcomes the the international community’s
increasing awareness of the important role that women
play in the search for lasting peace and security. But
if the process must be open to everyone, the political
parties or the organizations that these parties belong
to must be strengthened in accordance with the
basic principles of peacebuilding, including national
ownership, partnership and mutual responsibilty. Such

12-65917

S/PV.6897

capacity-building requires the consistent support of the
international community.

mechanisms. However, United Nations support can be
provided in building the requisite capacities.

We often note that the assistance expected by a
country emerging from conflict is not forthcoming
because of various factors, including a lack of
confidence, whether the country is considered of
interest, and investors’ lack of enthusiasm for that
country. That is why Togo believes that the country
involved and development partners must from the outset
establish a contract of mutual commitment based on
accommodations among the parties in order to identify
and locate responsibility, should there be a failure to
respect commitments.

The end of the critical phase of a crisis that was
rooted in a conflict between political forces or national
or sectarian groups does not yet mean that the process
of national reconciliation is on track. Consolidating
achieved outcomes can take many years and require the
international community to take additional efforts by
providing mediation services or assisting in electoral
processes. In the post-conflict phase, it is important to
take into account more than just political aspects, in
that assistance in economic development, addressing
urgent social challenges and job creation are critical
factors in mitigating political contradictions. A
particular role here must be played by United Nations
funds and programmes. Many factors in conflicts are
regional in dimension. They include organized crime,
inter-ethnic or inter-tribal frictions, drug trafficking,
and the transboundary spread of weapons, which
call for appropriate reactions from the international
community.

In conclusion, Togo would like to thank the
international community for its efforts to provde
sustainable assistance to countries emerging from
conflict, especially in Africa. We urge it to do more to
ensure that such countries do not fall back into violence.
To that end, my country supports the draft presidential
statement to be adopted later in the debate.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict.
We have carefully considered the relevant report
(S/2012/746). We would specifically like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Mr. Momen,
for his productive chairing of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2012.
There is no doubt that, in order to be effective,
peacebuilding support must be provided in a timely and
adequate fashion and must be focused on addressing
those tasks that are directly related to eradicating the
root causes of the conflict. An absolute priority in
this sense must be compliance with the principles of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
post-conflict countries, as well as the identification of
national peacebuilding responsibilities and priorities.
A lead role in meeting those responsibilities must be
played by the Government of the country concerned.
An important priority in peacebuilding is assistance
in restoring security in countries where national armies
or police are not able to fully carry out their functions.
In such cases, assisting in the reform of the security
sector, programmes of demobilization, reintegration
and disarmament as well as demining are crucial.
Closely related to that is the need to restore the rule
of law in post-conflict countries. Core responsibilities
for addressing those tasks rest with the national judicial

12-65917

Peacebuilding assistance is not limited only to the
activities that I have mentioned. The nature of conflict
is diverse, and therefore assistance in eradicating the
causes, so that measures can be more effective, must be
tailored to each country, taking into account the unique
nature of each.
In the United Nations, through peacekeeping
operations, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) offices
and the PBC country configurations, a great amount of
peacebuilding effort is under way. Those activities come
with considerable challenges and complexities and call
for the coordinated efforts of States, United Nations
funds and programmes, regional organizations, the
United Nations Secretariat and international financial
institutions. To date, however, international assistance
has, for the most part, been fragmented. Clearly, there
is a need to improve coordination and the division of
labour between the participants in those processes and
a need to systematize the peacebuilding processes,
including enhancing the efforts of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
The compilation of the United Nations experience
and analysing it would be extremely useful for the
adoption of decisions in the area of peacebuilding and
for enhancing its effectiveness. We are convinced that
identifying new priorities or areas of peacebuilding
should be based on specific results in the field.

11

S/PV.6897

Attempts to agree on common or general approaches
in peacebuilding are being undertaken. For example,
in September a contact group on the rule of law was
established between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and United Nations Development
Programme. We hope that the United Nations Secretariat
will inform us on the activities of the mechanism. The
idea of transition pacts also needs some preliminary
analysis.
A particular role in the coordination of
peacebuilding support for post-conflict countries lies
with the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
It has considerable experience in direct dialogue with
national Governments, bolstered by instruments for
mutual oversight over the implementation of obligations
and the coordination of efforts by international players
in achieving the priorities identified by post-conflict
countries. Here too, we are certain that, beyond the
activities of the country configurations, the PBC
could be more actively involved in the discussion
of system-wide issues, such as the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and the leveraging of
national and international civilian capacities in postconflict periods. The sending of skilled civilian experts
to post-conflict areas is an important instrument in
peacebuilding activities. However, the establishment
of new mechanisms in the United Nations to make
use of such expertsor to change existing mechanisms
needs to be carried out with the oversight and consent
of Member States. The mandates must be made clear
and there must be clarity in the rules of selection so
as to ensure the high qualifications of such experts.
For our part, we will be ready to take an active part in
peacebuilding activities in the United Nations and in
constructive discussions of the issues of international
assistance in the post-conflict restoration of countries
and regions that are affected by armed conflicts.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Morocco for the initiative of holding today’s
open debate to discuss post-conflict peacebuilding. I
would also like to express my appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon and Ambassador Momen, the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for their respective statements.
Post-conflict peacebuilding plays an effective role
in eliminating the root causes of conflict. It has an
important bearing on achieving endurable peace and
sustainable development. Over the years, the United
Nations has been an active partner in post-conflict

12

peacebuilding in the countries where it has chosen to
work, where it has accumulated rich experiences and
achieved remarkable results. However, the organizations
involved also face a number of challenges. Here I want
to emphasize four points.
First, it is imperative to respect the ownership of
the countries concerned in post-conflict peacebuilding.
Post-conflict countries bear the primary responsibility
for their own peacebuilding. In assisting with
peacebuilding efforts, the United Nations and the
relevant agencies should strengthen partnerships with
the countries concerned, respect the priorities set by
those countries, and help them draw up their integrated
peacebuilding strategy based on their own conditions.
In the implementation of peacebuilding strategies,
it is important to emphasize capacity-building and
personnel training in those countries, fully utilizing
their existing human resources and expertise, and to
enhance their level of governance.
Secondly, it is important to tackle, as a matter of
priority, the root causes of conflict in post-conflict
peacebuilding, especially those related to economic
and social development. In post-conflict countries
and regions, economic reconstruction should be the
constant and overarching theme. Efforts to strengthen
economic security and development should be carried
out in parallel. Justice and the rule of law are important
in their own right; however, development merits
the primary attention. Only by achieving economic
reconstruction and recovery and only when people
can enjoy the peace dividend will there be an overall
situation that enables the promotion of political
reconciliation, the stabilization of security and the
establishment of a political basis for the peace process.
Thirdly, post-conflict peacebuilding should enjoy
adequate and guaranteed resources. The international
community’s swift and timely support in the form
of assistance is important in terms of achieving
peacebuilding objectives. The United Nations should
continue to pay attention to the financing requirements
of reconstruction programmes in the countries
concerned. The Organization should also urge the
international community to continue to provide
assistance to peacebuilding activities within those
countries and to work together to broaden the channels
for financing. In that connection, China commends
the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund for the active
role it has played and supports its efforts to improve its
work in enhancing the evaluation of the projects that it

12-65917

S/PV.6897

has carried out and in enhancing the efficiency of the
utilization of resources.
Fourthly, it is important to strengthen coordination
and cooperation in post-conflict peacebuilding. The
United Nations should continue to play a leadership
role in post-conflict peacebuilding efforts and should
seek to establish a stable relationship, or coordination,
with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund
and other international partners. At the same time, it
is important to bring into play the unique advantages
of regional organizations, including the African Union,
and subregional organizations in that respect. The
relevant agencies within the United Nations system
should have a clear division of labour and work together
more effectively. The United Nations Peacebuilding
Commission may have a greater role to play in helping
post-conflict countries in their peacebuilding activities.
China has been a strong supporter of peacebuilding
efforts in post-conflict countries and is ready to play its
due role in helping those countries in achieving durable
peace and sustainable development. The Chinese
delegation supports the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of today’s meeting and
wishes to thank the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations for their efforts in that regard.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa commends
the delegation of Morocco for organizing this important
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. We also
wish to thank the Secretary-General as well as the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their respective
statements. South Africa aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In South Africa’s view, the Peacebuilding
Commission remains a critical tool for the international
community in the broad realm of conflict prevention
and peace consolidation. The progress that has been
registered by the countries on its agenda is a clear
testimony to the value added by the Commission to
national peacebuilding efforts.
While the PBC has registered some gains in a
number of areas, the reversals in the peace consolidation
phase we have witnessed recently in Guinea-Bissau
and the Central African Republic reflect the challenges
faced by the Commission. It is therefore my delegation’s

12-65917

assessment that the Commission continues to evolve
and that it has not yet reached its full potential. Today’s
reflection on the achievements and challenges of the
PBC is therefore crucial, as we continue to assess the
effectiveness and lessons learned thus far.
We are encouraged by the progress made by the
PBC and its country-specific configurations in the
countries on its agenda, and we welcome the 8 October
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746). The PBC
has adapted to the diverse peacebuilding requirements
of countries emerging from conflict and has become
more agile in responding to them. It has done so through
developing integrated strategic frameworks, setting
shared objectives and timelines in relevant mission
environments, expanding partnerships with the World
Bank and regional organizations, institution-building
through the deployment of civilian capacities, and
through financial support during critical transitional
moments from the Peacebuilding Fund.
In moving forward to increase the effectiveness of
the PBC, we concur with the three priority directions
for peacebuilding set out by the Secretary-General,
namely, inclusivity, institution-building and sustained
international support.
Countries in post-conflict situations often have
weak human and institutional capacities. It is important
to build local institutional and human capacities and to
provide training in order to create new capacities and
enhance those that already exist. We welcome the process
led by the United Nations Development Programme
on strengthening the United Nations system-wide
approach to capacity development for peacebuilding.
My delegation cannot overemphasize the importance,
in developing those capacities, of forging partnerships
at the local, regional and subregional levels, in order
to exploit the unique advantages inherent in human
capacities at those levels.
In that regard, on 15 December the African Union
Commission and the United Nations the Department
of Political Affairs convened a continental workshop
in Bujumbura on the development of an African Union
strategy and framework for reconstructing public
service and administration in post-conflict countries.
The workshop sought to address key issues relating
to public service and administration facing postconflict countries, including the restoration of human
resource capacity, legitimacy and public confidence,

13

S/PV.6897

effectiveness and efficiency, and inclusivity and
equitable distribution. It further sought to share
lessons learned, experiences and best practices on
how to strengthen the public sector and administration
after conflict, in pursuit of sustainable peace and
development. It is important, in developing those
capacities, that national ownership be emphasized at all
stages of the peacebuilding process.
Increased coordination is crucial for ensuring
effective international efforts in post-conflict situations
and international interventions. United Nations efforts
are often fragmented and the Organization struggles
to pull its critical resources together and to maximize
the strength of collective effort. In that regard, South
Africa strongly supports the call for greater coherence,
coordination and interaction among the various
United Nations organs and agencies, especially in the
field. Greater coordination has the potential to avert
duplication of efforts and to maximize output at a time
of limited and constantly shrinking resources.
The relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC is something we have often discussed. It
is perhaps the most important relationship, given the
mandate of the two bodies. My delegation is pleased to
note that the PBC’s relationship with the Council has
continuously developed during the reporting period.
That positive development is evidenced, inter alia, by
the introduction of informal interactions between the
Council and the chairs of the country configurations.
We would like once again to stress the need for the
Council to consider flexible working methods so as to
allow the PBC to effectively play its role in advising
the Council on post-conflict situations. Whereas the
Council has incorporated peacebuilding tasks in most
peacekeeping mandates, we nevertheless stress that the
advice of the PBC should be sought at all times where
it is deemed relevant. We once again emphasize that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be mutually
reinforcing in the pursuit of lasting peace in postconflict countries.
Peacebuilding in post-conflict countries requires a
substantive injection of resources. We believe that timely,
sustainable and predictable financing remains a crucial
ingredient in realizing the objectives of peacebuilding.
We therefore emphasize the need for the United
Nations to consider utilizing sustainable mechanisms
as a means of kick-starting peacebuilding activities in
countries emerging from conflict, including assessed

14

contributions, especially with regard to quick-impact
projects. Such projects are critical for the consolidation
of peace dividends, so as to avert a total relapse into
conflict. The international community should provide
flexible and risk-tolerant funding mechanisms for
countries emerging from conflict.
Sustainable peacebuilding requires that those
previously marginalized at the political, social and
economic levels be included in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. In that regard, the role of
women in the post-conflict setting cannot be ignored.
Therefore, measures to enhance women’s engagement
in conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding,
including the protection and promotion of their rights,
are critical.
On the issue of peacebuilding, South Africa
reiterates its commitment to the work of the PBC,
because we believe it has a critical role to play in
conflict prevention, including in the early detection
of root causes and in identifying potential triggers
of conflict. There is no shortcut to sustainable
peacebuilding. Long-term and sustainable partnerships
will have to be forged and significant financial and
resource investments will have to be made if we are to
avoid relapses into conflict.
Before I conclude, we would like to note that this
is probably the last public statement that South Africa
will deliver in the Chamber as an elected member of the
Security Council in its current term. We would like to
express our appreciation to the members of the General
Assembly for having given us this opportunity to serve
the interests of international peace and security. We
thank all delegations with which we have worked for
their spirit of cooperation and congeniality over the past
two years. We thank the Secretariat for its unwavering
assistance, and we wish all the incoming five members
of the Council the very best during their terms.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all, Mr. President, to thank you for
having convened this debate, which is on a matter
of great importance and significance to Colombia.
The statements by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh,
clearly show the progress achieved in peacebuilding
with United Nations support at the same time as they
call attention to the tasks remaining.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

Five priority areas were identified in 2009 as
requiring support: political processes, security and
protection of civilians, provision of basic services,
restoration of core governmental functions, and
economic revitalization, including job creation.
Support in those five areas is fundamental to the
success of any peacebuilding process. Because of that,
while we welcome the progress set out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2012/746), we believe we must
strengthen the Organization’s activities and fund them
at an appropriate level if we are to achieve the goals we
have set for ourselves.
The report recounts the progress made with respect
to assistance to each of the countries currently in the
process of peacebuilding, as well as with respect to
the joint, coordinated efforts of missions and country
teams, the development of integrated strategic
frameworks, and increased ties with international
financial institutions and regional organizations. While
we agree that those are all crucial elements in building
sustainable peace and development, future reports
should offer recommendations as to the impact of
United Nations actions on the ground and to developing
the policies and tools used by the United Nations to
support peacebuilding.
We reiterate that the principal responsibility for
peacebuilding initiatives falls to individual States
and that, in the framework of the principle of national
ownership, the various actors involved should stay
constantly aligned and agree on action plans that are
clear, inclusive and coherent.
Inclusive political agreements place negotiation
above violence, foster confidence and social cohesion,
promote transparency and add to the legitimacy of
political agreements. The building and strengthening
of national institutional capacities must be the pillar
for re-establishing the smooth functioning of public
administration and strengthening the role of the State
as the principal actor in the provision of high-quality
public services.
National activities aimed at establishing and
building peace in the aftermath of conflict must be
supported by effective civilian capacities in a timely
manner, making use of existing national capacities
so as to ensure a transition to stability and long-term
development and to contribute to a progressive reduction
in dependence upon the international community.

12-65917

The international community and the United
Nations in particular must be prepared to provide, more
swiftly and effectively, specialized civilian capacities
and the necessary expertise, with a view to supporting
national actors working to re-establish the rule of law,
revitalize the economy, resume the provision of basic
services to the population and develop the capacities
necessary to ensure that such progress is sustained.
To that end, we must strengthen sustained
international political and financial support for
peacebuilding processes. It is important to strengthen
ties with the international financial institutions,
regional development banks and non-traditional
actors, including the private sector and philanthropic
organizations, so as to promote strategies aimed at
yielding long-term socioeconomic development.
Colombia acknowledges the role played by women
in conflict prevention and peacebuilding. The United
Nations must promote the participation of women in the
areasof conflict resolution, gender-inclusive planning,
economic recovery and the rule of law.
We reiterate the importance of starting and
undertaking peacebuilding activities at the earliest
stages of planning and carrying out peacekeeping
operations, in particular through clear mandates. We
recognize the contribution made by peacekeeping
personnel and missions to such early peacebuilding.
We wish to express special recognition for the
continuing dedicated work of the PBC, which has made
it possible to make progress on fundamental goals,
including support for the identification of priorities in
countries emerging from conflict, the strengthening of
cooperation and coordination among principal actors,
and the mobilization of international support. It is
pivotal to continue to address the problems identified
during the debate and the interactive dialogue held last
July last, and thereby to promote the coordination and
intensification of the work of the PBC and the Security
Council.
Strategies aimed at establishing a stable and lasting
peace require adaptation to the specificities of each
case. Such recognition must guide the discussions
and decisions of the Council, so as to ensure that the
measures adopted correspond to the political, economic
and cultural characteristics of each situation.
The implementation of effective peacebuilding
strategies ensures lasting peace and development.

15

S/PV.6897

Hence the United Nations must continue to ensure
that countries, in peacebuilding processes, are able
to overcome the causes of instability and conflict and
thereby avert any resurgence of violence and build a
lasting peace.
In July last, when Colombia had the honour of
presiding over the Council, we held an interactive
debate and dialogue (see S/PV.6805) that we believe
contributed to a deepening of the dialogue on the
United Nations architecture for supporting peace
processes, clarifying expectations relating to roles and
responsibilities, and strengthening cooperation among
the various United Nations agencies in New York and in
the field. In that dialogue, the strengthening of national
capacities and the creation of conditions conducive to
allowing countries to regain their full independence
and sovereignty and generate development and welfare
for their people must be placed centre stage.
With that aim, from the permanent forum provided
by the General Assembly, we will continue to promote
the exchange of experiences of countries that have been
in situations of conflict and post-conflict, as well as
South-South and triangular cooperation regarding
initiatives related to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration; security sector reform; the restoration
of the rule of law; and the reconstruction of national
institutions, including ensuring justice and elaboratig
strategies to revitalize the economy and reduce poverty.
As we conclude our two-year term in the Security
Council, I should like to convey to you, Mr. President,
and to all my colleagues and all delegations our sincere
gratitude for this honour and for the privilege of being
part of the noble mission of promoting international
peace and security. It has been an honour that we
value highly, and my country will remain attentive
and willing to contribute in any way necessary for the
United Nations to ensure that international peace and
security can be a reality.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish to
thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this open
debate. As this may be the last formal meeting of the
Security Council in 2012, may I take this opportunity
to thank the outgoing members — Colombia, India,
Portugal, Germany and South Africa — for all their
cooperation and their efforts on the Security Council
over the past two years.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comments and the Chair of the Peacebuilding

16

Commission, Ambassador Momen, for his briefing this
morning.
In May of this year, my Council colleagues and I
travelled to Côte d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Liberia.
In Sierra Leone and Liberia, we saw how the United
Nations system works closely with international and
regional partners to be the bedrock of support for
countries recovering from brutal civil wars. During
our visit, we saw how the United Nations planned to
support the successful and peaceful elections in Sierra
Leone that took place just last month, a real turning
point for the country. In Liberia, we saw how that
United Nations is helping to re-establish the rule of
law through building a functioning police, justice and
corrections system.
The United Kingdom recognizes the important role
of the United Nations in helping national Governments
and communities recover from the scourge of war.
That is why we are the largest contributor to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund, providing about
$20 million a year. We are committed to spending one
third of our rising aid budget in fragile and conflictaffected States.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent SecretaryGeneral’s report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict (S/2012/746). It is important that the Council
and the broader membership regularly review the
progress made by the United Nations on peacebuilding.
The report shows that the United Nations is moving
forward on key peacebuilding issues. Progress has been
made on inclusivity and institution-building, but much
work remains.
Further attention is required in three key areas
in particular. First, the United Nations must adapt
the evolving international context for peacebuilding
and adopt the principles outlined in the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States. Agreed by the Group of
Seven Plus (g7+) States, those principles set out how
the international community can improve its support
for countries emerging from conflict. Transparency
of support, predictability of action and the building
of national systems all are essential in improving the
way in which the international community supports
conflict-affected countries.
We call on the whole United Nations system to
ensure that its support for countries emerging from
conflict adheres to those New Deal principles. To that
I would like to add that we must also consider how the

12-65917

S/PV.6897

issue of conflict and fragility can be incorporated into
the wider discussion on the post-2015 development
framework.
Secondly, the United Nations must improve the
way in which it supports countries with missions in
transition. Sustained, adaptable international support
is vital. We see the success of such support in countries
such as Timor-Leste, where there is a successful move
from the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste to a country team, or Sierra Leone, where in 2013
we should see the drawdown of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and
the country move onto a development path.
To achieve successful transitions such as these,
we need a well-coordinated United Nations system
that plans strategically from the outset of a mission’s
deployment. United Nations development actors must
also plan ahead and be ready with the right programmes
and the right resources.
Thirdly, the United Nations must do more to
encourage women’s engagement in avoiding and
dealing with conflict. The Secretary-General’s report
clearly shows that insufficient progress has been made
on the role of women in building peace, and we must do
more on that agenda.
We are pleased that the presidential statement
cites sexual violence in conflict. Peace cannot be built
without ending the use of that terrible weapon of war. In
May, the United Kingdom’s Foreign Minister launched
his Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative. The Initiative
works closely with the United Nations, international
partners and civil society on a sustained campaign to
build a global partnership to prevent sexual violence in
conflict. We must ensure that the United Nations has
the capabilities to deliver on that ambitious agenda.
Since 2009, the Secretary-General has consistently
identified the need for the United Nations to broaden
and deepen the pool of civilian expertise for critical
peacebuilding tasks, in particular, drawing on capacities
from the global South.
Recent figures show that over 20 per cent of
civilian rule of law posts in United Nations missions
remain vacant. That is unacceptable. If we truly want
the United Nations to perform well in peacebuilding,
we must deal with that shortcoming. We welcome the
Secretary-General’s efforts to address the issue and
look forward to discussions in the General Assembly

12-65917

and its subsidiary bodies on the proposals that he has
put forward.
Peacebuilding is a long-term project. It requires
patience and perseverance. It is seldom linear and
always complex. But we know that peacebuilding is
absolutely critical to the maintenance of international
peace and security, and in that, the United Nations has
a unique and central role to play.
Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, let me also take the opportunity to commend
and thank the five Council members who will depart
at the end of the year — Germany, Colombia, India,
Portugal and South Africa — and to thank them for
their contributions and cooperation throughout the
two years. I also thank the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission for their
briefings.
I associate myself with the statement to be made on
behalf of the European Union.
Twenty years after the publication of the report by
the former Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros BoutrosGhali, entitled “An agenda for peace” (S/24111), the
United Nations has provided itself with many means to
meet the challenges of peacebuilding. Today we have
an opportunity to take stock of the initiatives pursued
in that domain.
Peacebuilding is indeed a real challenge for the
United Nations. It is essential that the international
community have effective tools to avoid a recurrence
or resurgence of violence in States made fragile by
conflict. Current events provide numerous examples of
the ongoing risks in post-conflict situations. Therefore,
the entire United Nations must make the best use of
the means at its disposal to meet the challenges of
peacebuilding.
I wish to address three issues presented as priorities
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/746).
First, the peacebuilding process must be inclusive.
No reconstruction effort is possible without genuine
national ownership of the peacebuilding goals. To be
sustainable, that reconstruction must be based on an
inclusive process. Yesterday the Council again saw, with
respect to the situation in the Central African Republic,
that it is essential that all stakeholders accept the terms
of the peacebuilding process and fully participate in it.
The processes must entail a broad political dialogue in

17

S/PV.6897

which the opposition, under a democratic framework,
has its full place.
Also, the lives of various segments of society
must be taken into account. Addressing post-conflict
peacebuilding must include enhancing the contribution
of women. Women must have access in a more
systematic manner, and on equal footing with men, in
the political, economic, social and cultural domains. In
that regard, we fully support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to ensure the active participation of
women in all aspects of peacebuilding. The goals of his
seven-point action plan must be implemented.
Secondly, institution-building efforts must be
strengthened. Institution-building is a key factor in the
success of peacebuilding. But beyond the institutions,
in the strict sense of the word, a broad enabling
environment for peacebuilding must be established.
That involves the implementation of security sector
reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration processes. It also requires support for
national reconciliation, establishing respect for rule of
law, and the reintegration of the economic fabric.
Setting up all of those elements presupposes
excellent coordination of all actors involved over
the long term in order to appropriately address the
transition process. As a priority, coordination of
all actors at all levels is crucial. The Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) — I commend its work here — can
play a liaison role among various members of the
international community, including States, international
organizations and financial institutions. We encourage
the PBC to step up efforts in those areas.
The second aspect of transition is that it must be
formulated with a view to the long term. Transition
covers a number of realities, for example, transition
from a peacekeeping operation to a special political
mission, or from a political mission to the withdrawal
of United Nations action. Setting up an appropriate
sequence entails defining the criteria. However, it also
involves expectations. For example, the transition plan
established under the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste was developed over the long term and
in close coordination with the local authorities. It is an
example of institutional reforms having been carefully
adjusted in preparation for the withdrawal.
Thirdly, international support must be lasting and
based on the principle of mutual responsibilities. We
know that peacebuilding involves long-term efforts. I

18

would like to highlight two initiatives that are sources
of hope for enduring peacebuilding, namely, the New
Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, and the review
of the civilian capacities initiative.
To start, the role of the international community
is to create the conditions for a country’s recovery.
States receiving assistance should not continue to get it
indefinitely. To deal with that, priority should be given
to setting up contracts, such as the New Deal compact,
which was defined during the Fourth High-level Forum
on Aid Effectiveness, held in Busan. Such a contract
would define a State’s commitments and therefore
enable its full involvement in the undertaking. In that
view, initiatives aimed at restoring a viable economic
fabric must be especially encouraged. The joint event
held in June by the Economic and Social Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission on partnerships for job
creation for young people was useful. However, what is
important, obviously, is the specific implementation of
those efforts on the ground.
Secondly, to ensure the durability of the international
community’s commitment, certain considerations were
addressed, such as a review of civilian capacities. We
would encourage the Secretary-General to continue to
broaden and strengthen the use of civilian experts to
fully meet immediate capacity-building requirements
of States emerging from conflict.
The issue of developing partnerships is a key
element of the review. We believe that the long-term
commitment of all partners represents the best hope.
We note with interest the launching of the CAPMATCH
initiative.
In conclusion, I highlight that the robust
mobilization of many players on these crucial issues has
enabled the establishment of many impressive tools. It
is now up to us to use them effectively, relying as much
as possible on the synergies of the various available
instruments. In that way the coherence of international
action and the clarity of United Nations peacebuilding
interventions can be assured.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to express our gratitude to the delegation of Morocco
for the holding of this open debate. We welcome the
adoption of the draft presidential statement later during
this meeting as an outcome of today’s debate.
I also thank the Secretary-General and Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh, in his capacity

12-65917

S/PV.6897

as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
for their briefings and insights. Azerbaijan strongly
supports United Nations efforts to build sustainable
peace in war-torn countries.
Drawing conclusions from the Secretary-General’s
detailed report (S/2012/746), I would like to focus on
the following aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding.
First, the report outlines the progress achieved
in the implementation of the 2009 Agenda for Action
and enunciates the need for further action, especially
in the areas critical to averting a relapse into violence
and to building sustainable peace. We believe that the
significant progress in some areas should not obviate
the need to place more emphasis on others, including
governance, economic recovery, enhanced financial
support and capacity-building assistance.
Secondly, the sense of national ownership in
peacebuilding is critical. The Governments of countries
emerging from conflict bear the primary responsibility
for peacebuilding, including for identifying their own
needs and setting up national development agendas.
In certain situations, when some parts of a national
territory are conflict-affected, strategic planning and
long-term preparation are required in order to launch
an immediate and smooth recovery process once peace
is reached. The international community should fully
respect the sovereignty and independence of States and
their national development choices.
Thirdly, international assistance efforts can yield
true results only if they strive to build and develop
the national institutional capacities of post-conflict
countries. Solid and self-sustainable national capacities
are key prerequisites that underpin the effectiveness
of peacebuilding. Rebuilding them requires consistent
and predictable financial support commensurate with
the expectations placed on the United Nations and
recipient Governments.
That approach brings us to the widely used
concept of mutual accountability that aims to ensure
the consistency of international assistance to national
plans and priorities based on a balanced partnership
between donors and recipient countries. Given the
various challenges posed by post-conflict situations,
that concept might not be applicable to and workable
in all cases. We concur with the Secretary-General’s
recognition of the need to elaborate risk assessments
and analyses in post-conflict environments and to
employ risk-tolerant approaches.

12-65917

Fourthly, peacebuilding is an integrated system
and a web of different complementary and mutually
reinforcing components. It is a complex process
with a number of actors and spheres of engagement.
Therefore, effective and efficient peacebuilding
requires more coordinated and coherent actions among
all organizations and donors. In that regard, we would
like to stress the particular role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in coordinating the activities of all
relevant actors within and outside the United Nations.
Its strategy of promoting improved coherence and
aligning donors with national peacebuilding priorities
should be further strengthened.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is inextricably linked
to the preceding peace process and its outcomes.
An effective process of recovery, reconstruction
and development in the aftermath of conflict can
take root and succeed only if a genuine peace based
on the generally accepted norms and principles of
international law, in particular those pertaining to
respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
States, is established on the ground. The legality and
ethics of actions taken to achieve peace determine the
success of peacebuilding agendas.
Peacebuilding must not be directed at sustaining
and legitimizing a status quo created as the result
of violations of international law, in particular its
peremptory norms such those prohibiting the threat or
use of force, genocide and racial discrimination. Nor
should it be used as a tool to consolidate a priori illegal
and fait accompli-based solutions. The imposition of
solutions incompatible with international law and with
the principles and purposes of the United Nations will
fail to provide the necessary foundations for enduring
peace and long-term stability, such as those aimed
at establishing a secure post-conflict environment,
inclusivity, national unity, societal cohesion, national
ownership and responsibility.
To conclude, Mr. President, I would like to
congratulate the five outgoing members of the Security
Council — the Ambassadors of Colombia, Germany,
India, Portugal and South Africa and their respective
teams — on the successful completion of their two-year
terms. I thank them for their significant contribution to
the work of the Council during this period of increasing
threats and challenges, as well as for their leadership in
managing the activities of the relevant subsidiary bodies
and their effective penholdership on other issues. I wish

19

S/PV.6897

my colleagues and friends every success in their future
endeavours.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We are grateful to you,
Mr. President, for arranging today’s debate and we
commend the Moroccan delegation for ably facilitating
negotiations on the draft presidential statement, which
we support. We also thank the Secretary-General and the
Peacebuilding Commission Chairperson, Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, for their insightful briefings.
We join others in paying tribute to the outgoing elected
members of the Council — Columbia, India, Portugal,
Germany and South Africa. Working with them has
been a truly enriching experience.
The Secretary-General’s progress report (S/2012/746)
on peacebuilding in the aftermath of confl ict is a
substantive addition to the series of reports on the subject.
In his earlier reports, the Secretary-General outlined an
agenda for coherent, efficient and predictable responses
to the peacebuilding needs of countries emerging from
conflict. The present report notes the progress achieved
in the implementation of the peacebuilding agenda and
gives priority directions for future work.
In the context of the progress update, we welcome
the enhanced effectiveness of the field presence, which
stresses stronger communication and coordination.
An emphasis on assessment and planning helps forge
consensus among stakeholders on priorities and
resources. In that regard, it is a matter of satisfaction
that an integrated strategic framework has been
completed in nearly all missions. The current review
of the integrated mission planning process should
further streamline planning requirements. In terms
of future directions, the report rightly underscores
the importance of inclusivity, institution-building and
sustained international support for peacebuilding. We
support closer interaction between the United Nations
and Governments to reinforce national ownership.
We feel that it would have been useful for the report
to have focused also on tasks aimed at preventing
the relapse of conflict as well as long-term recovery
plans and on the role of external actors. In addition,
references to peacebuilding activities in the security
and defence sectors, justice and corrections systems,
basic Government functions and support to political
processes would have been helpful. In that regard,
the commendable achievements of United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Haiti
and Timor-Leste are worthy of mention, as are those

20

in Somalia and Darfur, where the United Nations and
the African Union have jointly undertaken important
peacebuilding-related tasks through peacekeeping.
Our future work on peacebuilding must be
guided by four key concepts. First is the imperative of
national ownership. Secondly, there needs to be strict
prioritization of targeted areas of peacebuilding based
on specific needs and articulated with the consent of
national authorities. Thirdly, there needs to be a sharper
emphasis on the development aspect of peacebuilding.
Finally, the nexus between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding needs to be refined.
The Peacebuilding Commission is the appropriate
forum for discussing and implementing those concepts.
The Commission has made important strides in the
first seven years of its existence. The PBC’s work will
improve with a refinement of the global discourse on
peacebuilding and an augmentation of resources for
peacebuilding. The buttressing of the PBC’s advocacy
and resource-mobilization roles is important.
The risk of relapse into conflict is a perennial
challenge to peacebuilding. Peacekeepers acting as
early peacebuilders can help to mitigate this risk.
We attach high importance to factoring the gender
perspective into peacebuilding endeavours. We believe
that lasting peace will remain elusive unless the
condition of women and other vulnerable groups is
improved. For long-term economic recovery and social
cohesion, women’s access to health care, education and
entrepreneurial opportunities are essential. Women’s
participation in mediation and policy formulation will
promote the efficacy of peacebuilding efforts.
The success of United Nations peacebuilding
hinges on adequate financial resources. In this context,
the Peacebuilding Fund has catalytic role to play in
attracting other sources of funding. We therefore
value the ongoing work on resource mobilization
carried out by the Peacebuilding Support Office and
the Peacebuilding Commission’s Working Group on
Lessons Learned. International financial institutions
and development actors also have a role to play in
providing resources for peacebuilding.
Besides finances, peacebuilding initiatives require
adequate human resources. The Secretary-General’s
civilian capacity initiative is important in identifying
expertise to be tailored to specific post-conflict needs.
The process should stand up to intergovernmental

12-65917

S/PV.6897

scrutiny, avoid duplication of roles, and be compliant
with United Nations rules and procedures.

should be initiated upon the request and consent of the
country under consideration.

In conclusion, we reiterate our strong commitment
and support to United Nations peacebuilding
endeavours. We share the hope that our collective
peacebuilding efforts will benefit all conflict-affected
peoples of the world.

Thirdly, in order to enhance its role in building
partnerships within and outside the United Nations
system and with the competent authorities of the affected
country, the Commission should be, as far as the United
Nations is concerned, the builder of bridges between
various intergovernmental bodies of the Organization,
such as the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. In that sense,
and as we pointed out in July in this very Chamber,
the Commission is a link between the Security Council,
whose mandate is limited to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the General Assembly
and the Economic and Social Council. The latter two
bodies have mandates in development and democratic
governance.

Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemal) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, let me thank the delegation of the
Kingdom of Morocco for having organized this open
debate. We also express our appreciation to Ms. Judy
Cheng-Hopkins and Ambassador Momen for their
presentations, as well as the Secretariat for the report
before us (S/2012/746), concerning the progress made
in improving the coherence, efficiency and internal
accountability in peacebuilding activities.
Seven years after its establishment, the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) has not yet reached its full potential
or entirely fulfilled the purpose for which it was
originally established. However, it is clear that it has
made significant achievements; the contribution of the
Commission to the countries under its care is increasing
over time. Evidence of this is the expansion of country
configurations through the advisory role of the PBC,
working to secure the foundations for lasting peace and
national reconciliation.
Building on what the Security Council’s debate in
July (see S/PV.6805) when we met to consider the fifth
report of the Peacebuilding Commission (S/2012/70),
my remarks will focus on the following six points.
First, the Peacebuilding Commission should help
to ensure that donor support is in line with national
peacebuilding plans, and accommodate national
priorities that address the root causes of conflict and
the actions to overcome them. We agree with the report
of the Secretary-General, and the established practice
of the Commission itself, that the countries directly
concerned must set the course and provide leadership
in the implementation of those plans.
Secondly, the Commission should help ensure that
collective efforts generate coordinated and coherent
action in the field by all stakeholders, including by
exploring such alternatives as simple and flexible
collaboration with other partners, such as foundations
and the private sector. This aid must at all times
complement and support the efforts and initiatives
undertaken by national actors, and the entire process

12-65917

For that reason, the boundary between peacemaking
and peacebuilding is not clear, which is why a good
understanding between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission would enhance compliance
with the mandates of both bodies, especially on the
ground. It is important to forge alliances between
these bodies, and between the United Nations and the
multilateral financial institutions.
Fourthly, the report of the Secretary-General
prominently addresses the issue of women’s
participation in peacebuilding processes. We endorse
the notion that women are key agents for attaining
lasting peace. During our presidency of the Council in
October, we promoted a presidential statement on the
matter (S/PRST/2012/23). In that respect, we recognize
all efforts undertaken by the Secretary-General to
ensure the participation of women and the availability of
experts on gender issues in peace processes, especially
peacebuilding processes.
Fifthly, it is critical that in the earliest stages of
any peace process broad sectors of society and a wide
range of relevant national actors be included in order
to better address the root causes of conflict and give
greater legitimacy to the consolidation of peace and all
that it entails. The active participation of national actors
supports the national responsibility in the achievement
of peacebuilding goals and ensures that national policies
are developed in a way that benefits the common good.
In this, women can also play a conciliatory role.
Sixthly, all efforts made by the United Nations
and partners on the ground will be for naught if

21

S/PV.6897

national capabilities are not generated and democratic
institutions whose role is recognized and respected by
the population are not built.
In that regard, we find it relevant to refer to civilian
capacity and the availability of experts in developing
countries who can contribute to developing national
capacity and establishing peacebuilding institutions.
That entails both the idea of national ownership and
participatory processes and focused international
cooperation, which also favours South-South
cooperation.
In conclusion, we have taken note of the suggestions
and recommendations that the Secretary-General
makes in his report. We welcome the vast majority of
them without hesitation.
This is the last formal meeting of the Council in
which we will participate with colleagues with whom we
have worked intensively in the past year — including,
seated to either side of me, Ambassador Hardeep
Singh Puri and Ambassador Peter Wittig, as well as
Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Ambassador Baso Sangqu
and Ambassador José Filipe Moraes Cabral. We shall
genuinely miss them. Each one of them, with his
support teams, singular contributions to the work of the
Council and unique personality, has made a profound
impression on us. Working with them has been an
unforgettable experience. We wish them every success
in their future endeavours, which will no doubt serve
to confirm to the rest of us elected members of the
Security Council that life goes on after serving on the
Council.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s
open debate on a subject that is of vital importance for
the work of the Security Council. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and for
his report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746). Our thanks are due in particular to
Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen of Bangladesh
for his statement today and for his able stewardship of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) this year. I would
also like to thank the Secretariat team so ably led by
Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins.
Once described as the missing middle between
peacekeeping and durable peace, the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission was in response to the
widely felt need of the international community to assist
post-conflict societies to attain sustainable peace. The

22

PBC, its Organizational Committee and its countryspecific configurations have done commendable work
in mainstreaming peacebuilding in post-conflict
countries.
The Council’s continuous engagement on
peacebuilding in recent times has also helped to
emphasize the critical role of peacebuilding. In that
context, we welcome the progress made in implementing
the Secretary-General’s Agenda for Action. Inclusivity,
institution-building and sustained and meaningful
international engagement, which are the priorities
identified by the Secretary-General, are useful guides
to peacebuilding ventures in the future.
Inclusive polity and governance, including the
provision of basic services and peace, security and a
stable social order, continue to be the key peacebuilding
tasks. Success in their implementation will impact upon
subsequent efforts at economic and social revitalization.
In turn, that success will depend upon the ability of
the international community to provide the resources
required and to generate greater coherence among
entities, programmes and field operatives, with a view
to promoting an integrated approach to sustainable
peacebuilding.
We believe that peacebuilding activities should
draw from achievements in the field: the PBC being
an advisory body, the expectations are that its countryspecific configurations will deliver core peacebuilding
tasks with agility and nimbleness. With much effort
invested in its mechanisms at Headquarters, the time
has now come to test our ability to make a difference
to the people and societies in post-conflict situations.
Inclusivity is a sign of healthy societies. Women
and youth should be fully included in peacebuilding
activities. However, efforts in that regard are
demanding and resource-intensive. Also, the widening
gap between our aspirations and field programmes
need to be narrowed by means of suitable programmes
and enhanced resource commitments. My delegation
encourages the PBC to work in that regard with
international and regional financial institutions, so
that tangible peace dividends are made available to the
population in post-conflict societies. It is also necessary
to avoid an over-reliance on the supply side of the
equation by relegating peacebuilding programmes to a
secondary place.
Conflicts today are vastly different that those of
the past. Their intra-State character, natural-resource

12-65917

S/PV.6897

dimension, transnational crime aspect, illicit
trafficking in drugs and weapons component and
regional dimension demand an integrated approach.
Establishing institutions of governance, socioeconomic
development,
youth
employment,
transitional
justice national reconciliation, electoral support and
constitution-building are tasks that require coherent and
sustained assistance from the international community.
That, in turn, requires political will, matching
resources and readiness for long-term engagement,
while taking into consideration local conditions. It is
therefore important for the PBC to align its objectives
with national priorities and to ensure that all plans and
programmes are implemented under national leadership
and ownership and through national institutions, so that
the gains are sustainable even is slow.
It is also important that peacebuilding start from
a firm foundation of successful peacekeeping. As a
responsible global citizen with broad experience with
nation-building, which is most relevant for countries
on the PBC’s agenda, India has been a regular
contributor to the Peacebuilding Fund. Apart from
our participation in peacekeeping missions, we have
also partnered extensively with national authorities
in post-conflict countries, in particular in Africa,
with a view to supporting their national efforts at
peacebuilding, including in sectors such as humanresource development, institutional capacity-building,
information technology and so forth. We will continue
to partner with post-conflict countries bilaterally and
through the United Nations in meeting the challenges
of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
As this is the last public meeting of the Council this
year, let me avail myself of this opportunity to thank all
the members of the Council, the wider United Nations
membership and the Secretariat for their cooperation
during the past two years as we have made our modest
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. I would also like to extend a very warm
welcome the five newly elected members, namely,
Argentina, Australia, Luxembourg, the Republic of
Korea and Rwanda. I wish them great success during
the next two years.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Morocco.
I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
to the Secretary-General for his statement and for his

12-65917

report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746), including the important recommendations
therein. I also wish to thank the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for his briefing.
My delegation of course associates itself with the
statement to be delivered later in this meeting by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-aligned Movement.
By virtue of its half-century partnership with the
United Nations in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
efforts, my country was keen to devote the last open
meeting of its presidency to the issue of peacebuilding
in the aftermath of conflict. The challenges associated
with post-conflict peacebuilding in connection with
security, development and human rights require
coordination and the rational use of resources and
efforts.
Peacebuilding is often connected to the very delicate
management of the transition from the establishment
of peace to ensuring sustainable peace. That makes
it very important to coordinate national, regional
and international efforts in countries emerging from
conflict in order to achieve stability. That coordination
requires prioritizing peacebuilding strategies in order
to align and harmonize them with national policies
and to involve all stakeholders. The involvement of all
national actors and national ownership are prerequisites
of peacebuilding efforts.
National authorities must maintain the primary
responsibility for peacebuilding in the aftermath of
conflict, and for maintaining and sustaining peace in
their country. However, support for those efforts will
also depend on building clear, balanced, results-based
and sustainable partnerships among all stakeholders
that are based on accountability, because the three main
axes of peacebuilding — the identification of needs,
sustainable support and the allocation of roles to the
stakeholders — constitute an important approach to the
success of peacebuilding. Also important is the use of
the various peacebuilding and peacekeeping tools in a
comprehensive and integrated way to avoid redundancy
and duplication and to adopt a phased approach that
takes into consideration the priorities of each case
individually and within the available resources.
In that context, the Peacebuilding Commission can
play a very important role because its establishment
was the beginning of a new approach by the United
Nations to addressing post-conflict situations based

23

S/PV.6897

on linking peacekeeping and security. Now that nearly
seven years have passed since the establishment of the
Commission, we can truly say that it has proven its
effectiveness, given the multiple achievements that have
benefitted the countries on the Commission’s agenda.
The Commission is also now in a position to provide
even more experience and advice for the benefit of the
Security Council.
Morocco believes that the success of any
peacebuilding effort will depend on the extent of
its comprehensiveness, inclusiveness, effectiveness,
sustainability and attention to human development
and social and economic matters. That requires the
availability of the necessary resources and predictable
financing on a timely basis. In that context, we must
also reaffirm the need to promote cooperation with
the various financial institutions of the United Nations
and international and regional development banks, as
well as the participation of other international bodies
through triangular and South-South cooperation.
Attention should be paid to regional and subregional
cooperation, South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation also in order to confront the challenges
that hamper peacebuilding and peace consolidation
efforts. In the critical immediate aftermath of conflicts,
countries have proven the importance of building and
consolidating institutional capacities and the rule of
law, security sector reform and other justice reforms,
which necessitate incorporating civilian expertise in
peacebuilding, including mobilizing the capacities of
developing countries, particularly those of women and
youth.
Based on ithis conviction and the importance of
that aspect, and in order to promote an exchange of
expertise, Morocco, together with Qatar and Norway, on
10 November organized a workshop to promote civilian
capacities in the Arab world. That was an occasion to
highlight the importance of building national capacities
in post-conflict stages. It also laid the cornerstone for
cooperation and the exchange of expertise among Arab
countries, aimed at a promising partnership between the
League of Arab States and the United Nations. Morocco
is committed to maintaining its cooperation with the
United Nations in peacekeeping efforts, especially in
our Arab and African neighbourhoods.
(spoke in English)
Now that five of our colleagues are about to leave
the Security Council, I would like to say that it has been

24

a real privilege and pleasure for Morocco to serve for
one year with them. I would like to congratulate them
on their outstanding performance in 2011 and 2012.
(spoke in Spanish)
We will miss their ability to manage delicate
matters with determination, elegance, impartiality and
a firm belief in and commitment to the goals of the
United Nations.
(spoke in Arabic)
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf.
“The Security Council recalls its resolutions
and the statements of its President on post-confl ict
peacebuilding, in particular S/PRST/2009/23,
S/PRST/2010/20, S/PRST/2011/2 and S/PRST/2011/4,
and reaffi rms the critical importance of peacebuilding
as the foundation for sustainable peace and
development in the aftermath of confl ict.
“The Security Council takes note with
appreciation of the Secretary-General’s report
on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746).
“The Security Council reaffirms that national
ownership and national responsibility are key to
establishing sustainable peace and reaffirms also
the primary responsibility of national authorities in
identifying their priorities and strategies for postconflict peacebuilding.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of inclusivity in advancing national
peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to
ensure that the needs of all segments of society are
taken into account. The Council calls on the United
Nations to support national efforts to include
relevant national actors in peacebuilding activities
and processes.
“The Security Council welcomes initiatives
of post-conflict countries to reduce poverty,
deter conflict and provide better conditions to
their populations and underlines that the primary
responsibility for successful peacebuilding lies
with Governments and relevant national actors,

12-65917

S/PV.6897

including civil society, in countries emerging from
conflict and that the United Nations can play a
critical role in support of national reconciliation,
security
sector
reform,
demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration, restoring the rule
of law and national institutions, revitalizing the
economy, and providing basic services and other
key peacebuilding efforts in post-confl ict countries.
“The Security Council reaffirms that
sustainable peace requires an integrated approach
based on coherence among political, security,
development and human rights, including gender
equality, rule of law and justice activities. In
this regard, the Council stresses the importance
of the rule of law as one of the key elements of
peacebuilding, emphasizing that courts must
provide justice and equal protection under the
law for all citizens and recognizing the need for
enhanced efforts aimed at capacity-building in
justice and security institutions, especially in
the police, prosecutorial, judicial and corrections
sectors.
“The Security Council stresses the need
for more coordinated, coherent and integrated
peacebuilding efforts and emphasizes that better
coordination between United Nations missions,
United Nations country teams and other regional
and development actors, including regional
organizations, is of paramount importance in
ensuring greater efficiency and effectiveness in
the delivery of critical peacebuilding tasks. The
Council further emphasizes the need for greater
clarity on the respective roles and responsibilities of
these actors in the delivery of critical peacebuilding
tasks, based on their comparative advantages.
“The Security Council recalls its resolution
1645 (2005) and recognizes the important role of
the Peacebuilding Commission in advancing and
supporting an integrated and coherent approach
to peacebuilding, including promoting improved
coherence and alignment of partner policies around
national peacebuilding strategies and priorities.
The Council reiterates its support for the work
of the Commission and expresses its continued
willingness to make use of its advisory, advocacy
and resource mobilization role, including through
targeted advice on international and national
commitment to long-term peacebuilding objectives
in countries on the Commission’s agenda. The

12-65917

Council further emphasizes the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in support of seamless
transition of mandated missions in countries on its
agenda, in particular through the mobilization of
sustained international support to critical national
capacity needs.
“The Security Council notes with appreciation
the
contribution
that
peacekeepers
and
peacekeeping missions make to early peacebuilding
and emphasizes that mandated peacebuilding tasks
must also contribute to long-term peacebuilding
objectives in order to ensure sustainable progress
towards achieving peacebuilding objectives
and facilitating drawdown and transition of
peacekeeping missions. The Council recognizes the
need to integrate mission expertise and experience
into the development of peacebuilding strategies.
“The Security Council further emphasizes the
importance of focused, well-defined, balanced and
sustained support to partnerships with post-conflict
countries, on the basis of mutual commitments, to
implement national strategies aimed at effective
peacebuilding, including reconstruction and
building of institutions necessary for recovery
from conflict, which are based on the achievement
of results and mutual accountability. The Council
urges Member States and other partners to
increase efforts towards achieving the objective of
ensuring sustained and predictable financing for
peacebuilding, including through the Peacebuilding
Fund and multi-donor trust funds.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of effective collaboration with
international financial institutions, regional
development banks and the private sector in
ensuring support for job creation and the long-term
socioeconomic development needs of post-conflict
countries.
“The Security Council encourages national
Governments, the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations to broaden and deepen
the pool of civilian expertise for peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict, including
from countries with relevant experience in postconflict peacebuilding or democratic transition,
giving particular attention to mobilizing capacities
from developing countries and from women as
vital for successful United Nations peacebuilding

25

S/PV.6897

endeavours. The Council also encourages national
Governments, the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations to use existing civilian
expertise and further develop it, bearing in mind the
necessity to minimize possible duplication of efforts
and to ensure its consistency and complementarity.
The Council further underlines the importance
that intergovernmental deliberations take forward
the process in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 66/255 and the imperative of mandating
and deploying civilian expertise in compliance
with relevant United Nations rules and procedures.
“The Security Council underlines the
usefulness of sharing the experience of countries
which have gone through conflict and postconflict situations and comparable transitions and
emphasizes the importance of effective regional,
South-South and triangular cooperation.
“The Security Council recognizes the important
role of women in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in peacebuilding and underlines the
primary role of national Governments affected by
armed conflict to enhance participation of women
in the prevention and resolution of conflict and
in peacebuilding within the framework of the
women, peace and security agenda, including by
consulting relevant women’s organizations from
the earliest stages of planning and priority-setting.
The Council welcomes the call of the SecretaryGeneral for enhanced participation, representation
and involvement of women in the prevention and
resolution of armed conflict and in peacebuilding,
as well as for a stronger commitment to address
challenges to such engagement of women at all
levels.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance
of addressing crimes committed against women
in armed conflict, including killing and maiming
and sexual violence issues from the outset of peace
processes, mediation efforts, ceasefires and peace
agreements, particularly in provisions for security
arrangements, transitional justice and reparations
as well as in the context of security sector reform.
“The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of investing in the economic capacities
of women and youth for stable post-conflict
recovery and encourages Member States to support
such investment.

26

“The Security Council reaffirms its decision
in paragraph 14 of its resolution 1998 (2011) to
continue to include specific provisions for the
protection of children in the mandates of relevant
United Nations missions. The Security Council
recognizes that transnational organized crime,
including illegal activities such as drug trafficking
and illicit trade in arms, negatively impact the
consolidation of peace in countries emerging
from conflict, and underlines the importance of
increasing international and regional cooperation
on the basis of common and shared responsibility
to address them effectively and build national
capacities on crime prevention and criminal
justice. The Council underlines, in this regard,
the importance of enhancing cooperation among
peacebuilding actors within the same region, to
address these challenges in a coordinated manner
and in close collaboration with and with the
consent of relevant national authorities, regional
and subregional organizations as well as United
Nations regional offices.
“The Security Council requests the SecretaryGeneral to brief the Council and the General
Assembly by December 2013 and submit a report
no later than December 2014 on further progress
in the United Nations peacebuilding efforts in
the aftermath of conflict, including the issue
of women’s participation in peacebuilding, and
placing particular emphasis on the impact on the
ground, including lessons learned from United
Nations peacebuilding activities in countryspecific contexts, and on progress in taking forward
the elements included in this statement, taking
into consideration the views of the Peacebuilding
Commission.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/29.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on postconflict peacebuilding. We hope that the discussions

12-65917

S/PV.6897

today will help to further strengthen the United Nations
support to countries emerging from conflict. We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/746)
and for his briefing this morning. We also express
appreciation to the Peacebuilding Support Office for its
able work. Brazil is grateful to Ambassador Abulkalam
Abdul Momen for his statement and for his leadership as
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Brazil has been an early and active supporter of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. As Chair
of the Guinea-Bissau country-specific configuration
and member of the organizational committee of the
PBC, we have striven to advance the notion that postconflict settings require a comprehensive approach that
takes into account the linkages between security and
development as fundamental elements for achieving
sustainable peace. It is our firm belief that peacebuilding
is an essential tool with which to bridge the existing
gaps between those two dimensions and to effectively
address the root causes of conflict.
We fully agree with the Secretary-General
that national ownership must be a cornerstone of
peacebuilding processes. Peacebuilding activities should
be designed in accordance with national strategies and
priorities and should strengthen local institutions. In
this regard, the nurturing of national capacities and the
restoration of core Government functions, including in
the field of basic services, should be a key component of
our efforts. As the report highlights, it is essential that
the United Nations entities develop a comprehensive
approach to institution-building and that missions and
country teams establish effective partnerships in this
area.
The contribution of women to peacebuilding efforts
must also be continuously emphasized. Women are often
the leading actors in shaping reconciliation, preventing
conflicts and bolstering economic revitalization.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment that
additional efforts to increase their role in the fields of
governance and economic recovery are needed.
We commend the emphasis placed in the report on
the need to deepen the interaction between the PBC
and other United Nations bodies, such as the Security
Council. It is our hope that the Council will build on
the discussions held during the interactive dialogue last
July. Enhancing the relationship between the Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission is essential. A
dialogue between the Council and the country-specific

12-65917

configurations — on a regular basis and in the context
of mandate renewals — could be a useful tool for that
purpose.
Furthermore, the United Nations peacebuilding
actors must continue to reach out to other institutions
outside the United Nations system and work to ensure
that the support of all actors is coordinated, coherent
and aligned behind national priorities. Brazil is
particularly pleased to note the growing interaction
with the international financial institutions and the
efforts being made by the PBC to foster dialogue with
regional and subregional organizations.
The idea of mutual accountability, as outlined in
the report, should be seen as the joint identification
of strategic objectives and priority actions by postconflict countries and the international community.
Besides, it is crucial that the international community
understand the realities of the affected countries and
therefore develop, as recommended by the report, a
more risk-tolerant perspective.
May I once more reiterate that the Brazil will
continue to engage in providing assistance to countries
emerging from conflict and work with other Member
States to make the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture ever more effective.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this open debate on
peacebuilding, and I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and his report (S/2012/746), which takes
stock of the progress made since the previous report
of 2009 (S/2009/304) and identifies those areas where
renewed efforts are necessary. I welcome the briefing
by the Chair of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and I would like to
highlight the quality of the presidential statement just
adopted (S/PRST/2012/29).
I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to raise the following points in
my national capacity, by focusing on the three
priority areas highlighted in the report: inclusion,
institution-building and improving partnerships. My
experience as Chair of the Guinea country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission has
shown me the importance of these areas among the

27

S/PV.6897

efforts undertaken to support post-conflict countries
on their paths towards sustainable peace.
Concerning inclusion, it is indispensable that all
peacebuilding stakeholders of a given society have
the means to be heard. More substantial efforts must
be undertaken to ensure full participation by women
and girls in peacebuilding and state-building processes,
be it in peace negotiations, in efforts for national
reconciliation or when it comes to equal representation
at all levels — legislative, executive and judiciary — of a
State’s institutions . We need to pay particular attention
to the material conditions allowing women to play a
more complete role in society. We also need to engage in
a relentless fight against all forms of violence targeting
women and girls. The inclusion into peacebuilding
processes of all segments of a population, in particular
the most vulnerable groups, is in our view the best way
to prevent, both in the short and in the long terms, the
flaring up of frustrations that could lead to a relapse
into conflict and violence.
In the same vein, we call for the efforts to establish
fair and sustainable state institutions to be redoubled.
This is not just a question of capacity-building for
public administration, but also of harmonizing the
State’s responsibilities — in particular its sovereign
functions — and the means to exercise them in a
responsible and inclusive manner. We must approach
State reform in a comprehensive manner, respecting
the separation of powers. There can be no effective
Government without legislators to which it is accountable
or without courts to which citizens can turn to have
their rights enforced. That is where the Peacebuilding
Commission has real added value, because its approach
to peace is comprehensive and because it recognizes
and reinforces the intrinsic links between promoting
sustainable socioeconomic development, maintaining
international peace and security and respect for human
rights and the rule of law.
Concerning the improvement of partnerships, we
see the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States
as a perfect example of ownership and leadership
from the South, having been elaborated by the Group
of Seven Plus. Luxembourg welcomes, in particular,
the endorsement of the New Deal by the Republic of
Guinea, as well as by the five other Member States
that are on the PBC agenda. These countries have the
courage to address difficult questions of State-building,
which implies a revision of the social contract in order
to place the State at the service of its citizens.

28

My delegation believes that, since we will soon
be one of the elected members of the Council, it is
opportune to further strengthen the relationship
between the PBC and the Security Council. Its role in
maintaining international attention on the countries on
its agenda gives the PBC a unique capacity in the United
Nations system, as does its ability to link subjects
of interest to this Council, on the one hand, and the
other main bodies of the United Nations, on the other.
It would appear particularly useful to benefit from the
knowledge and analysis of the Chairpersons of the
country-specific configurations during consultations
of the Council, as well as throughout the mandate
cycles of United Nations missions. While the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General inform the
Council about activities of the United Nations system,
the Chairpersons of the country-specific configurations
can inform it about the peacebuilding activities on the
part of a much wider array of stakeholders, including
bilateral, multilateral and regional partners, as well as
those from civil society and the private sector.
The Security Council can count on Luxembourg’s
continued commitment to deepening and improving
partnerships for peacebuilding, be it in the Guinea
configuration of the PBC, in the Security Council or in
other relevant forums of our Organization.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): We thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate. We also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his commendably brief
and focused report (S/2012/746) and recommendations,
and Ambassador Momen, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing.
However, as we read that Secretary-General’s
report, we cannot escape the conclusion that the United
Nations discussion of peacebuilding is still beset by its
continued focus mainly on post-conflict environments.
It is, of course, vital that once a conflict is over, the
United Nations play a key role in helping prevent a
relapse, and the Secretary-General has demonstrated
that the United Nations is developing some very useful
methods in that regard. But it is no less vital that there
be effective peacebuilding from the very earliest phases
of peacekeeping operations, which raises issues that
have not yet received sufficient attention from this
Council, and we urge that, in 2013, it should return to
that unfinished business.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

There is another point about peacebuilding that
was only implicit in the Secretary-General’s report, but
is right at the heart of this Council’s responsibilities and
should therefore, we believe, be highlighted , namely,
the vital role of the peacebuilding methodology of
not only preventing relapse into conflict, but also
preventing and containing conflict in the first place.
That is touched on in the report’s introduction, and we
urge that, in future reports, such a wider applicability
of the methodology should be expanded.
The report tells us that the accumulated experience
of the United Nations reveals three key elements
of peacebuilding methodology that really do work:
inclusivity in political settlements and processes,
institution-building, and sustained international
support.
We should reflect, I think, on how different
might things have been in the situation in Syria, if
the United Nations, including this Council, had much
earlier applied those three concepts, particularly
inclusivity. When we look at the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and should consider how much
better things might now be in the Kivus if the United
Nations had insisted — much earlier and much more
firmly — on real political inclusivity and on building
effective institutions. In the context of inclusivity,
we join Brazil and Luxembourg in welcoming the
Secretary-General’s focus on the role of women in
peace processes.
As for sustained international support, TimorLeste comes quickly to mind, particularly following
the smooth transition of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste over the past year. We should
not forget, however, that, in 2006, we all failed TimorLeste. We underestimated the importance of sustained
international support, and the Timorese paid an
unacceptable price. Although Timor-Leste will not be
on the active 2013 agenda, its experience teaches us
that this Council should not prematurely wind back
international support for United Nations peacebuilding.
The lesson is clear. Premature cost-cutting is a false
economy; too often it simply transfers costs to
vulnerable civilian populations, and before long, the
United Nations has to return to expensive peacekeeping.
Like Luxembourg, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s reference to the initiative of the Group of
Seven Plus countries, including Timor-Leste, which
have emerged from conflict, and they deserve our

12-65917

respect and admiration for their efforts now to help
others. We particularly support their five peacebuilding
goals, and we urge that this Council take each of those
goals to heart as key benchmarks when constructing or
reviewing mission mandates.
I also join others in stressing the importance of
improving the United Nations capacity to rapidly
identify and deploy relevant civilian capacities. The
United Nations will struggle to be a credible and
effective contributor in early peacebuilding settings,
unless it is substantially better at deploying the right
people with the right experience in a more timely
manner.
I echo and commend the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to promote further improvements
in the way the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Security Council work together. Indeed, those
recommendations take us, I think, back to last month’s
debate on Council working methods, when we proposed
that the Council focus on practical changes that would
improve its effectiveness. So I welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s identification of the interaction between
the Peacebuilding Commission and Security Council
as another practical area where working methods
improvements would enhance effectiveness, and I urge
that this Council carry forward that idea into its 2013
discussions on reforming working methods.
Finally, as they will be leaving the Council in a
few days, Mr. President, I would like to convey New
Zealand’s warm thanks to our friends from Colombia,
Germany, India, Portugal and South Africa for their
tireless work on behalf of us all. They have done us
proud.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Australia.
Mr. Nankervis (Australia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I also wish
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/746)
and briefing, as well as Ambassador Momen for his
statement and valuable work as Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
Peacebuilding is vital work. We know that about
half of the countries emerging from conflict relapse
into violence within five years — the situations
preoccupying the Council today provide ample evidence
of that. Ensuring that we take advantage of the critical
post-conflict window to shore up peace is one of the

29

S/PV.6897

most important endeavours we can undertake. Australia
looks forward to working with others to advance the
peacebuilding agenda in the Council. We hope to draw
on experiences from peacebuilding partnerships in our
own region.
We welcome progress within the United Nations
system, including work to enhance mission integration
and efforts to clarify roles and responsibilities, such
as the designation of the United Nations Development
Programme and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations designation as a joint global focal point for
the rule of law; enhanced partnerships with the World
Bank and regional organizations; and work to improve
deployment of personnel with the right skill sets,
including importantly those from the global South,
through the civilian capacities initiative.
I would like now to focus on three aspects of the
Secretary-General’s report.
I would first like to address the question of
transitions. Transitions and drawdowns can be
as important to maintaining stability as initial
deployments. We welcome the vital work under
way on the part of the Secretariat to develop a
transitions policy. It is a particularly topical issue,
given the many transitions in progress, including the
drawdown of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), on the subject of which we
welcome the presidential statement issued yesterday
(S/PRST/2012/27), the reconfiguration of the United
Nations Mission in Liberia and the planned drawdown
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone. The Joint Transition Plan of the TimorLeste Government and UNMlT provides an especially
useful model.
Australia, the Solomon Islands and regional partners
are also working together to draw down the Regional
Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands (RAMSI)
in 2013. Key lessons from that experience include the
importance of beginning transition planning early and of
emphasizing national capacity development. Successful
transitions require inclusive national ownership, as well
as flexibility and strong coordination with multilateral,
bilateral and non-governmental partners. They should
be conditions-based, not driven by artificial timelines.
The participation of women is vital.
That leads to my second point of focus, namely,
women’s participation. The issue is not simply one
of equity. Experience consistently demonstrates

30

that peacebuilding processes that involve women
are more likely to succeed. The Secretary-General’s
report points out that only modest progress has been
made on the seven-point action plan for genderresponsive peacebuilding (see S/2010/466). We must
do better. Australia welcomes the Secretary-General’s
commitment to the issue as a priority for his second
term.
Enhancing women’s participation is incumbent
on us all. Australia has been learning lessons on the
issue through peace operations in our region. Since
2009, for example, the Regional Assistance Mission
to the Solomon Islands’ Gender Adviser has provided
advice across the range of the mission’s programmes
and Government agencies. RAMSI’s assistance in
addressing gender inequality also focuses on removing
barriers to women’s participation in Government.
The third issue I want to address is sustained
international support. Peacebuilding is a longterm endeavour. Transforming institutions rarely
takes less than a generation. It requires a long-term
commitment. International support must be guided
by the overarching principle of national ownership, if
it is to be effective and sustainable. We welcome the
efforts of countries emerging from conflict to clearly
define their peacebuilding priorities. Australia is proud
of our partnership agreement with Timor-Leste, which
aligns our support with Timor-Leste’s own Strategic
Development plan, and provides clear, measurable
targets for Australian assistance.
Finally, Australia believes that the PBC
has an important role to play. The Commission
needs to prioritize impact in the field. Its country
configurations, for example, should continue to work
in support of national actors and United Nations
leadership teams. Australia has consistently urged a
closer and more organic relationship between the PBC
and the Council, emphasizing the advisory role that
country configurations can play, especially on mandate
renewals and transitions, and their potential role in
early warning.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council
of Australia’s commitment to ensuring that the
peacebuilding agenda delivers results on the ground
for the 1.5 billion people living in countries affected by
repeated cycles of violence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I am very grateful to the delegation of the Kingdom
of Morocco for convening today’s open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for their statements.
As we said in our statement in the most recent
debate on this topic in July (see S/PV.6805), we
understand that the Security Council has a central
role to play in organizing support for post-conflict
countries, promoting the building of lasting peace and
an environment conducive to comprehensive ongoing
development, based on the rule of law, respect for
fundamental rights and the progressive collective
exercise of human, civil, political, economic, social and
cultural rights, as well as promoting the strengthening
of democratic institutions. The task is one of the
greatest challenges the international community faces
today, and one to which my country attaches particular
importance.
We believe that, when confronted with those
challenges, it is necessary to support post-conflict
strategies based on three elements. First is the principle
of national responsibility in peacebuilding activities,
based on the protection and promotion of human rights,
guaranteeing the involvement of the societal sectors
concerned throughout the reconstruction process, and
honouring the priorities of local authorities, in such a
way as ensure broad, inclusive, pluralistic discussions
that will lead to engagement in collaborative actions
aimed at addressing post-conflict challenges directly,
effectively and in a legitimate manner.
Secondly, the role that the United Nations plays in
peacebuilding, which is to coordinate all international
assistance, is an element that is indispensable to the
success of peacebuilding efforts and to peacekeeping
efforts as well. Thirdly, we point out the role of regional
and subregional organizations, in accordance with the
provision of Chapter VIII of the Charter, and the need
to strengthen the capacities of regional systems in order
to support countries that need to recover and rebuild
after a conflict.
Considering those elements, we appreciate the
usefulness of the Secretary-General’s latest report
on post-conflict peacebuilding (S/2012/746). We
particularly note the progress made in implementing
the programme proposed by the Secretary-General in
2009, which sought to make the United Nations capable

12-65917

of more coherent, timely and effective responses
to peacebuilding needs, by, among other things,
encouraging greater interaction and collaboration
between United Nations teams on the ground and
strengthening ties with regional organizations.
Despite that progress, it is clear that a long road lies
ahead. For example, in the matter of women and peace
and security, we share the Secretary-General’s concern
about the slow pace of progress in implementing his plan
of action on women’s participation in peacebuilding
initiatives in the various countries concerned. That
is not only a matter of ethical and legal principles. It
is a matter of noting and embracing practices known
to foster coherence and effectiveness in restoring
lasting and sustainable peace as well as in promoting
sustainable development. We also call attention to the
need to include young people and to respect the right of
children to participate and be heard in those processes.
On the other hand, we see a positive trend in
providing civil capacities to affected countries,
opening the way for innovative approaches to technical
cooperation and for strengthening South-South
cooperation.
We agree with the Secretary-General about the
need to give greater attention to an inclusive approach
to peacebuilding, with full national involvement in
building lasting peace. However, we should all recall
something that we in Argentina know from our
own experience, namely, that no strategy aimed at
achieving genuine reconciliation can succeed unless
it incorporates the principles of truth, memory, justice
and reparation, and rejects impunity for any perpetrator
of serious, heinous violations of human rights in the
course of the conflict we are trying to recover from.
Lastly, about the activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we join the Secretary-General’s call to
strengthen the work of the Commission to promote
greater coherence and to adapt donors’ support
to national peacebuilding plans. We also support
strengthened relations between the Commission and the
Security Council, including through interactive dialogue
before the renewal of United Nations peacebuilding
mission mandates, so that the Commission can fulfil
the assessment role assigned to it by the United Nations
and the Council can benefit more from the experience
that the Commission has to offer.
Finally, we express our solidarity with and respect
for the work of the non-permanent members who are

31

S/PV.6897

coming to the end of their terms on the Council. As
Argentina is about to embark on a term itself, we also
pledge our country’s commitment to fulfilling the
responsibility to build on our accumulated common
experience to help the Council strengthen, maintain and
revitalize its mission, which is to maintain international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to echo other representatives in expressing our
appreciation to Ambassador Mohammed Loulichki,
Permanent Representative of Morocco, for his
leadership in convening today’s open debate.
While we agree with the findings contained in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/746) to the
effect that much more is needed to make an impact on
the ground, Japan welcomes the significant progress
made since the 2009 report (S/2009/304). In addition,
Japan strongly supports the priority directions for
peacebuilding outlined in the report.
Japan attaches particular importance to the
following observations.
First, the importance of institutions in
peacebuilding and, consequently, development, cannot
be overemphasized. The restoration of core Government
and service-delivery functions, based on national
ownership and undertaken with an inclusive approach,
are at the heart of State-building. The international
community must come up with stronger mechanisms
for aligning stakeholders to support that process. We
also look forward to seeing positive results come out of
the civilian capacities initiative.
Secondly, the inclusion of women in all peacebuilding
processes must be accelerated, particularly in the areas
of governance and economic recovery, in accordance
with the seven-point action plan.
Thirdly, sustained international support is also
crucial to the creation of space for countries to fully
engage in institutional transformation, which can often
take years, even decades.
Fourthly, the concept of mutual accountability
allows for equal partnership between the recipient
Government and its international partners, as can
be seen in the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile

32

States, as well as in the declaration issued at the Tokyo
Conference on Afghanistan held in Japan this summer.
Japan has been a committed member of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) since its inception
and currently serves as the Chair of the working group
on lessons learned. We believe that the PBC has played,
and will continue to play, a crucial role in taking forward
the recommendations contained in the report. Needless
to say, a stronger partnership with the Security Council
is crucial for the PBC to realize its full potential,
particularly when Council decisions directly affect the
peacebuilding processes of the country on the agenda
of the Commission. The meeting of the working group
held on 21 November focused precisely on this point and
emphasized the role of the PBC in ensuring sustained
international support by consciously linking peace and
security discussions to long-term development during
United Nations mission transitions.
The complexity and long-term nature of
peacebuilding require a multifaceted and holistic
approach. One example that Japan can present is that
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process, our primary framework
for dialogue on development issues with our African
partners. The TICAD process has since its inception
placed great emphasis on the consolidation of peace
as the basis of development. In that context, we are
delighted to host our fifth TICAD in Yokohama next
June.
The current discussion on the post-2015 development
agenda also provides an invaluable opportunity for
Member States to reflect on the role of peacebuilding
in long-term development. The Secretary-General has
called for the inclusion of peacebuilding considerations
such as security, justice and economic foundations into
the post-2015 development agenda. The issue has been
introduced in the post-Millennium Development Goals
contact group, which Japan chairs.
We are very much aware that challenges remain as
to how to achieve convergence of the different views
on how and in which form peacebuilding should be
incorporated into the next development framework. We
believe that human security, emphasizing the protection
and empowerment of individuals through a holistic
approach, plays a significant role in that context. Japan
remains committed to pushing the discussion forward.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan’s strong
and lasting support for peacebuilding. Peacebuilding is

12-65917

S/PV.6897

a very long process, but Japan will continue to engage,
both bilaterally and through the PBC, in the building of
sustainable peace in post-conflict countries.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): Mr. President,
allow me to begin by expressing my sincere appreciation
to you for having convened this timely open debate on
the issue of post-conflict peacebuilding. Half a year has
passed and a lot has happened since last July’s general
debate (see S/PV.6805), based on the fifth annual report
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his initial briefing
and his in-depth report (S/2012/746), which clearly
illustrates the problems at hand and the priorities ahead.
My appreciation also goes to the Chairman of the PBC,
Ambassador Abdul Momen, for his insightful remarks.
I am confident that the sixth annual report of the PBC
will serve to help us better understand and define the
nature and scope of the PBC’s role.
As the Secretary-General’s report rightfully points
out, the Peacebuilding Commission has over the past
six years been steadily developing with a view to
effectively carrying out its mandates by catalysing
international efforts to assist countries emerging from
conflict situations to achieve sustainable peace.
Noticeable progress has been made due to factors
that include more effective leadership of United Nations
teams in the field; enhanced United Nations support for
national capacity-building; ownership of peacebuilding
processes; and an improved funding mechanism to
support peacebuilding.
Nevertheless, reality dictates that the situation in
most, if not all, post-conflict countries and regions
is still fragile, and the many challenges before us
have hardly subsided. Two days ago, in the Central
African Republic, which is one of the PBC’s country
configurations, rebel forces relied on the use of force
to make their point. That is only one of the many cases
which demonstrate that the focus of peacebuilding
efforts should be placed on preventing the recurrence
of conflict. The Security Council must also be ready to
swiftly respond to the recurrence of violence in postconflict situations.
Having said that, let me stress the following points
from our national perspective.

12-65917

First, peacebuilding efforts should be exerted in
such a way as to further strengthen and respect the
national ownership of recipient countries. The ultimate
goal of peacebuilding does not stop at stabilizing
a post-conflict situation, but lies in establishing a
basis for long-term sustainable development, which
is impossible without the recipient countries’ own
capability. In that regard, my delegation would like
to stress that strengthening civilian capacity in the
aftermath of conflict is the most critical ingredient for
achieving and maintaining sustained peace.
Secondly, inclusivity has proved important in
addressing the root causes of conflict and increasing
the legitimacy of a political settlement. The role
of non-State actors and civil society needs to be
recognized and integrated in peacebuilding efforts.
The case of Yemen provides a good example. By
including the extra-parliamentary opposition and other
key constituencies such as civil society representatives,
women’s groups and youths in the political process,
Yemen’s national dialogue conference is on a stronger
track for a transparent transitional process that is in
keeping with international norms and standards. As
such, my delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
efforts to highlight the significance of inclusivity as
one of the priority directions of his report.
Thirdly, partnerships among all stakeholders,
within and outside the United Nations system, should
be strengthened, with the PBC playing the role of
facilitator. The strategic partnerships of the United
Nations with international and regional financial
institutions, such as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, are crucial in securing financial
resources and effective budget allocation. In that vein,
we were pleased to witness intensified cooperation
with the World Bank throughout the year, including the
launch of a joint process to strengthen the alignment
of the Peacebuilding Fund, the World Bank and other
multilateral peacebuilding financing instruments in
that respect.
Finally, my delegation would like to emphasize
the importance of a closer linkage and coordination
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission in carrying out peacebuilding mandates
and helping countries meet the multifaceted postconflict demands. The Security Council should make
clear what advice it needs from the PBC, and the PBC
should develop a systematic method for assisting the
Security Council to better utilize the lessons learned

33

S/PV.6897

through its activities related to the six country-specific
configurations. The accumulated lessons and experience
of each of the country-specific configurations will add
valuable perspective to the discourse of the Security
Council.
The Republic of Korea has been constructively
contributing to peacebuilding activities, including as
vice-chairperson of the PBC in 2009 and member of
the Organizational Committee since 2008. Korea has
recently made an additional donation of $500,000,
bringing its total contribution to $4.5 million, since
the establishment of Peacebuilding Fund in 2006.
My delegation stands ready to further scale up our
multifaceted contribution to the noble cause of
peacebuilding and looks forward to further constructive
discussions in the Security Council and the General
Assembly on ways to implement and improve the
PBC’s role, with a view to promoting a more secure and
sustainable peace around the globe.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Secretary-General for his
report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2012/746). We remain convinced that, in order to
respond to the challenges of our times, peacebuilding
in general must be strengthened, and in particular, the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The United
Nations has a lot of experience behind it. We commend
the Secretary-General and the Organization for the
progress made to date. However, further progress is in
order.
Allow me to begin with three general comments
on the report. First, the Secretary-General notes
three peacebuilding priorities, namely, inclusivity,
institution-building and sustained international
support and mutual accountability. We welcome
both the choice and the order of the three priorities.
Our own experiences — particularly through the
Swiss chairmanship of the Burundi country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) — confirm that those priorities are critical
in successful peacebuilding. The recent donors
conference for Burundi, held in Geneva at the end of
October, is a good illustration in that regard. It allowed
an alignment of donors around a common agenda that
had been prepared by Burundi through an inclusive
process. The conference represented an important

34

milestone in Burundi’s peacebuilding process, and we
are optimistic regarding its long-term positive impact.
The three principles also form important elements
of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
which was agreed in Busan last year and of which
Switzerland is a signatory. The New Deal represents
a useful framework for implementing measures aimed
at mutual accountability, and, as noted in the report,
transition compacts can help in formalizing long-term
commitments among States and their partners.
Secondly, we believe that a clear long-term vision
for peacebuilding would help to better streamline
our efforts. The present report sets clear priorities
for effectively continuing earlier efforts. However,
a strategic outlook for the overall peacebuilding
architecture would be equally important. Discussions
should not only address ways to respond to current
challenges, but also elaborate a vision of United
Nations peacebuilding in the next five to ten years.
Even if it appears difficult, we should try to set targets
for successful peacebuilding and develop a vision of the
United Nation’s role in relation to other peacebuilding
actors. Such a strategic discussion would also help
us to better understand the existing links among the
peacebuilding architecture and other core processes,
such as the post-Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) process. The increasing gap between conflictaffected countries and other developing countries
in achieving the MDGs is, indeed, worrying and
constitutes a challenge to our effective efforts. We
therefore strongly support the inclusion of peacebuilding
considerations in the post-2015 development agenda.
Thirdly, further progress is necessary on gender
mainstreaming. The Secretary-General’s seven-point
action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding (see
S/2010/466) represents a useful starting point. Progress
has been encouraging, but further progress is needed,
especially in governance and economic recovery. With
the creation of UN-Women, the Secretary-General can
count on the support of a strong partner. We expect to
see a more systematic consideration and inclusion of
gender-specific issues in peacebuilding in the future.
Clearly, we were particularly interested in the
section on the Peacebuilding Commission. We agree
that further progress should be achieved, particularly
on the points covered in the 2010 review (S/2010/393).
Let me make five specific remarks in that regard.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

First and generally, we believe that there is further
potential for peacebuilding actors to play a more
central and strategic role within the overall United
Nations architecture. That is particularly true for the
PBC, as a consultative intergovernmental body, as well
as the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO). It appears
that their roles and added value have been neither
understood nor exploited to the fullest extent possible.
Secondly, increased efforts must aim to broaden
dialogue and link the actors concerned. The PBC is
uniquely placed to fulfil that role. It has — in large part
thanks to the PBSO — invested considerable effort to
reach out to the United Nations system, particularly the
Security Council and other international organizations,
such as the World Bank and the African Development
Bank. Considerable progress has been achieved, and
my view is that development banks are taking a more
active role in peacebuilding. Those factors must be
exploited to the fullest possible extent.
Thirdly, with direct reference to my previous point,
the relationship between the Security Council and the
PBC is crucial. Regular exchanges between the two
bodies, whether through open debates such as today’s,
or more informal exchanges such as the dialogue
organized by Colombia in July, are very useful.
We are convinced that the Peacebuilding
Commission can bring added value to the Council’s
discussions. In particular, it can serve as a safety net
for fragile countries that are not the immediate focus
of the Council’s attention but that nonetheless require a
degree of support. The fact that the PBC closely follows
the countries on its agenda allows Council members
to concentrate their efforts on other, more pressing
situations. In return, on the other hand, the PBC needs
the Council’s full support along with swift and flexible
access to it in the event of a sudden deterioration on the
ground.
To conclude, I reiterate our belief that the challenges
of peacebuilding should be urgently addressed and that
the United Nations has an important role to play in that
regard. We will continue to fully support efforts to that
end and stand ready to contribute our share.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned

12-65917

Movement on this important agenda item. I would like
at the outset to thank you, Sir, for organizing this open
debate. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Ambassador Momen, Permanent Representative of
Bangladesh and Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for his tireless efforts and for his statement.
The Non-Aligned Movement stresses once again
its principled positions concerning post-conflict
peacebuilding activities, as contained in the outcome
document of the sixteenth Summit of Heads of States
or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in
Iran in August.
The 2009 report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) established an agenda for strengthening
the United Nations response to peacebuilding
challenges and for facilitating an earlier and more
coherent response by the international community.
Since then, several steps have been taken by the United
Nations and the broad range of relevant actors to
restore sustainable peace in countries emerging from
conflict, as reflected in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2012/746). Nonetheless, we must recognize
that much remains to be done to address the overall
challenges of peacebuilding and to intensify the nexus
between peace and development. In that regard, the
Movement would like to stress several points.
First, peacebuilding is continuously evolving.
Much remains to be learned in order to devise the
right policies and to identify an appropriate sequence
of priorities that fully respond to the specifics of each
local context. It is also necessary to take into account
the multidimensionality of conflict situations and their
changing nature, which requires a keen eye for the
multifaceted root causes of conflicts.
It is also important to further leverage our collective
peacebuilding effort to guarantee more coordinated
and coherent actions on the ground. That also requires
the United Nations to maintain its central role in
identifying a common vision of peacebuilding and in
forging a closer partnership with all relevant actors, for
the well-being of people emerging from conflicts.
Second, the Movement would like to reiterate
that all peacebuilding initiatives and planning should
be based on the principles of national ownership
and benefit from timely, predictable and sustainable
financing. We also maintain our position that there
can be no lasting and sustainable peace without

35

S/PV.6897

development. The importance of economic recovery
and the development dimension in the peacebuilding
process therefore hardly needs reiteration.
Third, with regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
the Movement believes that the Commission indeed
constitutes a platform for a coordinated, coherent
and integrated institutional mechanism to address the
special needs of countries emerging from conflict.
We also reiterate the central role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in providing the United Nations with
policy guidance and strategies in its post-conflict
peacebuilding activities. In that regard, the PBC should
give special attention to the need to develop national
capacities and further institution-building through
the appropriate mechanisms and with the requisite
financial and technical resources.
We endorse the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report encouraging the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission to build on the
important elements that emerged from the debate and
interactive dialogue held in July 2012, and encouraging
the Council to continue to articulate the advice that
it requires from the Commission, including during
mandate discussions. Moreover, we would like to
emphasize that institutional relations between the PBC
and the General Assembly, as well as with the Economic
and Social Council, should also be further promoted.
We would like also to underline the need for the PBC
to develop multiple forms of engagement appropriate
to the specific circumstances of different countries on
a case-by-case basis and to their evolving needs, as
well as to fully exert its preventive role in avoiding a
relapse into conflict. Moreover, we had hoped that the
Secretary-General’s report would further elaborate on
how the respective roles and responsibilities of the PBC
and United Nations actors in the field could be further
clarified in order to enable the PBC to fully exercise its
mandate.
Fourth, turning to the part of the report on women
and peacebuilding, the Movement underlines the need
to alleviate the challenges faced by women and girls
in post-conflict situations and to strengthen their
effective participation in the peacebuilding process.
The potential contribution that women can make to the
peace process hardly needs reiteration. In that regard,
the Movement appreciates the ongoing efforts of the
Secretary-General to ensure women’s participation in
and the availability of gender expertise to the peace

36

process, and emphasizes that women are crucial
partners in shoring up the three pillars of lasting
peace: economic recovery, social cohesion and political
legitimacy.
Fifth, we believe that the priority areas contained
in the 2009 report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict should remain the same. In
that context, we stress the need to reinforce the
inclusiveness of the peacebuilding process and national
reconciliation in order for all national actors to be in a
position to meaningfully engage in the peacebuilding
process. The active participation of all national actors,
including marginalized groups, may ease the situation
and contribute significantly to ensuring national
ownership in achieving peacebuilding goals through a
common vision of national development. The full and
effective participation of women can further strengthen
the process.
Sixth, we reiterate that national ownership is a
fundamental principle for reviewing civilian capacities.
The Movement reaffirms the importance of existing
civilian capacity within the developing world, and
expresses its readiness to support national capacitydevelopment and institution-building in support of
peacebuilding activities in post-conflict situations, as
well as enhanced regional, South-South and triangular
cooperation. We would like also to underline the need
to involve the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Fifth Committee, which will
continue to play a key role in the consideration of the
review of civilian capacities, given its administrative
and budgetary implications.
Seventh, as underlined by the Secretary-General’s
report, the rebuilding of national institutions requires
sustained international political and financial support.
Headquarters must ensure the ability to undertake these
tasks in the field. In this connection, while emphasizing
the necessity to ensure the sustainability of funding
for countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, we express our concern regarding the lack
of coordination and coherence among financial donors
resulting in duplication and redundancy in particular
areas and the neglect of other catalytic projects. In this
regard, we call for the setup of a mechanism within the
PBC to review, within each country configuration, ways
and means to ensure the unity of efforts by donors, in
close collaboration with host countries.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

In conclusion, the Movement reiterates once
again its full commitment to share its inputs and
to constructively engage in future discussions on
peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abdullah (Malaysia): I wish to extend my
sincere congratulations to you, Sir, and your country,
the Kingdom of Morocco, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I also wish to align
Malaysia with the statement made by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for the preparation of the report contained
in document S/2012/746, entitled “Peacebuilding in
the aftermath of conflict”. My delegation welcomes
the report, its findings and conclusions. The report
is an invaluable reference on progress related to
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict. In this
regard, my delegation wishes to share some pertinent
views that Malaysia sees as important in relation to the
report.
Countries in transition from conflict have to
endure many challenges emanating from within and
outside their territory. Experience has proven that a
Government emerging from conflict and embarking on
institution-building, reconstruction and nation-building
will require the support of the international community.
Such reinforcement provides these countries with the
needed assistance to successfully leave conflict behind.
Navigating these challenges will determine the success
or failure of transition from conflict to peace.
Nation-building programmes and Government
reform cannot be imposed by external entities. Instead,
such sensitive political reform and nation-building
efforts must be inclusive and have strong national
ownership. This is important, as Governments of
countries emerging from conflict have the experience
and legal mandate to lead change for the nation. As
such, national ownership requires United Nations
peacebuilding efforts to play a supporting role in
nation-building and reform. Such partnership would
help to ensure sustainable peace in the country.
However, given that the challenges differ from country
to country, Malaysia shares a similar perspective on
the need to develop principles and guidelines in the
development of national capacity-building programmes.

12-65917

Another pertinent issue in successful transition
experience is a strong national capacity-building
programme, which must be developed under a
coordinated peacebuilding programme. My delegation
wishes to underscore the importance of the various
fields of expertise, including justice, law enforcement,
institution-building, economic development and
inclusive social development programmes, which
are needed when assisting countries emerging from
conflict. In this regard, we stress the importance of
partnership with countries that have experienced
conflict as a source of potential providers of expertise
and partnership in the development of programmes and
module.
Countries emerging from conflict cannot be
successfully assisted without adequate financial
resources. Malaysia welcomes the pledges made
during the recent annual stakeholders meeting of the
Peacebuilding Fund. We share the view that continued
financial support is as important as political will in
successfully moving to peace. Recent peacebuilding
experience has shown that a successful recovery
of countries from conflict requires prolonged and
continued international financial support. While the
timeframe may differ, countries emerging from conflict
may require international support for up to 15 years or
until such time as their national institutions can fulfil
domestic needs in achieving political and economic
stability.
Malaysia wishes to reiterate the importance of
the role played by the Peacebuilding Commission
in developing strategies for peacebuilding, resource
mobilization and civilian capacity, which are central to
the success of peacebuilding initiatives. My delegation
believes that peacebuilding strategies must emphasize
the inclusion of civilian experts as the central pillar
in nation-building and institutional and economic
developments. While peacekeeping seeks to improve
security and stability, peacebuilding encompasses a
wider field in improving human security, economic
development, employment and nation-building.
An example of such experience can be seen in
South-East Asia. Malaysia has been actively involved in
facilitating talks between the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front and the Government of the Philippines. Since
2002, Malaysia has contributed observers, including
military, police and civilians experts, in the southern
Philippines. We welcome the recent signing of a
framework agreement on 15 October between the

37

S/PV.6897

Government of the Philippines and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front. Through the concept of moderation
and constructive engagement, Malaysia will continue
to apply such important values and principle in its
approach in peacebuilding.
Malaysia is of the view that the development of
human capital is an essential element of peacebuilding.
As a member of the Guinea configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Malaysia plays host to over
300 Guinean students at various Malaysian universities.
Malaysia has been involved in the creation of
employment opportunities in Guinea, with investments
in the financial sector and direct participation
in Guinea’s construction industry. Malaysia has
continued to provide training and technical assistance
in developing an inclusive national development
programme in Guinea. So far, 81 Guinean officials
have benefited under various human development
programmes conducted under the auspices of the
Malaysian Technical Cooperation Programme since
1993.
Malaysia has been an active participant in
international security and peacebuilding initiatives.
Malaysia is of the view that assisting countries
emerging from conflict entails the need for a welldeveloped peacebuilding strategy. We look forward to
further contributing to the work on and development
of peacebuilding strategies, development initiatives
and the building of civilian capacities in support of
countries in transition to peace.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
Mr. Vrailas.
Mr. Vrailas: I speak on behalf of the Europan
Union (EU) and its member States. The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and Serbia;
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, Armenia and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, allow me to congratulate the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Momen, on his leadership as Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) over the past 12 months.
Today’s debate represents a very good opportunity
to take stock of the efforts and results achieved over the
past years in the peacebuilding realm. In this context,

38

let me start by putting one question forward: Are the
United Nations and the international community better
equipped today, compared to three years ago, to face
the multifaceted challenges of peacebuilding?
The answer, coming directly from the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/746) of October 8, is
yes. However, it is clear that there is still a long way
to go. The report indicates areas where achievements
have been accomplished in enhancing efforts to build
lasting peace in post-conflict countries. Examples
include accountability of United Nations leaders;
deployment of senior leadership, field staff and experts;
working within integrated strategic frameworks;
partnerships with the international community; and
institution-building expertise.
However, the report also provides a frank assessment
of the shortcomings and points out the critical
areas where further work is required. These include
gender-responsive planning, women’s engagement in
peacebuilding and governance, and economic recovery.
Tackling the challenges presented by post-conflict
peacebuilding is an ongoing effort that requires the
continuing commitment and coordinated and integrated
efforts of all parties involved. While the United Nations
is the most relevant entity capable of supporting the
recovery of post-conflict countries, it cannot do so
exclusively on its own. The United Nations must
continue to align with its partners — including Member
States, national counterparts, regional organizations
and civil society actors — to collaboratively leverage
their skills and expertise to ensure progress. All
this must be done under the overarching principle of
national ownership.
The European Union and its member States stand
ready to play their role. The Lisbon Treaty has, for
the first time, explicitly enshrined as one of the key
objectives of the EU’s external action to preserve peace,
prevent conflicts and strengthen international security,
in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.
The EU is heavily involved in peacebuilding and
has a wide array of external policies, instruments and
tools — diplomacy, development cooperation, actions
under the Common Foreign and Security Policy and
the Common Security and Defence Policy, among
others — aimed at assisting in addressing the challenges
presented by it. Our effectiveness in pursuing the
complex task of building peace depends not only on

12-65917

S/PV.6897

our ability to define the right mix of such policies,
instruments and tools, but also to adopt comprehensive
approaches to the assignment and ensure overall
consistency.
The European Union is already cooperating with the
United Nations on peacebuilding efforts. The SecretaryGeneral’s report acknowledges some of these examples,
such as the United Nations-EU Partnership on Natural
Resources and Conflict Prevention, a project that seeks
to improve reporting on peacebuilding assistance in
Liberia; the EU-UN-Women partnership on promoting
women and peace and security; EU assistance to the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on
insider mediation; and regular contact with United
Nations counterparts working on conflict prevention
and peacebuilding issues, principally the UNDP and
the United Nations Department for Political Affairs.
In the same vein, the European Union supports
strongly the civilian capacity initiative. As the report
of the Secretary-General states, the initiative will apply
across the various responses of the United Nations
system. We encourage the United Nations system to
continue to work in finding the optimal ways to be
more nimble, responsive and innovative in post-conflict
situations.
The European Union and its member States are eager
to continue to pursue their peacebuilding efforts in the
following three areas: the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Peacebuilding Fund, the New Deal for
International Engagement in Fragile States, and women
in peacebuilding. On the PBC, we have been a firm
supporter from the outset, and we remain determined to
help that body realize its maximum potential. We share
the view of the Secretary-General that the PBC should
continue to explore lighter and more flexible forms of
engagement. The PBC should better coordinate and
support various United Nations and national actors in
the field. These changes would allow the PBC to add
greater value to Security Council decision-making and
thereby strengthen the relationship between the two
bodies.
The Peacebuilding Fund is an integral part of the
United Nations peacebuilding structure. It is a nimble
funding mechanism strongly supported by many
European Union member States.
On the New Deal, we will further enhance our
support, particularly through development aid, and
sustain the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding

12-65917

and Statebuilding and the Group of Seven Plus fragile
countries in piloting the New Deal, bearing in mind
the need to prepare post-2015 contexts. We call for
synergies between the PBC and the New Deal to be
utilized so that work efforts are not duplicated and
synergies are maximized.
On women in peacebuilding, we will continue to
advance women’s role in promoting peace and security.
Last year, the Security Council reported that women’s
participation in conflict resolution remained too low.
Of the nine peace agreements signed since 2011, only
two have provisions ensuring women’s rights. We need
to ensure women’s participation in all stages of peace
processes, and from early on. This will help guarantee
the inclusion of women’s rights and perspectives in the
later stages of the peace process.
Women’s absence from formal peace negotiations
results in their absence from bodies that are instrumental
in laying the foundations for a new, post-conflict
society, such as political decision-making bodies,
constitutional and legislative reform commissions, and
truth and reconciliation bodies. The European Union
and its member States are firmly behind resolution 1325
(2000) and fully support setting concrete targets in the
areas of women’s equal participation in the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security, and for the
mainstreaming of gender perspectives into confl ict
prevention, peace negotiations, peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and post-confl ict reconstruction.
To conclude, the international community cannot
fail to meet the challenge of supporting post-conflict
countries in building lasting peace. The United Nations,
with its global legitimacy, and in close partnership and
coordination with the main actors, has a central role
to play. The European Union and its member States
remain resolutely determined actively to support these
collective efforts to better assist countries in building
sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French) I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Sweden associates itself
with the statement just made by the observer of the
European Union.
We thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate, and the Secretary-General for his report in
document S/2012/746. We agree that progress has been
made. However, the international community must

39

S/PV.6897

continue to enhance its ability effectively to manage
the building of peace. Let me point to three challenges
Sweden sees in this regard.
The first is to ensure a well-coordinated response
from the international community. We note with
interest the new policy on United Nations transitions
in the context of mission drawdown or withdrawal.
Successful implementation will require early planning,
jointly conducted by United Nations actors and host
nation counterparts, in order to ensure smooth transition
at all stages.
That the United Nations is delivering as one is one
important key in achieving a smooth transition, but
it is not enough. Sweden would like to emphasize the
importance of other aspects such as focusing on the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework on
peacebuilding priorities; ensuring that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts work in tandem; and ensuring
that the United Nations system as a whole finds ways to
coordinate more closely with the international financial
institutions (IFIs) and bilateral partners, not least in
regard to ensuring and mobilizing predictable and
sustainable funding.
The second challenge is ensuring a strengthened
dialogue with and support to the host country through a
joint compact. The international community will serve
the host country best if it can ensure a sustained and
common message on key issues. The establishment
in the country configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) of so-called statements of mutual
commitments has proved to be a useful tool for
dialogue and joint guidance. Equally, the New Deal
for International Engagement in Fragile States and
its compacts offer an excellent opportunity for the
host country to elaborate a basis for joint efforts with
bilateral partners, IFIs and the United Nations system.
This will help to further national ownership, promote
the use of national financial systems, and link security
and peacebuilding priorities to financial sustainability,
transparency and the fight against corruption. In setting
up such instruments of mutual commitments, we
should build on existing experiences, ensure alignment
with national priorities, and avoid duplication or
parallel reporting. One common basis for dialogue,
commitments and reporting should be the aim.
The third challenge relates to the importance of
inclusivity. Sweden welcomes the focus on inclusivity
in the Secretary-General’s report — an aspect that is

40

key to dealing not only with reconciliation after violent
conflict, but also with the root causes of conflicts. It
is particularly important that we take a harder look at
the way natural resources and land issues are handled,
the role of extractive industries, adherence to the rule
of law, and how revenues are collected and used for the
common good.
The report sensibly suggests that United Nations
entities should ensure that factors contributing to
marginalization should be identified early and addressed
in peacebuilding strategies. Sweden’s heavy engagement
in Liberia, bilaterally and by means of chairing the PBC
Liberia configuration, aims at supporting inclusivity,
reconciliation and decentralization efforts. Moreover,
the justice and security hubs in Liberia funded by the
Peacebuilding Fund will also help to provide services
and a governmental presence throughout the whole
country.
We also support the emphasis in the SecretaryGeneral’s report on enhancing efforts on gender.
Regional cooperation can support this, as is shown by
the regional dialogue on enhancing women’s leadership
in peace and security in West Africa, organized
recently by the United Nations Mission in Liberia in
collaboration with other United Nations missions in
the region. The recommendations were clear — to
enhance the role of women in peacebuilding efforts, in
particular as mediators, including in peace missions of
the Economic Community of West African States.
On the more structural side of our work in regard
to peacebuilding, Sweden supports increased regular
interaction between the PBC and the Security Council.
We should build on the interactive dialogues of the past
year. The Security Council could be more specific in
seeking advice from the PBC, including in the context
of peacekeeping mandate renewals.
At the same time, we would invite the PBC for its
part to further demonstrate the specific contributions it
can make to the deliberations of the Security Council
and the United Nations system as a whole. In the end,
the effectiveness of the PBC will and must be measured
in terms of its impact at the country level. To achieve
impact, enhanced linkages to the field are crucial.
Effective support to the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General and the country teams are essential
elements in that regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Denmark.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

Mr. Laursen (Denmark): First, allow me to
underscore that Denmark aligns itself with the statement
of the European Union.
Let me start by thanking the presidency of Morocco
for having organized today’s timely debate focused on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Denmark welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746). We also wish to
thank him for his personal commitment to strengthening
the United Nations efforts towards building lasting
peace in post-conflict countries.
It is vital that we continue to strengthen the
United Nations peacebuilding capabilities, and that the
United Nations deliver timely, coherent and integrated
support to nationally owned and led processes. In
our view, the key to success lies in delivering actual
concrete results on the ground that are inclusive and
demand-driven. Ownership and leadership of the kind
demonstrated by the Group of Seven Plus is noteworthy
and should be encouraged. In this respect, partnerships
of all interested parties — including the international
financial institutions, civil society and the private
sector — are all crucial to ensuring long-term stability,
maximizing consistency and avoiding overlap.
The Secretary-General’s report outlines how the
implementation of the 2009 agenda has enabled the
United Nations to provide “a more coherent, timely
and effective response to immediate post-conflict
priorities” (S/2012/746, para. 2). This is a welcome
development and one that needs further focus and
attention over a wide range of interrelated issues that
the United Nations system faces on a daily basis.
The report also acknowledges a number of
areas where progress has been less impressive. It
is of significant interest to Denmark that progress
continue towards promoting and increasing the active
participation of women in peacebuilding, governance
and economic recovery. Denmark firmly supports
resolution 1325 (2000) and the setting of concrete
targets so as to ensure women’s equal participation in
the promotion of peace and security.
Post-conflict peacebuilding is increasingly high
on our collective international agenda, and with good
reason. No post-conflict or fragile country has achieved
any of the Millennium Development Goals. The
United Nations plays a central role in addressing this
complex and pressing issue. To this end, Denmark has
been a strong supporter of a more ambitious and more

12-65917

effective United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
and Denmark is ready to deliver.
Denmark hopes to become a member of the
Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2013. As highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, the Peacebuilding Commission should
continue to strengthen its political support to countries
emerging from conflict in order to foster greater
coherence among funds and initiatives and to mobilize
international support.
Furthermore, Denmark supports the work of
the Peacebuilding Fund. The Fund provides crucial,
timely and gap-filling financial support during
critical transition moments. Consequently, Denmark
has recently decided to renew its financial support
by providing a new contribution of 50 million Danish
kroner — some $8.6 million — for the years 2012-2014.
It is our conviction that one of the key ingredients
in a successful integrated approach to post-conflict
peacebuilding involves quick and hassle-free
deployment of civilian capacity, whether within the
United Nations system or beyond. Allow me on this
occasion to reaffirm Denmark’s support, including
through substantial financial support, for the
Secretary-General’s civilian capacity initiative and the
team working diligently on furthering this important
work. Denmark welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict
(S/2011/527), and encourages further progress on this
central aspect of post-conflict stabilization efforts.
As co-Chair of the International Dialogue on
Peacebuilding and Statebuilding, Denmark would
like to encourage the United Nations system to bring
even greater focus to the New Deal for International
Engagement in Fragile States when working with
conflict-affected and fragile countries. The Steering
Group of the International Dialogue met earlier this
week in Juba, South Sudan, and confirmed a strong
focus on the implementation of the New Deal in pilot
countries in coming years. The real challenge is in
many ways to create a strong and lasting partnership
at the country level. The United Nations has a key role
to play in this regard. The ambition is to build peace
and stronger States in some of the world’s poorest and
most fragile nations, and the New Deal can make a real
difference in that respect by supporting country-owned
and country-led processes out of fragility.

41

S/PV.6897

Fragile States are those furthest from reaching
the Millennium Development Goals. This is not
sustainable. Denmark believes we should draw upon the
work of the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding
and Statebuilding, including the peacebuilding and
State-building goals, and work to ensure that a new
development framework post-2015 recognizes that
peace, security and development are interconnected.
In conclusion, Denmark is committed to doing its
part. We will, in coming years, further scale up our
support to and cooperation with fragile States, and
Denmark will continue to give full support to the work
of the Secretary-General in this respect.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate on postconflict peacebuilding. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks, and express my
appreciation to Ambassador Momen, Chairperson of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for his useful
intervention.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
We commend the Secretary-General and his team
for the progress made on what is a dynamic and difficult
global agenda of helping conflict-affected countries
navigate their way towards peace and development.
Yet, a more intensive and constant effort by the United
Nations and the international community is required
to deepen the impact on the ground and strengthen the
capacities and institutions of countries so that they can
consolidate peace effectively.
My delegation is heartened to learn that there
has been significant progress in the context of the
implementation of the 2009 Agenda for Action in
peacebuilding and, more modestly, the seven-point
action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/746), post-conflict countries often continue
to experience instability years after the end of armed
conflict, with high levels of relapse into violence.
That situation is one of deep concern. The success of
post-conflict countries depends predominantly on the
quality of their nationally identified, owned and driven
peacebuilding. At the same time, this quality in large

42

measure depends on the support of a robust, responsive
global peacebuilding architecture.
Indonesia is thus pleased that the Peacebuilding
Commission, as a key entity in global peacebuilding,
has been making important strides to advance postconflict issues and make the support to its agenda
countries more coherent and sustainable. Indonesia
fully supports the United Nations peacebuilding
agenda in post-conflict countries and will continue
to support the work of and vital role played by the
Peacebuilding Commission, on which Indonesia serves
as a member. While concurring with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations to the PBC, I wish to make
the following additional observations.
First, the emphasis placed throughout the report
on advancing the national ownership principle is
very important. We also welcome the Security
Council’s reaffirmation of this principle in its newly
adopted presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/29). As
underscored by President Yudhoyono in his remarks
in September this year (see A/67/PV.6), the sense
of ownership in peacebuilding is critical. We have
to ensure that when we are supporting countries’
peacebuilding efforts, we get to know the needs and
aspirations of all stakeholders better. In order to foster
ownership, nationally identified priorities must be the
blueprint of international support. Indonesia supports
the Secretary-General’s observation concerning the
need for the PBC to strengthen its strategy of promoting
coherence and the alignment of donors with national
peacebuilding plans.
Secondly, effective peacebuilding is one that
unlocks the potential for economic progress and
development. To that end, the assistance of the United
Nations system and relevant bilateral, regional and
multilateral partners is crucial. In order to adequately
assist post-conflict countries, the multi-sourced
international support framework necessitates close
coordination and collaboration among its actors. The
PBC’s recommendations in this regard can play a vital
role. We also believe that the support framework requires
a more transparent and accountable process. Indonesia
can testify to the significance of this, particularly given
its experience of engagement in the context of bringing
peace to Aceh after decades of conflict there.
Thirdly, I should like us to continue to explore
all available avenues in garnering support. My
delegation is heartened that the Secretary-General has

12-65917

S/PV.6897

also encouraged the Commission to engage with the
foundations and the private sector. As some may be
aware, in 2008 Indonesia facilitated a PBC policy task
force on partnering with traditional and non-traditional
private sectors. Some of the recommendations made in
its outcome document are reflected in the 2012 PBC
road map of action and will, it is hoped, serve to broaden
the base for resources and partnerships in post-conflict
peacebuilding.
Fourthly, we fully support the call on the Security
Council and the PBC to build on debates and interactive
dialogues such as this. Timely advice and views from
the PBC to the Council enrich the Council’s actions.
The valuable knowledge and insights developed by
the PBC and Peacebuilding Support Office should be
drawn on by other principal and subsidiary organs,
as well as United Nations agencies and departments.
We should not be hesitant to draw on the advantages
offered by each.
Fifthly, Indonesia supports the United Nations
focus on enhancing the participation of women in
peacebuilding. We commend the Security Council
for adopting the landmark resolution 1325 (2000). We
expect that the seven-point action plan for genderresponsive peacebuilding will be implemented tangibly.
Indonesia is determined to furthering the participation
of women in post-conflict peacebuilding at home, in
the region and at the international level.
The increased participation of women in
peacebuilding must go beyond fulfilling quotas, and
should also focus on bolstering capacity-building
support for women’s participation, particularly in
developing countries. In this context, we also stress
the importance of drawing on the available capacities
of women civilian experts of the global South in the
United Nations global civilian capacities system
currently being developed.
As the world’s third largest democracy, which
has traversed its own transition to a well-functioning
democratic State, Indonesia bears witness to the
different challenges and opportunities in building peace.
We have directly seen the fruit of national capacity
development. We have achieved major national reforms,
including in the rule of law, governance, human rights,
political processes, elections, media development, civil
society and women’s participation.
Finally, I should like to reiterate Indonesia’s
unwavering support for the PBC in helping it to

12-65917

undertake robust and responsive actions to the needs of
affected countries.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): My delegation wishes to
express its profound appreciation to the delegation
of Morocco for its initiative in convening this timely
debate. It is proper that the international focus be
directed at mechanisms being employed to ensure
durable peace in countries emerging from conflict.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comments
and appreciate the report that has provided the basis
for our discussion today (S/2012/746). We also thank
Ambassador Abulkalam Momen for his briefing.
Today’s debate once again provides an opportunity
to assess the progress of and challenges to our
collective efforts to support peace and socio-economic
development, as well as prefer strategies to assist
countries emerging from conflict. Long before the
inception of the Peacebuilding Commission, Nigeria
undertook efforts to support post-conflict peacebuilding
in various countries in Africa. The lessons from those
experiences underline our deep concern that the scale
and scope of the new forms of conflict, and the everpresent risk of relapse, are outpacing our collective
ability to respond effectively to it.
Recent developments and daunting challenges in
the post-conflict recovery process have underscored
the fact that peacebuilding requires a more integrated
approach encompassing political inclusiveness,
security, economic development, gender empowerment
and participation, human rights and the rule of law,
complementarities and coherence among the various
actors and partners. Indeed, a comprehensive approach
to peacebuilding requires partnership, consistency and
coherence among the various actors.
Our individual and collective commitment to the
activities of the Peacebuilding Commission must be
supportive and results-oriented. The commitment of
members must extend beyond mere interests; it should
also be reflected in our desire to share experiences
and provide technical and financial contributions.
Resources and funds are very critical factors for
successful peacebuilding in countries emerging from
conflicts. Therefore, the commitment of Member
States should be reflected in their willingness to
make financial contributions, as well as to share their
experiences and provide technical assistance.

43

S/PV.6897

Nigeria commends the steps taken by the
Peacebuilding Support Office to continuously
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Peacebuilding Fund. The Peacebuilding Fund’s third
high-level stakeholders meeting of 29 November
was a huge success. That laudable effort must be
complemented by exploring other options for longerterm financing. Closely related to this is the need for
greater accountability, monitoring and evaluation of
peacebuilding projects and programmes, and to assist
countries on the peacebuilding agenda to develop a
mechanism of internal tax collection to boost their
revenue basis.
Nigeria is particularly encouraged by the
increased attention to the important role of women in
peacebuilding activities through the gender promotion
initiative. Women play a crucial role in economic
recovery, social cohesion and political legitimacy.
Best practices can be replicated in the deployment of
gender expertise in conflict and post-conflict contexts.
We therefore call for greater women’s participation in
peace and post-conflict processes.
Threats to peace have cross-border implications
and linkages, often requiring broader efforts and
mechanisms at the regional and subregional levels.
That is not only true of conflicts in West Africa,
but is the case in most regions of the world. For that
reason, we would like to emphasize the need to pay due
attention to the regional dimensions of peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding cannot be achieved using a short-term
strategy. It requires a comprehensive and integrated
strategy responsive to needs and priorities, as well
as the long-term commitment of all actors at the
national, regional and international levels. It is in this
consideration that Nigeria has endeavoured to actively
support post-conflict peacebuilding processes in the
West African subregion.
As a member of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission, we remain committed
to supporting integrated peacekeeping strategies for
sustainable peace and development. It is our fervent
hope that this debate will provide new insights on
impetus for enhancing post-conflict peacebuilding
activities. We are also determined to work in concert
with other stakeholders to make its impact positively
felt.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.

44

Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We also thank the
Secretary-General for the presentation of his report on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746)
and the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Momen, for his active involvement and his
statement.
The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses post-conflict peacebuilding reflects the
importance that the international community attaches
to the issue as a preventive tool against the recurrence
of conflict and for the establishment of sustained
security and stability, which are prerequisites for the
maintenance of peace and development. We are all
cognizant that, in different parts of the world, conflicts
still hinder the prospects of regional peace and security.
Further delay in the settlement of these conflicts not only
undermines the regional cooperation and considerably
limits the prerequisites of the peacebuilding efforts of
regional and international actors, but also constitutes a
serious security risk should they one day erupt from a
dormant condition into an active one.
Although each and every conflict and post-conflict
situation is different, a conducive environment that
leads to their individual solutions through peacebuilding
strategies is an indispensable precondition. What
we have learned throughout the long period of living
with conflict and negotiating is that we should
continue to be persistent and patient because the
alternative — destruction and chaos — is unacceptable.
Armenia remains committed to post-conflict peace
initiatives and believes that the Security Council should
further strengthen and advance development initiatives
by supporting such peacebuilding mechanisms as the
Peacebuilding Commission, which helps countries
emerging from conflicts by offering targeted advice to
their recovery, reintegration and reconstruction efforts.
In that respect, it is important that the programmes
adopted be country-specific, needs-based and targetoriented.
Effective peacebuilding requires active engagement
with local parties. That engagement should be
multidimensional in nature, involving Governments
and civil society, with a particular focus on women and
youth, whose role in post-conflict rebuilding is difficult
to underestimate. Particular attention should also be
paid to rebuilding and re-evaluating the educational
system in countries emerging from conflict.

12-65917

S/PV.6897

Moreover, all peacebuilding initiatives have to be
inclusive in order to make a demonstrable difference
in the lives of the people affected. In that regard,
we endorse the recommendations and conclusions
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. In
addition, the contributions of international financial
institutions, regional development banks and the
private sector should play a decisive role in enhancing
the coherence of peacebuilding efforts at the regional
and subregional levels.
Today the post-conflict period in our region
offers a window of opportunity to provide basic
security, deliver peace dividends, build confidence
in the political process and strengthen core national
ownership to lead peacebuilding efforts and lay
the foundations for sustainable development in the
aftermath of conflicts. The successful implementation
of this agenda requires a basic level of political will,
determination and national ownership, which are key
to establishing sustainable peace. With those political
conditions in place, the ability of the United Nations or
any other intergovernmental, regional or national actor,
including civil society, will be enhanced and supported.
Armenia therefore welcomes Morocco’s initiative
to hold this open debate, reflect on our experiences and
highlight priority aspects for united, practical action in
the coming year of 2013.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor to
Mr. António.
Mr. António: Let me start by joining others in
commending you, Mr. President, and all the members of
the Security Council for this timely initiative to organize
an open debate during your country’s presidency of the
Security Council on a very critical topic of vital interest
to the African Union (AU) and the continent as a whole.
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
and thank the outgoing members of the Security
Council for their contribution to advancing the cause of
peace and security in the world, with a special mention
of South Africa, a member of our organization, for its
contribution, along with the other African members of
the Security Council, in advancing the African agenda
in this very important body.
Africa’s vested interest in this subject matter is
substantiated by the scale and complexity of the conflicts
being witnessed on the continent today, ranging from
illicit trafficking and the flow of drugs and weapons,
transnational organized crime and wider regional

12-65917

implications. The experiences of the African Union in
its efforts to address conflict situations on the continent
have shown a direct correlation between sustainable
peace and the scaling up of post-conflict reconstruction
and peacebuilding, as well as development.
It will be recalled that the African Union adopted
a policy on Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development (PRCD) in Banjul, the Gambia, in June
2006, aimed at improving the timeliness, effectiveness
and coordination of peacebuilding activities in postconflict countries and at laying the foundation for
social justice and sustainable peace and development.
The AU PCRD policy is underpinned by five
core principles, namely, African leadership; national
and local ownership; inclusiveness, equity and
non-discrimination; cooperation and cohesion; and
capacity-building for sustainability.
The Commission has continued to work on postconflict reconstruction and development through
assessment missions to countries emerging from
conflict and through raising the awareness of partners
and Member States to permit them to provide the
required support and exchange experiences.
Moreover, in order to renew efforts aimed at postconflict reconstruction and development with a view
to consolidating peace where it has been achieved,
the African Union, in July 2012, launched the African
Solidarity Initiative, an AU-led process for mobilizing
enhanced support from within the continent for postconflict reconstruction and development in countries
emerging from conflict. The overriding objective of
the African Solidarity Initiative is to promote African
solidarity commitments in support of African mutual
reliance as part of an urgent agenda to significantly
address the magnitude of the challenges being faced
by the countries concerned in their reconstruction,
peace consolidation, recovery and development. One
overall intention is to promote a paradigm shift that
puts African self-reliance centre stage as a key force for
enhanced and effective development of the continent
driven by the motto “Africa helping Africa”.
As the continental flagship initiative, the African
Solidarity Initiative is aimed at instituting an expanded
and coordinated platform for mobilizing a higher
level of support, particularly from Africa, for postconflict reconstruction and development. Such support,
while including financial contributions, would also
target in-kind sharing of expertise, approaches, best

45

S/PV.6897

practices, training facilities, familiarization schemes
and capacity-building commitments as essential
non-monetary forms of support.

frameworks, and follow with interest the development
of a new policy on United Nations transitions in the
context of mission drawdown and withdrawal.

We at the African Union Commission are
convinced that the launch of the African Solidarity
Initiative will go a long way towards mobilizing
from within the continent’s support for African
countries emerging from conflict and consolidate and
expand intra-African cooperation and mutual selfhelp, consistent with the AU policy on post-conflict
reconstruction and development, as well as the 1975
Inter-African Convention Establishing an African
Technical Cooperation Programme.

Croatia welcomes the priorities for the upcoming
period identified in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, in particular the focus on inclusive
peacebuilding processes, institution-building and
sustained international engagement. In our view,
inclusive country-owned and country-led initiatives,
supported by the coherent, coordinated and sustainable
engagement of the international community, are vital
for States to successfully emerge from conflict.

In conclusion, we call on the international
community at large to support the Africa-led efforts I have
mentioned, aimed at building and consolidating peace
in post-conflict situations, especially those countries
on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission. In
supporting those efforts, it is important to underscore
as cornerstones the principles of complementarity and
African ownership and leadership. The success of those
efforts lies in the strong collaboration and coordination
among the Peacebuilding Commission, the AU
Commission and the regional economic communities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Mikec (Croatia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his inspiring statement
and for the report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict that we are discussing today
(S/2012/746). I would also like to thank Ambassador
Momen for his statement on behalf of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and for his able stewardship of the
Commission in 2012.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement previously
delivered by the obseraver of the European Union.
However, I would briefly like, in my national capacity,
to make a few additional comments.
Croatia welcomes the progress made in implementing
the Agenda for Action outlined in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document S/2009/304,
dated 11 June 2009. We are particularly encouraged
by his recognition of the increased effectiveness of
leadership on the ground and the improved functioning
of the funding mechanisms in support of peacebuilding
efforts. In that context, we also welcome the significant
improvements in the completion of integrated strategic

46

Croatia commends the initial progress made
towards the implementation of the seven-point action
plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding. We believe
that the equal participation of women in political,
transitional and peacebuilding processes is of crucial
importance for their comprehensive and effective
implementation. In that context, we strongly support
further efforts aimed at strengthening the position of
women in the such processes and at addressing their
specific needs as set out in the Secretary-General’s
2010 report on women’s participation in peacebuilding
(S/2010/466).
Croatia welcomes a more interactive and dynamic
relationship between the Security Council and the
PBC. We are encouraged by the recent developments in
that regard and we hope that the Council will continue
to make clear what advice it needs from the PBC,
particularly during mandate discussions. Furthermore,
we welcome the possibility of informal interaction
between the two bodies, which is a form of interaction
we find particularly rewarding.
Croatia acknowledges the work of the Group of
Seven Plus countries aimed at clearly defining the ways
by which the international partners should support
their peacebuilding processes. Croatia believes that the
New Deal principles, including national ownership and
national responsibility for commitments undertaken
and mutual accountability offer useful additional
guidance for the Commission’s engagement with the
countries on its agenda.
Croatia strongly believes that rebuilding civilian
capacities represents one of the most important fields
of assistance to countries emerging from conflict. In
that context, we closely follow the civilian capacities
initiative and its results. We stand ready to further
contribute to the broadening and deepening of the pool

12-65917

S/PV.6897

of civilian peacebuilding expertise, including through
the newly established sharing platform, CAPMATCH.
Finally, let me conclude by emphasizing the
importance that my country attaches to the efforts
aimed at greater coordination and coherence among
multiple international actors engaged in peacebuilding
processes, including the further clarification of their
respective roles and responsibilities. We strongly
believe that only through increased collaboration and,
in particular, appropriate engagement by international
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations, private-sector and non-traditional
donors, can we all maximize output and ensure effective
international engagement in post-conflict situations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Srivali (Thailand): At the outset, I would like
to express my delegation’s sincere appreciation to the
President for convening today’s important open debate
on post-conflict peacebuilding. I would also like to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission for
their important updates and contributions earlier today.
Before I begin, I would also like to align my
statement with the statement delivered today by the
Permanent Representative of Iran, who spoke on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The report of the Secretary-General on
peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (S/2012/746)
makes many insightful and critical assessments of
international peacebuilding efforts, particularly since
the last progress report issued in 2010 (S/2010/386). The
latest report notes that progress has been significant.
However, it also notes that there is much room for
improvement. It underlines the need for the United
Nations and the international community to continue
to engage sustainably. It also stresses the need to be
in tune with what countries emerging from conflict
require for building lasting peace and for avoiding
relapses into violence. My delegation shares many of
the views expressed in the report and would like to
take this opportunity to engage in the discussion by
stressing a few points that we felt particularly worthy
of reiteration.
First and foremost, we would like to join others who
have stressed the importance of the principle of national
ownership and of hastening and prioritizing economic

12-65917

recovery and inclusive development in peacebuilding
efforts. Without national ownership, countries
emerging from conflict may lack the foundation
needed to foster national leadership, which is critical
to identifying a meaningful path to sustainable and
inclusive development.
A second and related priority is timely, predictable
and sustainable financing and international support. In
the current global climate of fiscal austerity, the report
rightly mentions the need for mutual accountability
so as to reinforce sustained international support. It
also notes a promising effort to improve reporting on
peacebuilding assistance through improved data. Those
are important exercises, although we appreciate that
the report acknowledges, first and foremost, the need
to sustain international support for peacebuilding as an
essential element of social and economic development
in post-conflict countries. We are sorely aware of the
fact that conflict-affected States lag behind in their
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals,
when compared with other developing countries. It is
also our hope that the incorporation of peacebuilding
considerations into the post-2015 development agenda
will lead to more meaningful commitments in the
future.
Thirdly, my delegation believes that the
international community must continue to focus its
efforts on helping to build strong and responsive
institutions and capacities in countries emerging from
conflict. In the past, Thailand’s peacekeepers have also
served as early peacebuilders and assisted in local and
community development, sharing our best practices in
areas such as agriculture, health and water resource
management. We therefore welcome the opportunity
to explore innovative avenues to further expand our
opportunities to assist in the context of strengthening
civilian capacity in the immediate aftermath of
conflict. We feel that the global South has an important
comparative advantage in that respect and can therefore
play a role that could potentially have a great impact
on helping to further consolidate peace in that manner.
Last but not least, we also look forward to further
gains on the part of the international community and
the United Nations system itself in the context of
women’s participation in peacebuilding in general and
in conflict resolution processes in particular. Here,
the role of women and the inclusion of gender-relevant
issues will be critical in laying the strong foundations
needed for an inclusive society and sustainable and

47

S/PV.6897

inclusive development. In that connection, we also
take a keen interest in the mention in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of the drafting of minimum standards
for gender-responsive transitional justice mechanisms
and guidance concerning reparations for victims of
conflict-related sexual violence. We look forward to
receiving more information from the relevant United
Nations entities involved in those efforts.
As with any worthwhile endeavour, post-conflict
peacebuilding requires sustained focus, attention
and commitment from all of the parties involved.
Continued discussions and debates like this one can
only help to clarify roles and responsibilities and
enhance the coordination of efforts in general and
between pivotal actors such as the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission in particular. They
also enhance partnerships with the wider international
community aimed at taking potentially meaningful
initiatives forward. We will continue to share our
input in that regard and, together with the international
community, continue to seek ways to fulfil what we
view as our common responsibility to assist countries
emerging from conflict to consolidate peace and
prevent further conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting to discuss the topic of post-conflict
peacebuilding. I am confident that our deliberations
today will contribute greatly to the discussion of one
of the most important items on the Security Council’s
agenda. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable comments.
In January 2011, during its presidency of the
Security Council, Bosnia and Herzegovina held a
debate on post-conflict institution-building (see
S/PV.6472). The focus of the debate was the importance
of national ownership and building national capacity,
including resilient institutions, issues that were seen
as core issues for a successful peacebuilding process.
In line with the Secretary-General’s 2009 agenda and
the 2010 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture (S/2010/393), the presidential statement
contained in document S/PRST/2011/2 requested an
impact assessment regarding the issue of contributing to
building viable institutions in post-conflict countries, as
well as recommendations to improve the effectiveness

48

of the United Nations contribution to more effective,
stable and sustainable institutions that can help prevent
relapses into conflict.
Almost two years after the debate, we are pleased
to see that institution-building, along with inclusivity
and sustained international support, are among the
central topics of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2012/746). Many concrete recommendations and
various developments resulted from the debate on
institution-building and a few other debates in the
Security Council on the issue of peacebuilding.
Inclusivity and institution-building are critical in
preventing relapses into violent conflict. Furthermore,
they are vital for domestic accountability systems and
are a more reliable base for the engagement of a State
with the international community. Only a viable State
with strong structures will contribute to peace and
stability and be able to avoid a return to conflict.
Dialogue with national actors in the earliest stages
of peacebuilding is a conditio sine qua non for the
success of early peacebuilding efforts. That process
needs to be open, creative and transformative. It must
include all relevant decision-makers who can contribute
to post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery efforts.
Rebuilding and transforming the functionality
of country systems is essential primarily for a good
transition from conflict, but also for the drawdown or
closing of peacekeeping missions and peacebuilding
offices. It is clear that the international community
should invest more in strengthening its tools in that
area. Finally, in order to improve that process, suitable,
well-designed and practical accountability mechanisms
must be in place. Early and substantial results need to
be achieved through the restoration of core Government
functions and delivery of services. In that way, balanced
long-term support for the process of institution-building
can be attained.
Maintaining and developing partnerships for
rebuilding institutions and sustainable peace requires
constant and stable international political and financial
support. In that context, we emphasize the importance
of mutual accountability. Balanced partnerships
between donors and recipient Governments are
a prerequisite for ensuring long-term and lasting
results and securing investments in peacekeeping
or peacebuilding processes. The development of
relevant national peacebuilding capacities is critical
to ensuring an effective and sustainable handover of

12-65917

S/PV.6897

mission responsibility to host countries. In that regard,
the donors need to develop flexible, risk-tolerant
approaches, because the risk of inaction may outweigh
the risks associated with action.

Belarus aligns itself with the statement delievered
earlier by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.

The interaction between the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission should be continued in
a more practical and sustained manner, which assumes
the continuation of dialogue and a better articulation
of the advice and analysis that the Council may receive
from the Commission, especially during mandate
discussions.

We consider peacebuilding to be an important factor
that has a direct impact on settling conflicts, reducing
the level of instability and ensuring post-conflict
stability. The United Nations has garnered significant
and unique experience in the area of peacebuilding,
which is being successfully used in various regions of
the world. At the same time, the process of emerging
from conflict, establishing controls over domestic
State procedures related to the law and order sector
and making changes to the internal security situation
of States is an extremely complex process, and it
is comprehensive and multifaceted in nature. That
significantly complicates peacebuilding efforts.

Institution-building as a central pillar of sustainable
peace was reinforced by the World Bank’s World
Development Report 2011 and the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development’s guidance
to donors on supporting State-building in situations
of conflict and fragility. The Group of Seven Plus
conflict-affected countries are working on their efforts
to implement the New Deal for engagement in fragile
States, which emphasizes the importance of, and respect
for, national priorities in funding peacebuilding efforts.
The United Nations civilian capacities initiative
aims at strengthening support for nationally owned
institution-building. Bosnia and Herzegovina actively
participates in the initiative, including through the
online platform CAPMATCH, and stands ready to
provide our first-hand experience in areas where
we have a comparative advantage, knowledge and
experience.
As noted in the Secretary-General’s report,
institutional support and capacity development are not
quick fixes. Reforms can be detrimental if implemented
too quickly, without national ownership or prematurely
by authorities that lack legitimacy. Therefore, we can
and need to do more in order to transform the mixed
record in this area into success stories.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I would
like to express my gratitude to the delegation of Morocco,
acting as President of the Council, for convening this
important open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, as well
as to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh for
his statement.

12-65917

The year 2005 saw the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) to address a whole
range of peacebuilding tasks. In the short period
since then, it has made substantive progress in its
work in organizing the peacebuilding process and
in dealing with a number of complex tasks. At the
same time, as noted today by the Chairperson of the
PBC, the Commission still has a lot to do. We hope
that the Commission will continue to improve its
work in organizing peacebuilding and strengthening
cooperation with other entities through its efforts to
find effective peacebuilding paths forward.
As was already mentioned today, it is important
to strengthen the institutional links between the PBC
and the Security Council, the General Assembly and
the Economic and Social Council. Furthermore, it
is necessary to establish closer partnerships with
the relevant countries and international financial
institutions, such as the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the African Development Bank.
A key element necessary in enhancing peacebuilding
activities is to establish clearer coordination, coherence
and cooperation among various United Nations agencies
and offices, both in New York and in those countries
receiving post-conflict support and assistance. Given
the limited resources available, it seems to us that
that could enhance effectiveness and delivery. We
believe that the greatest impact from post-conflict
peacebuilding can only be achieved on the basis of full
respect for the sovereignty of the countries concerned.
States in post-conflict phases are responsible for

49

S/PV.6897

ensuring peacebuilding in their territories. However, a
comprehensive, coordinated and targeted approach is
needed in that effort, taking into account the different
domestic conditions in the countries involved.
We note with satisfaction the increased attention
to the status of women in conflict-affected countries
and in States undergoing post-conflict peacebuilding.
As the representative of a State that is actively involved
in addressing human trafficking, I should like to draw
attention to the fact that the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, adopted by
consensus by the General Assembly, calls for human
trafficking to be incorporated into broader United
Nations strategies and programmes in order to address
issues that also include the post-conflict recovery
period. I believe that serious attention should be given
to that aspect during the development of various
peacebuilding programmes.
As this is the last open debate of 2012, I would like
to take the opportunity to wish everyone the best for the
forthcoming year.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Senegal.
Mr. Diallo (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
commends your initiative, Mr. President, in convening
this debate on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict.
It is as important to address this challenge as it is to put
an end to situations of open hostility. Allow me, on this
occasion, to reiterate my warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council and,
at the same time, to commend the skillful way in which
your predecessor, Ambassador Majeev Singh Puri,
guided this body in the month of November. No one has
any doubt that, as we take stock, the Council has done
useful work under the wise leadership of Morocco, a
friendly country whose contribution to peace in Africa
is well known and appreciated by all. I would therefore
like to assure you, Sir, that my delegation will always
be ready to support you for in pursuit of a resounding
success to your presidency.
The topic that brings us together today places the
Council at the very heart of the issue of the viability
and sustainability of peacekeeping in the world.
Through this debate, therefore, we are called upon to
look at the tools that could be utilized to ensure that
lasting peace takes hold in countries emerging from
conflict. As recalled by the World Bank in its World
Development Report 2011, 90 per cent of conflicts

50

between 2000 and 2009 occurred in countries where
civil war had already taken place. That alarming fact
leads us to take a critical look at the factors that might
explain the relapse into conflict. The factors differ,
depending on whether they arise from an unfavourable
international context or from an unstable internal
situation. The impact of trans-border situations and the
presence of international criminal groups can therefore
contribute to bringing about an unfavourable climate
for transitions, which are often already fragile.
Equally, the lack of consensus on the political
process, discrimination or social inequalities, added
to the dramatic impact of the economic situation, can
provide fertile ground for the resurgence of crisis
situations. Post-conflict peacebuilding would therefore
seem to be less effective and efficient in conflict
reduction than prevention of conflict in the first place.
Success in such a volatile phase of peacebuilding
more often than not requires that multiple needs be met.
That fact clearly attests to the breadth and complexity
of post-conflict situations, for both national authorities
and the international community. That is why setting
priorities for transition plans is truly essential.
In doing so, it is crucial to ensure effective reform
of the security sector beginning with disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, in order to better
protect civilians. As the backbone of any national
reconciliation process, an inclusive political dialogue
remains necessary to guarantee the holding of free and
democratic elections and in order to build the rule of
law, based on robust institutions. That dual political
and security foundation should be supported by
strengthening national capacities to meet social needs,
focusing on health, education and training, while
also ensuring an economic recovery that is capable
of promoting development, especially in the areas of
agriculture and infrastructure.
Seconding the Secretary-General’s recommendations
in his latest report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of
confl ict (S/2012/746), my delegation attaches particular
importance to real and active participation by women
in the transition process. Having considerable
advantages in achieving the requirements I mentioned,
women have always made an invaluable contribution
to peacebuilding throughout the world, as witnessed by
the many female Nobel Peace Prize winners, including
Betty Williams, Mother Teresa, Aung San Suu Kyi and
Kenya’s Wangari Muta Maathai. We are pleased to note

12-65917

S/PV.6897

that the report mentions considerable efforts in the area
of eliciting women’s participation.
Within this relatively narrow scope, it is important
to engender an impetus for effective, sustained support
from the international community. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission(PBC), as the relevant
interactive intergovernmental body, has a major role to
play, including in mobilizing the necessary funds for
transition.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations should also be encouraged and
strengthened. We therefore take this opportunity to
welcome the quality of the strategic partnership that
the African Union continues to develop with the United
Nations through peacekeeping missions, such as those
deployed in Somalia or Darfur. Such cooperation is all
the more welcome for Africa because most countries on
the PBC agenda are African.
In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the need to provide the support I have just
described as soon as hostilities end, because, even
though that period is the most fragile, it is still the
most conducive to the success of a skilfully conducted
transition to lasting peace and development.
The Council can be assured of Senegal’s unflagging
and ongoingly renewed commitment, along with all
peace-loving countries, to the realization of the ideal
that today unites all people the world over.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Ms. Kamara (Liberia): Liberia joins previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate on the all-important issue of postconflict peacebuilding. It conforms to the tradition
of Morocco’s active involvement in the peacekeeping
and peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations. It
is also reflective of the Security Council’s continued
interest in, and commitment to, peacebuilding as part
of its larger responsibility for international peace and
security, which we commend.
We thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
report (S/2012/746), which records the progress achieved
in the United Nations support for peacebuilding
activities in conflict-affected countries and charts
future directions for the improvement of peacebuilding
interventions by the United Nations system and its
Member States. The emphasis on inclusivity resonates

12-65917

well, because we know that marginalization, alienation
and the culture of exclusive politics are root causes
of conflict. The report’s embrace of the principles of
institution-building and statebuilding as core elements
of peacebuilding is very encouraging. As a member
of the Group of Seven Plus, Liberia subscribes to
those principles and believes that they are critical to
preventing a relapse into conflict and to building the
resilience of States.
Current trends, reflecting growing collaboration
and cooperation between conflict-affected countries
and the wider international community, have given
peacebuilding in post-conflict settings a new dimension
and dynamism. That cooperation can evolve into
partnership when both parties agree on peacebuilding
arrangements that are country-specific, avoid the
one-solution-fits-all approach and ensure burdensharing in implementing agreed strategies.
Two years ago, Liberia was placed on the
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).
That engagement followed earlier efforts by the
United Nations to strengthen peace dividends by the
infusion of emergency funding for peacebuilding
activities. The direct engagement with the PBC,
however, has provided an opportunity for Liberia to
focus singularly on critical areas requiring urgent
resuscitation — the security sector, the rule of law
and national reconciliation. The responsibilities and
accountabilities of both the Government and the PBC
for achieving agreed objectives are encapsulated in a
statement of mutual commitments. The partnership is
driving a set of programmes and interventions that have
become indispensable to the attainment of sustainable
peace in Liberia.
The support of the peacebuilding architecture,
specifically the Liberia configuration of the PBC, the
Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office, together with the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, has been critical to the progress achieved in
implementing strategies for reform of the security
sector and the judiciary. They have also played a
catalytic role in engendering support from bilateral
partners. Through various cooperation arrangements,
including South-South and triangular cooperation,
institutions are being created and rehabilitated. That
includes the development of policy and infrastructure
as well as capacity enhancement to benefit the national
police, the immigration service and the judiciary.

51

S/PV.6897

Most notable among the programmes are plans for
the construction of five justice and security hubs at
strategic locations throughout the country, one of which
is nearing completion. The hubs will contribute to the
achievement of multiple objectives, which include, for
justice institutions, decentralization and better delivery
of their services; for citizens, greater access to justice
mechanisms and a stronger sense of security; and, for
the State, the extension of its authority throughout the
entire territory of the country, in order to better provide
protection to its people and more effectively monitor its
borders. The completion of the justice hubs will bring
monumental change, especially for Liberians in the
hinterland of the country, who have suffered the effects
of isolation and marginalization.
National reconciliation is ultimately one of the
most secure foundations upon which to build durable
peace. For Liberia, reconciliation is paramount for
national recovery, because it is only by addressing
historical ethnic and social cleavages that the social
fabric of Liberian society can be firmly restored.
That is why the development of a plan for national
reconciliation was prioritized in Liberia’s partnership
with the PBC. With critical technical support from the
United Nations Development Programme, a road map
for national reconciliation was crafted. It benefited
from consultations with the Liberia configuration.
Most importantly, the road map received overwhelming
support and validation from the Liberian people
through country-wide consultations. I am pleased
to say that the road map was formally endorsed at a
national conference convened last week, together with
a national vision for Liberia up to 2030.
We know that peacebuilding does not come
without challenges. That is a normal phenomenon and
not peculiar to Liberia. As peacebuilding is a process
to be approached from a long-term perspective, it is

important to manage expectations for immediate or at
least speedy results.
Secondly, there is the challenge of predictable
and sustained financial resources, as mentioned in
the Secretary-General’s report, which, when lacking,
generate uncertainty and anxiety. While the PBF is a
stabilizing force in that regard, there is an expectation
of greater fulfilment of the PBC mandate for resource
mobilization. Strong partnerships, including with the
international financial institutions, are important. My
Government’s responsibility to ensure the sustainability
of the investments made in the agreed priority areas is
also a challenge, which is being met through gradual
increases in budget allocations to specific sectors.
Looking to the future, we can say that the
implementation of all planned peacebuilding activities
in Liberia will bring transformational change. We
look forward to that eventuality. In the meantime, we
remain appreciative of all of our partners, including
those who are involved with the various United Nations
peacebuilding entities or who are part of the United
Nations system, for their steadfast support. We urge
them to continue to accompany Liberia on the path to
sustainable peace.
Our thanks go to the members of the Liberia
configuration for their support. A special word of
appreciation is offered to Sweden, which has assumed
the current chairmanship of the configuration on a fulltime basis. Sweden is also playing a pivotal role on the
ground in Monrovia in coordinating donor inputs and
ensuring an integrated approach to meeting needs in
priority areas, including the requirements for a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
The President: With the concurrence of the
members of the Security Council, I now suspend the
meeting until 3.45 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 3.15 p.m.

52

12-65917
