S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8723rd meeting

Thursday, 13 February 2020, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Van Vlierberge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Liu Yue
Ms. García Tapia
Ms. Mägi
Mr. Dang
Ms. Lohmann
Ms. Setyawati
Mr. Paraiso Souleymane
Mrs. Zabolotskaya
Mr. Bynoe
Mr. Davies
Mr. Ben Lagha
Mr. Brown
Mr. Simonoff
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict situations
Letter dated 4 February 2020 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/98)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03890 (E)
*2003890*

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with longer
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a summarized version when
speaking in the Chamber. The red light on the collar of
the microphone will begin to flash after four minutes
have elapsed.
I now give the floor to the representative Lebanon.
Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to thank
Belgium for convening this debate on a matter of
paramount importance for all of us who hold dear the
fundamental values of truth, justice, peace and the
rule of law. We see it as an essential discussion and a
logical follow-up to the debate (see S/PV.8668) held last
November on the role of reconciliation in maintaining
international peace and security.
Today’s discussion is taking place at a particularly
significant time for my country, as tomorrow will
mark the fifteenth anniversary of the assassination of
Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri. That led to the adoption
in 2007 of resolution 1757 (2007), which established
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon — a hybrid tribunal
created to find the truth about, and bring to justice the
perpetrators of, that heinous attack and end impunity.
In that regard, let me mention here the ministerial
declaration adopted by our newly formed Government
a few days ago, in which the Council of Ministers
reaffirmed its commitment to the work of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon to ensure that law and justice
prevail, free from any politicization or spirit of revenge,
so that it does not have a negative impact on the stability
of Lebanon, its unity and its civil peace. Unity and civil
peace are not mere words in my country, which was
torn apart by a 15-year long civil war during which
thousands of people were killed or went missing. A
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) concluded that 75 per cent of Lebanese citizens
had personal experience of armed conflict.
A positive step towards restoring truth was taken in
November 2018 when the Lebanese Parliament adopted
Law 105, on missing and forcibly disappeared persons.
That piece of legislation recognizes the right of families
to learn the fate of missing loved ones and, to that end,
seeks to establish an independent national commission.
2/34

13/02/2020

Let me add that the adoption of that significant law was
made possible thanks to the key role played by partners
such as the ICRC, non-governmental organizations
and the International Center for Transitional Justice,
to name a few, as well as civil society. That type of
collaborative partnership remains essential on our path
towards sustaining peace. Such partnership evidences
the necessity of implementing a comprehensive
approach to transitional justice premised upon the
inclusion of all relevant stakeholders.
Youth should be given the important role that
they deserve to have in transitional justice, as agents
of change, as the International Center for Transitional
Justice stated. Their participation in transitional justice
and reconciliation should be central, and not symbolic.
Resolution 2250 (2015), on youth and peace and security,
recognizes that role. In the same vein, we continue
to believe that women’s participation should also be
central. In that connection, I would like to mention that
Tunisia’s Truth and Dignity Commission was headed
by a woman. Furthermore, as conflicts and grievances
take on varied forms, there is a need for contextsensitive, local transitional justice that is cognizant of
national specificities and cultural sensitivities.
Throughout the world and across history, human
rights abuses, humanitarian law violations, conflicts
and cycles of violence have ravaged countries. Such
proliferation of suffering tears apart communities and
has the potential to entrench instability, which threatens
the prospects for peace. Transitional justice is essential
to move forward, but first a transition out of the
conflict situation is needed in order to start the process
of healing. In our region, continuous and perpetual
conflicts are the major obstacle to transitional justice.
Time is of the essence to transition from conflict to
justice within a reasonable time frame. Justice delayed
is justice denied.
Let us recall that this body has a great responsibility
in ending conflicts, in order for peace to take hold and
transition to begin. Instead of burying grievances and
remaining enslaved by the chains of the past, transitional
justice provides a range of mechanisms that allow first
the citizen and then the country to achieve sustainable
and meaningful peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal) (spoke in French): At
the outset, let me commend you, Madam President, for
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

convening this open debate. Portugal attaches particular
importance to transitional justice and endorses the
statement that will be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. In my national capacity, I would like
to make a few additional remarks.
Transitional justice mechanisms play a crucial
role in implementing peace agreements, preventing
the recurrence of conflicts and maintaining peace in
societies undergoing reconstruction. In that regard,
transitional justice enables communities to address
the legacy of large-scale violence and human rights
violations, ensure accountability, secure justice and
achieve reconciliation.
In that regard, it should be stressed that, without
prejudice to international law, those processes should
always take into account the specificity of different postconflict contexts. To achieve that, the judicial system of
each State must function effectively and independently,
thereby enabling the International Criminal Court to
assume its complementary role to national jurisdictions.
It is therefore of the utmost importance that all relevant
actors be involved, as well as civil society, which
can play a major role in facilitating efforts to sustain
peace. From that point of view, Portugal believes that
young people are fundamental actors in reconciliation
processes, as well as in the overall maintenance of
peace and security.
Transitional justice mechanisms must be victimcentred in order to meet the specific needs of victims.
We must also keep in mind that armed conflicts directly
affect the most vulnerable, especially women, children
and youth. Portugal is concerned about the issue of
children in armed conflict situations, particularly
concerning the recruitment and use of child soldiers.
In that regard, we wish to reiterate the importance of
the 2017 Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and
the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child
Soldiers. In addition, we must give priority to children
when planning demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration efforts.
Transitional justice mechanisms should also take
into account the decisive role and full participation of
women in conflict prevention and resolution, as well
as their status as victims of sexual and psychological
violence. In that connection, and in line with the
women and peace and security agenda, it is essential
that women be included in all stages of the peace

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

process, in particular in mechanisms for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts.
In conclusion, it is important that the link between
security and development guides the transitional justice
process, as it plays a crucial role in the pursuit of
Sustainable Development Goal 16.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I would like to begin by
congratulating Belgium on its presidency over the
Security Council for the month of February, as well as
commending the Kingdom of Belgium for allocating
time for the Security Council to discuss this timely and
significant topic.
Given that peacebuilding is both a short- and a longterm process, it is beneficial for the Security Council to
have regular discussions and exchanges on this topic
in order to continue addressing persistent challenges
facing fragile and conflict-affected situations around
the world, as well as to develop implementable action
points on transitional justice framed around sustainable
peace processes.
Kenya aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (see S/PV.8723).
Transitional justice and peacebuilding are, in
our view, multi-dimensional phenomena that should
embody several interrelated and critical elements.
Those elements include, but are not limited to, the
entrenchment of democracy and accountability,
resilience-building, the enhancement of affirmative
actions for peaceful coexistence and the introduction
of programmes for the establishment of national
reconciliation, restorative justice, restitution and
reparations, inter alia.
When addressing a conflict situation, it is important
for stakeholders to draw on the principle of inclusivity
in seeking to build meaningful partnerships with
the parties involved in the conflict. The inclusion of
different voices and perspectives in a conflict situation
provides stakeholders with an opportunity to consider
the different structural root causes that might at times
be side-lined by other approaches. In that regard, the
involvement of witnesses, victims, minorities and
individuals at risk of reprisal or intimidation, for
instance, may be of crucial importance in building
confidence and giving credibility to the process. Formal

20-038903/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and informal initiatives to support the transitional
justice and national reconciliation processes by local
actors, such as civil society, as well as private actors and
academia, could make an important contribution. At
the national level and of equal importance, mechanisms
that play a critical role — including national truth and
reconciliation commissions — deserve support.
Regarding groups perceived to be marginalized,
such as minorities, women and young people, the
Kenyan experience has taught us that investment in the
training of women and youth for peace is not without
reward. Women leaders in Kenya have been working in
peace and bridge-building activities.
The Security Council should seek to systematically
and contextually integrate regionally and nationally led
transitional justice processes into its work within the
broader framework of mission mandates.
Kenya joins other Member States in recognizing
the African Union’s (AU) adoption of its transitional
justice policy in February 2019. It is a critical guide
for AU member States to achieve essential transition
components, including the political ones. My delegation
welcomes that initiative.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of El Salvador.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank the Belgian
presidency for convening this open debate on
transitional justice, which is a matter of high priority
for El Salvador. At the same time, we thank and take
due note of the briefings delivered earlier today (see
S/PV.8723).
Our history has taught us that transitional justice
is a fundamental pillar in the process of consolidating
peace and democracy. One cannot move towards a future
of peace and progress without addressing the troubles
of the past and creating comprehensive strategies and
mechanisms with a view to achieving truth, justice,
memory, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
Our 1992 peace accords ended an internal armed
conflict that had lasted for more than 10 years. The
agreements resulted in a reform process aimed at
strengthening the legal and institutional framework
of the State and transforming its political, judicial
and security bodies. However, the agreements
did not comprehensively address the other causes
of armed conflict, such as poverty and social
4/34

13/02/2020

inequality — and neither did they guarantee a path
towards genuine reconciliation.
At the start of our transition and with the support
of the international community, important advances
were made in the areas of truth and guarantees of
non-recurrence. A truth commission emerged from
the peace accords in order to investigate and clarify
the most serious human rights violations that occurred
during the civil war. That commission, supported by the
United Nations, published its report documenting cases
of human rights violations in 1993. It also provided a
series of recommendations for the investigation of those
cases, as well as for institutional reform and national
reconciliation measures.
However, days after the publication of the report, a
general amnesty law was issued, completely voiding the
possibility of complying with those recommendations.
Moreover, the lack of economic opportunities and
our vulnerable social fabric, on top of erroneous
approaches taken in the past, served only to exacerbate
the fundamental issues that caused the conflict in the
first place. Those are the consequences of a partial
approach to a conflict, and they continue to impact our
search for peace today.
That is why the Government of El Salvador is
firmly committed to ensuring that our population lives
in dignity, while guaranteeing the protection of human
rights and supporting actions that enable us to advance
towards truth and reconciliation. That is how, just hours
after taking up office, the President of the Republic
gave the order to withdraw from the San Miguel Third
Infantry Brigade an individual listed in the truth
commission’s report as one of those responsible for
the El Mozote massacre in 1981. That was of symbolic
importance for the victims of abhorrent human rights
violations that took place during our armed conflict.
We consider it pertinent to note that a series of
measures have been taken to reinvigorate efforts to
promote the transitional justice process in my country.
Those measures include the creation of two national
search commissions, one for children and one for
adults, as well as the small investigation unit within the
Attorney General’s Office for crimes against humanity
and crimes that occurred during the armed conflict.
Together with the United Nations, we promoted a
virtual project for recovering historical memory, which
arises out of the need for Salvadoran society to have
an official space for building historical memory that
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

collects and recognizes various perspectives on the
country’s recent history.
We also enjoy an open and sincere relationship with
other international human rights protection systems.
In that connection, we hosted Mr. Fabian Salvioli,
Special Rapporteur on the promotion of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence, in May
2019, and the Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, in December 2019.
We wish to emphasize that, when extending external
support to a country in transition, it is essential to take
into account its specific needs and the current state of
the human rights protection systems in place, carry out
a comprehensive analysis of the situation of vulnerable
groups and promote the meaningful participation of
women and young people.
Finally, El Salvador firmly believes that transitional
justice is critical to any peacekeeping or peacebuilding
process. We take this opportunity to renew my country’s
commitment to peace, justice, democracy and respect
for international law, which are the only way to ensure
lasting and sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): It is great to see you,
Madam President, presiding over the Security Council.
I congratulate Belgium on its presidency of the Council
and thank your delegation for organizing this very
important meeting today.
My delegation fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered on behalf of the European
Union. We would also like to thank Ms. Bachelet
and the other briefers for their insightful thoughts
and contributions.
It has been said repeatedly that transitional justice
initiatives need to be tailor-made and address the specific
circumstances of each situation. For that reason, we are
convinced that considerations on transitional justice
have to become an integral part of Security Council
deliberations on country-specific situations. Only such
an approach can yield tangible outcomes, unlike the
general discussions we sometimes have.
The broader concept of transitional justice
represents an important part of peace operations’
mandates, especially in the form of measures relating
to accountability, the rule of law and a functioning

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

security sector that serves people, including the most
vulnerable. Those efforts must focus in particular
on women’s rights and on ensuring the adoption of a
child-sensitive approach. I am proud that Slovak police
officers participated, for example, in the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, which completed
its mandate in October. The Mission had been
mandated, inter alia, to assist the Government of Haiti
in strengthening its rule-of-law and justice institutions.
Of course, as we know, that particular work continues
with the further political mission on the ground.
I now wish to address two specific issues, namely,
accountability and security sector reform.
First, accountability has to be an integral part
of the transition process in a post-conflict situation
or when there is political change. There are various
methods and ways to ensure accountability, such
as criminal prosecution. However, it would not be
appropriate to equate criminal justice with transitional
justice. Transitional justice is a much broader concept
that encompasses a broad range of elements, including
criminal justice. We are convinced that bringing
perpetrators of crimes, especially crimes under
international law, to justice is a basic requirement
for the solution of any conflict and for subsequent
reconciliation efforts. That conviction may also have
led the Security Council to establish the international
criminal tribunals and various special courts.
In line with the principles of State sovereignty and
complementarity, national authorities have the primary
responsibility to prosecute crimes and adjudicate on
innocence and guilt. However, if national authorities
are not in a position to conduct investigations, recourse
to the International Criminal Court (ICC), especially
through a self-referral or a Security Council referral,
may be sought. The ICC, with its unique institutional
set-up, which grants a strong voice to the victims, is
ideally placed to contribute to transitional justice.
Bearing in mind the special institutional links between
the Security Council and the ICC, Slovakia encourages
Security Council referrals when war crimes, crimes
against humanity or genocide are being committed
and the national authorities bearing the primary
responsibility for the prosecution of those crimes are
not in a position to do so.
Turning to my second point, as an integral
component of any political settlement, any transitional
justice process must create synergies with other

20-038905/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

13/02/2020

relevant processes, such as security sector reform and
governance, which has supported nationally led efforts
to build resilient security institutions and prevent
relapse into conflict, in line with resolution 2151 (2014).
We must call for more people-centred approaches to
security sector reform and governance, as well as aim
for political solutions to conflict, the prevention of
conflict or relapse into violence.

peace process, the transformational drive required for
inclusive and long-lasting peace flows primarily from a
peace agreement that contemplates transitional justice as
an inherent part of a comprehensive and interdependent
architecture. In that framework, accountability for
gross human rights violations and serious crimes under
international law are key elements for the foundation of
a just and peaceful society.

As a co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, Slovakia recently convened a highlevel panel and discussion on security sector reform on
the occasion of the launch of an important publication
on the United Nations and security sector reform, in
policy and practice. Over the past decade, significant
progress has been made in the development of United
Nations norms and principles on this important issue.
However, gaps remain between the normative and
operational dimensions in United Nations security
sector reform support. We therefore need to strengthen
the implementation of resolution 2151 (2014), including
with regard to linkages and synergies between security
sector reform and transitional justice.

International tribunals, including the International
Criminal Court and fact-finding and investigative
international mechanisms, are fundamental tools in
the fight against impunity. Italy has been a staunch
supporter of the development of international criminal
justice as a building block to support societies’
march towards truth and reconciliation. We have
regularly provided funding to the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We have
also provided political, technical and financial support
for the work of hybrid criminal courts in Timor-Leste,
Kosovo and Sierra Leone.

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), Slovakia is also ready to promote partnerships
and synergies with other transitions processes in the
peacebuilding context. Our PBC priorities can be
summed up in just a few short elements — participation,
partnerships and people and coherence, coordination
and complementarity.
In conclusion, global peace and security can be
achieved only if sustainable solutions are found for
current conflicts. Transitional justice is certainly a
pivotal element in those aspirations. I once again thank
the Belgian presidency for convening today’s Security
Council meeting on this very pertinent issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We welcome this debate. We
thank the Belgian presidency for organizing it and all
the briefers for their interventions.
Italy also aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union on
this subject.
Italy strongly believes in transitional justice as an
effective means to address the after-effects of violent
and divisive conflicts and to achieve sustainable peace
and social harmony. As exemplified by the Colombian
6/34

In those and other contexts, we have vigorously
promoted the strengthening of law enforcement, the
building of technical capacities for vetting processes
and for the implementation of justice reform, and
the reinforcement of the independence, efficiency,
accountability and transparency of judicial systems.
We believe that the success of transitional justice
mechanisms also depends on the implementation of
security-sector reform and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) processes. We therefore
support stronger United Nations standing capacities
on security-sector reform, DDR, justice and correction
and police — which are all hosted in the United Nations
Global Service Centre in Brindisi — as effective tools
to foster complementarity between transitional justice
and these processes.
Striking a balance between victims’ right to
justice and the need for reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence is a very delicate exercise. The search for
historical truth on violence and abuses and the public
acknowledgement of the responsibilities of each party
are often a precondition for reconciliation and peaceful
coexistence. In that light, truth and reconciliation
commissions could serve the interests of truth without
replacing criminal prosecution and should disseminate
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

their findings to society for the education of present
and future generations.
Based on our experience, we would like to highlight
three main points.
First, each transitional process should be nationally
owned and inclusive. It should contemplate a careful
consultation with civil society, including vulnerable
individuals and groups, to assess the impact of conflict,
meet the widespread expectation for justice and shape
a common vision of the future. Women’s participation
is crucial to guaranteeing such inclusivity. Through the
participation of women in reconciliation and mediation
efforts, we can have more effective transitional justice
processes. Women mediators networks such as the
Mediterranean Women Mediators Network, which we
actively promoted, have indeed bolstered a gendersensitive approach to transitional justice.
Secondly, profound institutional reforms are often
needed to affirm the rule of law, enhance human rights
protection and reorganize the State in keeping with
democratic values. However, constitutional transition
and legal reforms cannot be effective without the
dissemination of a culture of lawfulness among civil
servants, citizens and local communities.
Finally, the importance of civil justice is often
underestimated. It plays a crucial role in the daily
lives of families, enterprises and individuals. In the
aftermath of a conflict, efficient and independent civil
courts should be able to grant redress for the damages
suffered and to re-establish economic, social and
cultural rights, which are often gravely violated.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Rugeles (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for having convened
this debate. I welcome the briefers, especially Father
Francisco de Roux, President of the Commission for the
Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition
of my country.
Colombia has been a significant reference point in
the implementation of transitional justice. Through the
signing of the Final Agreement for the Termination of
Conflict and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting
Peace in 2016, the Comprehensive System of Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition was created in
order to realize the rights of the victims.

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

That system was created on the basis of the lessons
learned not only from international examples but
also from processes involving other illegal groups in
Colombia. The processes involving the United SelfDefense Forces of Colombia, demobilized between
2003 and 2006 through mechanisms such as the law on
justice and peace, as well as the agreements for truth
contemplated in Law 1424, among others, allowed us to
build the system. We have been learning from our own
experiences for years now to ensure that transitional
justice mechanisms contribute to the ultimate goal of
peaceful coexistence among all Colombians.
The Comprehensive System combines judicial
mechanisms that allow for the investigation and
punishment of serious human rights violations and
serious violations of international humanitarian law,
as well as extrajudicial ones that contribute to the
clarification of the truth, the search for disappeared
persons and reparations for the harm caused.
Additionally, the System’s mechanisms make it
possible to progress in the fight against impunity, in
helping ex-combatants transition to civilian life and in
the reconciliation processes of Colombians.
Here I would like to refer to some important points
of these mechanisms.
First, one of the lessons that we Colombians
have learned is the need for such mechanisms to be
complementary. Experience shows that the effectiveness
of such measures is greater if they are applied in a
coordinated manner. The idea of the implementation of
a comprehensive system is for the measures to achieve
a maximum level of justice and accountability, but also
to contribute to the clarification of truth, reparation and
historical memory. The complementarity between the
various mechanisms must be the result of a detailed plan
under which each mechanism has a specific purpose
that contributes to an ultimate goal.
Secondly, transitional justice does not have a single
mould that is applicable to different contexts. Every
effort to consolidate peace, including transitional
mechanisms, must start from the principle of national
ownership. Within the system, each mechanism has a
clear objective, something that was necessary given the
Colombian historical, legal and social context.
Thirdly, it is important to emphasize that
transitional justice cannot and should not be
overloaded. Such mechanisms cannot alone address
the causes of a conflict, such as inequality or lack of

20-038907/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

13/02/2020

socioeconomic development. They must have their own
objectives, which will also make it possible to manage
the expectations of the population. Transitional justice
must be coordinated with other measures that make it
possible to address these causes.

justice to the prevention of gross violations and abuses
of human rights and serious violations of international
humanitarian law, including genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, and their
recurrence (A/HRC/37/65).

My Government respects and supports the work
of transitional justice mechanisms, as noted in the
most recent report of the Secretary-General to the
Council. My Government is also is convinced that the
participation of women in peacebuilding is a priority.
Transitional justice mechanisms have a gender focus in
their work and scope, but also rely on the principle of
the parity and participation of women. An example is
Colombia’s Special Jurisdiction for Peace, where 53 per
cent of the judges are women.

Building comprehensive and legitimate transitional
justice processes is essential in terms of acknowledging
past grievances and ensuring accountability for past
atrocities, as well as realizing the rights to truth,
justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence.
The effective implementation of transitional justice
policies requires a victim-centred approach, with a
special focus on women and children as the group who
are most vulnerable to atrocity crimes. The meaningful
participation of women who have been affected by
conflicts should be at the centre of efforts to seek truth
and ensure justice.

The various transitional mechanisms that we are
implementing have a higher goal, namely, to contribute
to prevention, a guarantee of the non-repetition of
violations, and peacebuilding. It is a challenge that will
take time, but we are certain that the outcome of these
mechanisms, as part of the legality-based peace policy
that runs throughout our development plan, will lead
us, by strengthening access to justice on equal terms, to
sustainable peace. That is Colombia’s dream.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): At the outset, I
would like to thank the Belgian presidency for the
initiative to include in its programme of work an open
debate on the theme of transitional justice. We thank
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Michelle Bachelet, and the other briefers
for highlighting different aspects of the concept of
transitional justice, also from the perspective of its
practical implementation.
Transitional justice processes and mechanisms are
traditionally seen as a critical component of the United
Nations framework for strengthening the rule of law.
Today’s debate is a good opportunity to highlight the
role of transitional justice also in the context of the
prevention agenda.
An important point of reference in this context
is the report of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence and the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide on
their joint study on the contribution of transitional
8/34

Regrettably, we continue to witness hate crimes
and atrocities against ethnic and religious groups,
State-led policies of hatred, racial and ethnic profiling,
the glorification and justification of past crimes and
the dehumanization of victims. The genocidal acts
perpetrated against Christians, Yazidis and other
communities by terrorist organizations in Syria and
Iraq are stark reminders that the denial of crime and
the dehumanization of victims do not belong only
to history.
The Armenian nation went through the horrors
of genocide at the beginning of the twentieth century
and continues to face the challenges of denial and
justification of past crimes. Therefore, Armenia
has been taking consistent measures to consolidate
international efforts to prevent the crime of genocide.
The justification of the Armenian genocide at the
highest level by denigrating and insulting the dignity of
the victims, qualifying it as “the most reasonable act”
and manufacturing alternative historical narratives
profoundly hamper efforts to ensure the realization of
the right to truth and non-recurrence.
In recognizing the crucial role of civil society
organizations and institutions, I would like to commend
in particular the important work carried out by the
International Centre for Transitional Justice, including
its analysis of the Armenian genocide.
Armenia is committed to supporting United Nations
efforts to promote transitional justice as an important
element of the United Nations prevention agenda.
Over the years, we have initiated a number of Human
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Rights Council resolutions related to the prevention of
genocide. It was at Armenia’s initiative that, in 2015,
the General Assembly designated 9 December as the
International Day of Commemoration and Dignity
of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide and of the
Prevention of This Crime.
Recognition and condemnation of past atrocities is
vital for preventing identity-based crimes, protecting
the universality of human rights and achieving genuine
reconciliation and sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Bavdaž Kuret (Slovenia): Let me thank
Belgium for organizing this very timely debate, and the
briefers for their presentations.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
wishes to add some points in its national capacity.
I wish to start by emphasizing the importance of
preventive action. On many occasions, including in
this Chamber, my country has expressed its conviction
that preventing conflict through the many available
instruments is always the best option. We believe
that the Security Council should be at the forefront
of preventive diplomacy and wish to encourage the
more frequent use of Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Transitional justice and reconciliation in all
forms are essential elements of building long-lasting
sustainable peace in post-conflict societies. If we want
them to be successful, the ownership of those inclusive
processes must clearly be vested in the affected societies.
All stakeholders, including women and girls, children,
young people, older persons and civil society, must
participate if we want the processes to be truly effective.
Therefore, in order to achieve sustainable peace and
build resilient societies, inclusive cooperation and a
comprehensive, gender-transformative approach must
be the building block for effective transitional justice.
Fighting impunity, in particular for the most serious
crimes, such as genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes, is the basis for justice and lasting peace.
Peace and justice are not mutually exclusive; they are
complementary. That is why Slovenia was actively
involved in the establishment of the first permanent
International Criminal Court (ICC). We continue to

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

strongly support its work and promote its universality,
integrity and efficiency.
We also support other mechanisms with the aim
of preventing impunity for those crimes, including the
work of the International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism for Syria. Victims and affected societies
must be at the centre of post-conflict endeavours that are
broad and comprehensive, from the acknowledgment
of victims to reparations, economic assistance and
incentives and social reintegration assistance. To
that end, Slovenia supports the ICC’s Trust Fund for
Victims, to which we regularly contribute.
Slovenia believes that the current international
legal framework on mutual legal assistance and
extradition for the most serious international crimes
remains inadequate to achieve effective justice.
That is why Slovenia, together with like-minded
countries — the Netherlands, Belgium, Argentina,
Senegal and Mongolia — launched an initiative for the
adoption of a multilateral treaty that would provide
inter-State cooperation mechanisms for the investigation
and prosecution of the most serious crimes.
The Mutual Legal Assistance (MLA) initiative
addresses the primary responsibility of States to
prosecute and try atrocity crimes and the need to
improve the effectiveness of the investigation and
prosecution of those crimes at the national level. We are
pleased to inform the Council that Slovenia will host a
diplomatic conference in Ljubljana from 8 to 19 June
with the aim of adopting a convention on international
cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of the
crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, to be known as the MLA convention.
Let me conclude by emphasizing one particular
element of post-conflict societies. Among the tools and
instruments available, we see education as one of the
most important. Only through continued education can
we expect peace to last and a society to truly transform.
Education must be continued because those societies
are very fragile and at a difficult juncture and the
horrors that they have experienced could be repeated at
any time. That is why we believe that everything must
be done to avoid a return to rhetoric and the incitement
to hatred. Education is indeed the best prevention and
investment, with the greatest return.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.

20-038909/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as well
as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement. Out of respect for the many speakers who
wish to take the floor, I will give an abbreviated version
of it.
First, let me express my appreciation to Belgium
for initiating this debate, and my thanks to the
excellent briefers.
Transitional justice is often described as dealing
with the aftermath of conflicts or atrocities. However,
it is not only a matter of providing meaningful justice,
but also an essential building block for sustaining peace
and avoiding relapse into conflict. Transitional justice is
also a means to achieve reconciliation. Only by dealing
meaningfully with the past can a society move forward
without being taken hostage by its own history. The
European Union, in its very essence, is the product of a
collective vision and commitment to overcome the past
and build a sustainable peace through reconciliation
and the establishment of free democratic societies in
which human rights and the rule of law are upheld.
We adopted a comprehensive policy framework
on support to transitional justice in November 2015,
becoming the first regional organization to do so. Since
then, we have witnessed several positive developments.
We welcome the African Union’s transitional justice
policy, adopted last year.
In our policy framework, we underline that all
transitional justice processes have to be nationally
owned and context-specific. Each situation requires
a tailor-made approach. Since it is a whole-of-society
endeavour, special attention needs to be paid to
tailoring inclusive transitional justice processes, while
promoting the participation and influence of women
and young people in decision-making at all levels, in
all areas.
Criminal justice, accountability, the establishment
of truth, reparations and institutional reform are all
possible entry points for ending impunity, providing
redress to victims, fostering trust and strengthening
the rule of law. The European Union recognizes that
accountability and justice are most successful if the
justice system functions effectively and independently,
thereby enabling the International Criminal Court
10/34

13/02/2020

to play its intended role, while complementing
national jurisdictions.
Victims and affected communities should be at the
centre of all efforts. Transitional justice is a complex
issue, and is therefore best considered from the start
of any peace support efforts, ranging from mediation
to restoring peace and security in countries emerging
from conflict. It also requires a truly integrated
approach. The active advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission in support of the Security Council could be
further drawn upon to ensure that appropriate attention
is paid to transitional justice and reconciliation at all
stages of the conflict cycle.
In recent years, the EU has made considerable
efforts to translate our policy commitments into more
concrete action on the ground, while always working
closely with, and in support of, the United Nations.
In Syria, we support the International Commission
on Missing Persons in setting up mechanisms and
partnerships for data collection and the systematic
compilation of information from the families of missing
persons. In Colombia, we stepped up our support
immediately after the peace accord was signed in order
to help overcome the obstacles that might occur during
the early implementation of the agreement. In the
Central African Republic, we also support the Special
Criminal Court as a critical body to fight impunity.
We collaborated with UN-Women to strengthen the
integration of the gender dimension in transitional
justice processes.
Supporting transitional justice requires specific
expertise. We have therefore set up a flexible
instrument that enables the EU to deploy transitional
justice experts on the ground to provide assistance upon
request. We are also ready to engage over the long term,
through our missions on the ground or our dedicated
financial instruments.
Finally, I would like to pay tribute to the crucial role
that civil society organizations have played in so many
transitional justice processes. They have often been the
driver behind numerous initiatives, giving a voice to
millions of victims. We stand ready to further engage
on the subject and hope that today’s deliberations mark
only the beginning of a deeper conversation, as it
touches upon so many different topics that are on the
agenda of the Security Council, ranging from mediation
to children and armed conflict, among others.
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.

and murdering Georgian citizens living in the occupied
territories, as well as along the occupation line.

Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let me also join colleagues
in expressing my appreciation to the Belgian presidency
for convening today’s debate. I also thank the briefers.

We hope that, after more than a decade, the alleged
crimes will effectively be investigated and justice
served, thereby paving the way for reconciliation,
rebuilding and sustaining peace. In that regard, we call
on the international community to take a consistent
and firm stance, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law.

My country, Georgia, aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to add the following comments in my national capacity.
Transitional justice is an essential building block
for the establishment of reconciliation and sustaining
peace. But, first, justice needs to be served. Atrocities
committed during conflict cannot go unpunished. Only
after justice is restored will the wounds of society
start to heal. Transitional justice processes are ideally
nationally owned and always context-specific, but in the
case of my country they reflect not only the domestic
reality but the international dimension as well.
The Security Council is well aware that the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of my country
is being violated and that two of Georgia’s regions,
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia, continue
to be under illegal foreign military occupation. The
Georgian Government cannot exercise its jurisdiction
over those territories, while international organizations
and monitoring mechanisms are also denied access by
the occupying Power. Therefore, impunity continues,
and we have seen gross violations of human rights
against ethnic Georgians, including restrictions on
their freedom of movement, access to health care
and education in their native language; kidnappings;
arbitrary detentions; and deprivation of life.
The only mechanism available to us is to uphold
the rule of law at both the national and international
levels. To that end, Georgia recognizes the compulsory
jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice and
reaffirms its support for the primacy of the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Georgia actively cooperates with
the Court in investigating crimes committed during the
Russian aggression in 2008, which represents the firstever case of the Court entering Europe’s legal geography.
We are also engaged at the regional level.
Georgia has submitted two inter-State applications
to the European Court of Human Rights against
Russia — one concerning the August 2008 military
aggression and continuous occupation of its territories
and the other concerning Russia’s administrative
practice of harassing, arresting, detaining, assaulting

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate friendly Belgium on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and for selecting today’s important topic. We also
express our appreciation for today’s comprehensive
concept note (S/2020/98, annex). And we thank
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of
Belgium, His Excellency Mr. Philippe Goffin, for
presiding over this meeting, and thank all the briefers
for their valuable presentations.
Given the complexities of conflicts and their
pernicious effects on post-conflict societies, transitional
justice is a key priority for achieving stability and a
sustainable peace. The post-conflict experiences of
countries have shown that sustaining peace and stability
requires a successful process of transformation, based
on an integrated and coherent approach that includes
establishing respect for human rights, strengthening the
rule of law, eradicating poverty, building accountable
institutions and achieving national reconciliation
through comprehensive dialogue and mediation, as
well as ensuring access to the judiciary and transitional
justice, accountability and good governance.
The fragility that results from conflicts, in
particular from human rights violations, makes
transitional justice a key priority for establishing a
sustainable peace in countries struggling with internal
and political strife. In that regard, achieving transitional
justice requires ending and documenting human rights
violations, holding those responsible accountable,
ensuring justice and reparation for the victims and
launching rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
We must also ensure non-repetition of those
violations, institutional reform and reconciliation
among all segments of societies in order to promote
recovery and guarantee a successful transformation

20-0389011/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

process that builds inclusive societies based on the rule
of law. Therefore, achieving transitional justice will
deter perpetrators from repeating flagrant violations of
human rights and will speed up the political transition
and national reconciliation towards sustainable peace.
The challenge of maintaining peace requires
addressing the root causes of crises and conflicts while
including all segments of society, in particular women
and young people, in policymaking and decision-making
processes. We stress the importance of providing
young people with employment opportunities as part of
transitional justice. Marginalizing them and ignoring
their issues and their future will push them towards
radicalization and help extremist organizations take
advantage of that marginalization and non-participation
in planning for their future.
The State of Qatar has supported all international
efforts aimed at achieving peace, stability, conflict
prevention and conflict resolution in a peaceful manner.
We have launched several initiatives in that regard.
The State of Qatar has played an active role in solving
several conflicts through our mediation. We have
continued our efforts to ensure respect and promotion
for human rights.
The State of Qatar has actively supported legal
mechanisms with a view to achieving transitional
justice, preventing mass atrocities and realizing
sustainable peace in order to ensure the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we recall
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 71/248,
of 21 December 2016, to establish the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011.
In conclusion, in the light of the State of Qatar’s
commitment to the protection of civilians, we play
an active role in promoting the principle of the
responsibility to protect. Together with Denmark and
Costa Rica, this year we are co-chairing the Group of
Friends of the Responsibility to Protect for the third
consecutive year.
In keeping with our policy of respecting
international law, the State of Qatar continues its
efforts to reach political settlements to crises based
on the rule of law and human rights. We will spare no
12/34

13/02/2020

effort to support sincere efforts to achieve the goals of
international law on which today’s meeting is focused.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank the Permanent Mission of Belgium to the
United Nations for taking the initiative of holding this
open debate on the issue of transitional justice, which is
an extremely important topic that represents one of the
key pillars for sustaining peace in countries emerging
from conflict. I also thank the briefers for the valuable
information that they provided (see S/PV.8723).
Transitional justice is an issue of increasing
importance in view of the experiences and lessons
learned with regard to the central role of justice
in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. That was
reaffirmed by two identical resolutions on the five-year
review of the peacebuilding architecture (Security
Council resolution 2282 (2016) and General Assembly
resolution 70/262). The two resolutions demonstrated the
importance that the international community attaches
to implementing and operationalizing transitional
justice mechanisms as a means of addressing the root
causes of conflict. They also demonstrate the need to
adopt a holistic approach towards the achievement of
transitional justice in order to ensure that countries do
not relapse into conflict. In that regard, I will share with
the Security Council the Egyptian vision for promoting
the role of the United Nations in supporting efforts to
achieve transitional justice in post-conflict countries.
First, Egypt’s delegation stresses the importance of
considering the specificity of every situation. There is
no one-size-fits-all approach to fit every situation. The
success of transitional justice endeavours and the move
from a divisive past to a shared future depend on the
respect of the international community for providing
assistance and support to the countries concerned and
the principle of national ownership and leadership of
those efforts. International support must be based on
national priorities and an environment conducive to the
success of such efforts.
Secondly, my country’s delegation emphasizes the
importance of coordination and clarification of the
roles of various United Nations bodies in supporting
transitional justice efforts in the countries concerned.
The Organization’s effectiveness requires harmony
among its various components so that they complement
one another and are fully coordinated.
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Thirdly, we underline the importance of
capitalizing on the Peacebuilding Commission’s
consultative role when the Security Council reviews
the mandates of peacekeeping missions and building
on the Commission’s past experiences and lessons
learned in order to reinforce national peacebuilding
priorities in the countries concerned. That helps to
strengthen peacekeeping in order to build and sustain
peace while ensuring a continuous response throughout
a given conflict.
Fourthly, we note the need to strengthen
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in particular the
African Union. Deepening such partnerships provides
an opportunity to coordinate efforts and benefit from
the comparative advantages of all the various entities,
which strengthens their effectiveness.
Fifthly, members will agree that post-conflict
transitional justice demands the continued commitment
and support of the United Nations and the international
community in order to enhance the human and
institutional resources of countries emerging from
conflict so that they can assume their essential functions
with a view to achieving the rule of law, strengthening
the justice system and preventing impunity.
Lastly, given the importance of the role of regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security, Egypt, during its chairmanship of the African
Union, has accelerated the operationalization of the
African Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development, based in Cairo, in order to address
the root causes of conflict and build and sustain peace
across the African continent, in line with the concept of
African solutions for African problems.
In December 2019, Egypt also hosted the Aswan
Forum for Sustainable Peace and Development. That
was the first African event that allowed an honest
dialogue among the continent’s leaders and senior
officials, the private sector, civil society and research
centres on practical recommendations to address
interconnected security and environmental challenges.
We are confident that making the Forum an annual
event would help the African continent to continue that
important dialogue in the future.
In conclusion, I reiterate my thanks to the Belgian
presidency of the Security Council for the opportunity
given to my country’s delegation to participate in

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

discussing this important topic. I would also like to
wish the Council presidency every success.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Kakanur (India): We thank Belgium for
convening this open debate on the importance of
transitional justice in achieving reconciliation and
durable peace. We appreciate the insightful remarks of
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
the President of the Commission for the Clarification
of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition of Colombia;
and the Executive Director of the Foundation for Human
Rights in South Africa (see S/PV.8723).
Since the end of the Cold War, activities by the
international community involving peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding have grown rapidly in
number, complexity and sophistication. The creation of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund are just two examples of recent institutional
innovations. Transitional justice approaches emerged
and developed following the demise of military
dictatorships, apartheid and post-Cold War theatres,
when there was an increasing international consensus
that transitional justice measures were needed to deal
with past human rights abuses. Those approaches also
coincided with the goals of some donors, banks and aid
agencies, all of which prioritized the strong rule of law
to enable economic development.
However, the involvement of external actors in
the internal or quasi-internal conflicts of States has
not only become more frequent but has also entailed
increased levels of coercion and State-building
activities that are at odds with the traditional concepts
of sovereignty. Effective transitional justice is not
only a question of whether there should be a domestic
versus an international trial, a truth commission versus
an international trial or a cultural alternative versus
a traditional trial. The question is: What is beneficial
to the people whose lives have been disrupted or even
destroyed by the perpetrators of violence?
Too often, the international community adopts a
technocratic, one-size-fits-all approach that can be
damaging. Transitional justice has become steeped
in Western liberalism, often appearing distant and
remote to those who actually need it most. Rebuilding
social capital and livelihood systems is harder than
restoring infrastructure and institutions. It involves
redefining relationships, promoting public deliberation,

20-0389013/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

creating a healthy civil society, facilitating the healing
process and making institutions both trustworthy and
effectively trusted.
There is also a perception that transitional justice
mechanisms have been providing a form of ideological
obfuscation that is intended to divert attention away
from those who benefited, and still benefit, from and
in the system. Specifically, we note that the historical
injustices inherent to colonialism are rarely the focus of
transitional justice. If transitional justice is conceived
merely as a Band-Aid that can be put on to past harms
during some unspecified and limited time of transition,
without any suggestion that it is attached to some deeper
change in the society, it is unlikely that those measures
will have any transformational capacity.
Reconciliation is a long and arduous process;
artificially imposed standards or timelines are unlikely
to achieve success. Reconciliation within a nation
must be not only homegrown but also home-nurtured.
It is important to identify and clarify goals of any
transitional justice mechanism before proceeding
and designing processes and projects to fulfil those
goals. Gender justice has to be fully integrated into all
institutional mechanisms and wider structural reforms
of the country concerned.
Transitional justice mechanisms can play a crucial
role in societies torn apart by the violence of conflict,
but they must contribute effectively to the will of the
local actors to take their destiny into their own hands
by devising political and institutional safeguards to
prevent a repetition of mass crimes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I thank today’s
briefers. I would also like to congratulate Belgium,
a fellow European Union member, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. We are very proud
to see you, Madam President, in that role.
Ireland very strongly supports the Security
Council’s recognition of the importance of transitional
justice in efforts to sustain peace. That is an issue
close to our hearts because we have lived it. Our
understanding of transitional justice is shaped most
profoundly by our own peace process, founded on the
1998 Good Friday Agreement, which brought to an end
some 30 years of violence in Northern Ireland and in
14/34

13/02/2020

which the work of protecting the peace and furthering
reconciliation continues to this day.
We have approached that in many ways, politically
and economically. One successful example was the
establishment of the Remembrance Commission, which
worked from 2003 to 2008 to administer a scheme of
assistance and remembrance for victims and their
families. The Commission made funding available to
individual victims and survivors in acknowledgement
of their suffering and economic hardship.
While much progress has been made on our island,
more remains to be done. In addressing the legacy
of the conflict, as a co-guarantor of the Good Friday
Agreement, we recognize that, in order to definitively
deal with the past and to deepen reconciliation, we
must continue to work every day. For that reason, in
the context of the recent agreement reached in January
on power-sharing in Northern Ireland, both the Irish
and United Kingdom Governments have affirmed their
commitment to moving ahead to establish a framework
of legacy institutions.
That comprehensive framework is founded on
principles that include promoting reconciliation,
upholding the rule of law, acknowledging and addressing
the suffering of victims and survivors, facilitating
the pursuit of justice and information recovery and
complying with human rights requirements. An
implementation and reconciliation group will also be
established. We recognize that this comprehensive
framework is vital to provide justice and truth for
victims and survivors. It will also bolster other ongoing
peacebuilding efforts, and it will enable politics,
policing and the wider society in Northern Ireland to
move on from the past and fully harness the benefits
of peace.
As this debate demonstrates today, transitional
justice is complex and part of a much wider tapestry
of actions necessary to sustain peace. Ireland has been,
and will continue to be, eager to learn from others on
similar journeys and to share our own experience. We
are proud of our continued support to the transitional
justice processes in Colombia, Sierra Leone, Syria and
elsewhere. Ireland welcomes recent progress within
United Nations missions to recognize and incorporate
elements of transitional justice in their work. We
support the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund’s
increased focus on transitional justice, including, most
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

recently, helping to develop a comprehensive national
strategy for transitional justice in the Gambia.
It is often stated that all wars are fought twice:
the first time on the battlefield and the second time
in memory. In our support for transitional justice, we
must never forget our overall aim, that is, to build
and sustain peace and reconciliation. As an aspiring
member of the Council for the term 2021 to 2022,
my country, Ireland, believes that transitional justice
must be aspirational: first, in seeking to maximize
peace and justice and, secondly, in being practical by
incorporating the local context and focusing on what is
required by communities emerging from violence. That
also includes special efforts to ensure the inclusion of
women. The participation of, and consultation with,
victims in the design, implementation and monitoring
of transitional justice policies is absolutely key. Only
then can a society begin to make the transformational
journey that reconciliation demands, and sustained
peace requires.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Peru.
Mr. Popolizio Bardeles (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Peru welcomes the holding of this open debate and is
grateful for the valuable statements made by the briefers,
who recognized the essential nature of transitional
justice in restoring and invigorating the social fabric of
post-conflict situations. That is accomplished through
an improved diagnosis and understanding of the
reasons that triggered a given conflict situation, while
providing reparations to victims and fighting impunity.
To that end, we have a valuable collection of lessons
learned in various parts of the world. Peace, truth and
reconciliation commissions, for example, have been
instrumental in interpreting facts and contexts from
a reflective and conciliatory perspective. Similarly,
independent fact-finding missions and arbitration
bodies have shown their worth in clarifying situations
and, ultimately, enabling the acceptance of their results.
We note that transitional justice processes must
be adapted to the specificities of each post-conflict
situation, using independent criteria, indicators and
evaluation parameters, because what works for one
reality might lead to a very different outcome for
another. In that regard, it is critical to strike a balance
between efforts to prevent impunity and convict those
responsible for abuses and lawbreaking and measures
to foster a climate of reconciliation and reunion. That

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

quest for balance is successfully reflected in the case
of Colombia, for example, where key instances for
reconciliation such as the Truth Commission and the
International Commission on Missing Persons have been
added to the establishment of special peace tribunals.
Peru has also been part of those developments for
restitution of justice and rights to nationals who suffered
at the hands of violence. In August 2012, we ratified
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and in 2016, we
adopted Law 30470, concerning the search for persons
who disappeared during the violent period that plagued
the country between 1980 and 2000. Our policy on the
search for missing persons prioritizes a humanitarian
approach and focuses on the alleviation of suffering
and uncertainty and providing family members with
the answers they need.
Nevertheless, we must stress that, in cases of
serious violations of human rights law and international
humanitarian law, such as genocide and crimes against
humanity, amnesties do not apply to their perpetrators.
On the contrary, the full force of the law must be brought
down upon them. When that does not occur at the local
level, the international community — including the
Security Council — must assume its responsibility
by configuring special political missions and ad hoc
tribunals or referring situations to the International
Criminal Court within the framework of the principle
of complementarity.
In that regard, we wish to highlight the value
of entities such as the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as well
as the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
I conclude by underscoring the positive role played
by the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting
transitional justice efforts, whether by promoting
synergies between the United Nations system and
other international agencies or by mobilizing financial
resources through the Peacebuilding Fund.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.

20-0389015/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Mrs. Kocyigit Grba (Turkey): I thank you,
Madam, for organizing this important open debate
and facilitating a broad discussion on an issue that has
global implications for peace and security.
Transitional justice is a crucial element of
reconciliation and sustaining peace, as it strives to take
into account the root causes of conflict, recognize the
dignity of victims, redress past injustices and contribute
to prevention efforts. Transitional justice not only
brings closure to past injustices, but also helps societies
move forward towards a more peaceful future. It is
essentially a society’s attempt to come to terms with
a legacy of large-scale past crimes, in order to ensure
accountability, serve justice and achieve reconciliation.
As such, transitional justice processes deserve due
attention in a comprehensive manner.
In order to succeed, we believe that reconciliation
needs to be the centre of gravity in transitional justice.
Establishing a basis to address the underlying causes
of violence and marginalization is the most meaningful
way to foster durable resolutions to conflicts. In doing
so, we should keep in mind that a variety of approaches
are applicable depending on the country-specific
context and that there cannot be a one-size-fits-all
solution to the issue.
As a starting point, establishing accountable
and transparent State institutions is vital in restoring
public confidence in justice. Effective governance and
justice systems founded on respect for the rule of law
and the protection of human rights is crucial in terms
of consolidating peace and promoting reconciliation.
Raising public awareness on access to justice is equally
important in order to include the most vulnerable
segments of society in transitional justice processes.
While doing so, it is crucial to establish solid safeguards
to protect the victims.
Criminal justice is another vital component of
transitional justice. Holding those who are responsible
for large-scale atrocities and systematic violations of
human rights contributes to the process of achieving
justice for victims. Prosecuting those individuals
contributes to upholding respect for the rule of law and
establishing an accurate historical record while serving
as a deterrent to potential criminals.
Transitional justice can contribute to achieving the
broader objectives of conflict prevention, peacebuilding
and reconciliation. Since it delves into the most painful
experiences of communities, transitional justice
16/34

13/02/2020

processes are inevitably difficult. They require a
reliable factual basis, an open approach and empathy.
Understanding the underlying grievances that lead to
conflict by taking into account the voices of women,
young people and marginalized groups is crucial.
All of that requires a context-specific approach and
recognition that it is not a static process.
The sustained commitment and support of the
United Nations and the international community must
accompany those efforts, as needed. Turkey stands
ready to contribute to national, regional and multilateral
efforts in the pursuit of achieving sustainable peace and
security through transitional justice processes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Fiji.
Mr. Motufaga (Fiji): Fiji would like to thank the
Belgian presidency for this opportunity to contribute to
discussions on the important topic of transitional justice.
The Security Council has placed huge emphasis
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Widespread
and serious human rights violations create conditions
where special justice interventions are needed if peace
is to be secured and sustained. Transitional justice
redresses gross violations. Transitional justice focuses
on the needs of victims and their communities. When
complemented by criminal justice mechanisms, they
strengthen the rule of law, which is critical in any
sustainable peace process.
Violent conflicts are always associated with
widespread human rights abuses and atrocities.
Communities are traumatized and torn apart while
losing property and sources of economic well-being.
That poses a huge challenge as to how communities can
be reconciled. When reconciliation cannot take place,
the chance of peace and development succeeding is
far lower. Communities have to be brought together,
and victims and their hurts and grievances need to be
heard. Transitional justice must have a heart in order
to both acknowledge and establish measures to reduce
what victims went through, as well as addressing
their demands for justice. Transitional justice must
seek to build trust and rebuild relations so that former
victims and perpetrators can live side by side again, as
a community.
As an international community, transitional justice
contributes to the promotion of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Development Goals (SDGs), especially SDG 16, which
aims at achieving peaceful, just and inclusive societies.
Transitional justice processes have been used
successfully in our region. The process was supported by
the international community and regional peacekeeping
missions. Our own examples of transitional justice
show that there is a need for political support to
Governments to establish inclusive transitional justice
processes. The United Nations system has an important
role to play, including from both the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding sides. Transitional justice mechanisms
should be properly integrated with and complement State
institutions. Such transitions always take time — the
process is a delicate one and needs to be supported.
It is essential that victims see that justice is done.
Transitional justice brings a sense of closure to the
victims, as well as to entire communities. They lay a
foundation for development and achieving the SDGs.
Transitional justice mechanisms should be part
of broader security sector reforms. Divisions within
communities take time to heal. Communities need to
regain their confidence in the law and its institutions.
Reconciliation measures must have a special focus,
namely, women and children. In all conflicts, women
and children are disproportionally disadvantaged and
suffer the most. The skills and knowledge required
to tackle the issue are complex, and therefore United
Nations capabilities are needed to provide support in
that regard.
For small island developing States, the changes in
climate will continue to have a destabilizing impact
on communities. The loss of land, even entire islands,
and livelihoods, as well as large-scale movements
of communities, can be catalysts for conflict. As
community relocation proceeds, new conflicts will
inevitably arise. Most will be rooted in cultural settings
around the management of and access to communityowned resources. Transitional justice measures offer
unique possibilities for rebuilding communities.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nepal.
Mr. Bhandari (Nepal): I wish to begin by thanking
the Belgian presidency for convening this open debate
on transitional justice. I would also like to thank the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the other briefers for the insightful presentations
they gave earlier today (see S/PV.8723).

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

Nepal believes that transitional justice is an
important component for sustaining peace in postconflict societies. It supports the process of healing
wounds, addressing the injustices of the past and
fostering trust and harmony in society. Transitional
justice is also about working through the painful past
in order to create a peaceful future. In that endeavour,
fundamental elements, such as finding truth, providing
reparations, ensuring non-recurrence and achieving
social reconciliation are all critical. Furthermore,
efforts to ensure peace should be complemented by
broad-based economic development and the inclusion
of victims in the country’s development activities.
There cannot be a one-size-fits-all approach to
transitional justice. Each conflict and its peace process
is unique and requires a unique transitional justice
system. Transitional justice must be guided by the
national context and societal needs of the post-conflict
communities. National leadership and ownership are
quintessential for healing the wounds of the past and for
ensuring psychosocial recovery. It is equally important
to promote the engagement of women, young people
and civil society in the process.
Allow me to shed some light on Nepal’s transitional
justice mechanisms. Nepal is a uniquely successful
case of a nationally owned and led peace process
that culminated with the promulgation of the new
Constitution in 2015. In order to conclude the last leg of
that process, two independent commissions — the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission and the Commission of
Investigation on Enforced Disappeared Persons — were
set up in 2015. The mandates of the Commissions have
been extended and new commissioners have recently
been appointed. The independence and impartiality of
the Commissions are guaranteed by law.
In addition, we are consulting with the victims in
order to ensure their participation in the amendment
of transitional justice laws. Nepal’s transitional
justice process is guided by the Comprehensive Peace
Accord, the directives of the Supreme Court, relevant
international commitments, the concerns of the victims
and realities on the ground. Our focus has been to strike
a balance between compliance with international norms
and standards and the national sociopolitical context
by putting the victims at the centre. As a country that
steered a uniquely successful peace process, Nepal has
the requisite capacity and political will to conclude the
transitional justice process in an equally unique manner.

20-0389017/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

In conclusion, Nepal is committed to ensuring
justice to the victims and making the transitional justice
process a credible, smooth and successful one. Our only
focus is on building a peaceful and prosperous Nepal.
By ensuring social justice, promoting an inclusive
society and delivering good governance, we are now
well on the path to reconciliation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Ms. Neumaus (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank you, Madam President, for having organized
this open debate. Transitional justice is a critical issue
in which the Security Council has an important role.
Resolution 2282 (2016) identifies transitional justice as
a key component of sustainable peace. For over 15 years,
Switzerland has supported many partner countries in
their processes of dealing with the past, through which
societies try to come to terms with the atrocities they
have suffered. On the basis of our experiences, I would
like to highlight three points.
First, the adoption of a set of legal and non-legal
measures is essential for preventing the recurrence
of large-scale violations and abuses of human rights
law and international humanitarian law, as well as for
establishing a new social contract. Respect for human
rights is essential for achieving lasting peace. While
criminal justice is crucial, it is but one dimension of
transitional justice. With its Integrated System of Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition, Colombia
serves as an example of an innovative approach
based on the four pillars of transitional justice. We
call on the Council to give greater consideration to
the complementarity between legal and non-legal
measures when using the instruments at its disposal.
The Secretary-General’s guidance note on the United
Nations approach to transitional justice can serve as a
reference. Switzerland supports the revision process
of that note, which is under way. We also support the
references made today to the importance of the advisory
role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Secondly, as the presentations in this open debate
have shown, civil society is a driving force in advancing
accountability and the fight against impunity. Civil
society, in particular women, must participate alongside
decision makers in the design of such measures. In that
connection, we wish to acknowledge the commitment of
Yasmin Sooka and all those who, like her, have invested
decades in seeking justice for the victims of the most
18/34

13/02/2020

serious crimes. The Council must understand the need
to involve and protect civil society, including human
rights defenders, in the relevant items on its agenda.
Thirdly, each context is different. We call on the
Council to take context-specific and tailored measures
based on an understanding of the needs of society as a
whole. The Council must make full use of its flexibility
in the formulation of mandates to ensure that targeted
and achievable measures are taken.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Belgian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this debate
on transitional justice to bolster efforts to achieve
sustainable peace.
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
Ten years after the Secretary-General’s guidance
note on the United Nations approach in this area, the
concept has proved its worth and its importance for the
sustainability of peace, in general, and the restoring or
strengthening of the rule of law, in particular, is no longer
in doubt. However, it is also clear that the dynamics of
ongoing conflicts require us to reassess our methods.
The challenges to consolidating the gains made on
this concept are legion and their management requires
sustained efforts. The call for the implementation
of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice,
launched in the context of resolution 2282 (2016),
therefore remains relevant.
Despite considerable efforts and achievements over
the past decade, we must redouble our efforts, rethink
our way of working together and devise responses that
are better adapted to different contexts. Although all
approaches to transitional justice must be based on the
principle of the universality of human rights, we know
today that there is no magic formula.
Nonetheless, we also believe that the approaches
developed in the framework of transitional justice
are essential to strengthening the rule of law. The
establishment of appropriate channels of justice in the
face of human rights violations makes it possible to build
reliable institutions and to lay the foundations for lasting
peace and sustainable development. In that respect,
Luxembourg remains committed to strengthening
international standards in this area in order to promote
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

transitional justice that combines asserting victims’
rights; promoting lasting peace, reconciliation and
democracy; and ensuring the implementation of 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly
Sustainable Development Goal 16.
On the occasion of this debate under the Belgian
presidency, Luxembourg wishes to renew its
commitment to participatory and inclusive transitional
justice. Victims and civil society must be fully
engaged in transitional justice processes, whether in
the pillar of truth, justice, reparations or guarantees
of non-recurrence. Therefore, we also believe that the
inclusion and participation of the perpetrators of human
rights violations, who are the subjects of transitional
justice processes, is often critical, given that the goal
is reconciliation, a fundamental precondition for the
sustainability of peace.
In that regard, Luxembourg would like to mention
its collaboration with the International Center for
Transitional Justice, which, in 2009, was consolidated
through a first partnership agreement. Luxembourg
pays particular attention to the Centre’s work in
Tunisia, which is aimed at helping victims, civil society
and State actors to promote victim-centred, gendersensitive transition processes.
In conclusion, transitional justice will have
an important place in the review of Luxembourg’s
humanitarian strategy, which will be carried out in 2020.
We will be guided in that undertaking by our desire to
better respond to the short-term needs of victims and
to better coordinate strategies over the long term while
maintaining a balance among advocacy, diplomacy and
work on the ground.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bangladesh.
Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): We thank the Belgian
presidency for having convened this open debate. I also
wish to thank the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights and the briefers for having shared
their insightful perspectives.
Post-conflict countries generally remain at a high
risk of relapsing into new cycles of violence. Such
violence can disrupt a peace process and undermine
longer-term development and the rule of law. It is
therefore critically important in post-conflict situations
to address impunity, ensure accountability and break
the cycles of the conflicts and atrocities of the past.

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

As a major troop- and police-contributing country
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, we have
been supporting the efforts of the United Nations to
enhance national accountability and transitional justice
in countries emerging from conflict. We support the
Secretary-General’s reform agenda, with a focus on
system-wide coordination and coherence among the
United Nations peace and security pillars with the
development and human rights pillars, especially at
transitional stages of peace operations. We stress
the prioritization and sequencing of the mandates
of peacekeeping operations with the United Nations
rule-of-law and transitional justice mechanisms.
Transitional justice needs to also receive enhanced
priority in the Peacebuilding Commission’s efforts
in the area of peacebuilding and sustaining peace
with a view to preventing a sense of inequality,
discrimination, exclusion and other root causes of
violence and conflict. Special political missions should
have transitional justice as a sub-mandate, and so
should the new generation of United Nations country
teams. It is important to have synergy among those
various entities.
Bangladesh remains committed to supporting
the initiatives of the Security Council towards the
implementation of both the women and peace and
security, and the youth, peace and security agendas. We
value women’s enhanced contribution to transitional
justice through their participation in mediation,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
We remain committed to supporting the
multipronged efforts of the United Nations to prevent
and ensure accountability for violence against women
and children during armed conflict. We must also
continue our fight to bring to justice transnational
organized groups and terrorist organizations for their
heinous acts of trafficking, enslavement and torture of
women and children.
We appreciate the work of the relevant mandates
working to promote women’s participation in peace
processes and the rehabilitation of children deployed
in armed conflict. On our part, we remain committed
to consistently underscoring these dimensions in
implementing peacekeeping mandates.
We believe that internationally recognized criminal
justice mechanisms should be allowed to play their role
to ensure justice for countries coming out of conflict
situations and sustain peace there. For Bangladesh,

20-0389019/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

hosting 1.2 million Rohingyas from Myanmar’s
Rakhine state is a case in point. We welcome the
ground-breaking decision of the International Criminal
Court to ensure accountability for the grave human
rights violations and atrocity crimes committed by
Myanmar against its Rohingya population. The Court’s
order of 23 January is also a momentous development in
this regard. Ensuring justice and accountability for the
Rohingya population is an important precondition for
their safe, dignified and voluntary return to Rakhine
state and eventual societal reconciliation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Government of Belgium for the initiative to
organize this debate, as well as for the special emphasis
placed on addressing the issue of transitional justice
using an approach that takes into account its four
components: truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-repetition — one based on the premise that
there can be no single transition justice model that is
applicable to all cases.
According to the guidance note, transitional
justice is considered from a rights-based perspective
and provides three ways to continue strengthening the
activities of the United Nations in this area.
First, we must seek to take into account the root
causes of a repressive conflict or Government and
combat violations of all rights, including economic,
social and cultural rights. Secondly, it is important
to take into account human rights and transitional
justice aspects in peace processes. And, thirdly, it is
crucial to coordinate disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration initiatives with the processes and
mechanisms of transitional justice, so that they can
positively reinforce one another.
Within the framework of this open debate, we would
like to briefly share some aspects of the Argentine
transitional justice experience, which is the result of
a post-dictatorial process and not of a post-conflict
context. We consider it important to issue that disclaimer.
What happened in my country’s recent past was not an
armed conflict. Serious human rights violations against
society were committed through the repressive actions
of the armed and security forces, within the framework
of a de facto dictatorial Government.
20/34

13/02/2020

Since constitutional order was restored in December
1983, the Argentine State has carried out ongoing work
to comply with its international obligations in the
area of human rights. One of the first decisions of the
democratic Government was the establishment of the
National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons,
which that took concrete measures to recognize the
right to the truth in order to clarify the facts related
to the forced disappearance of persons. The following
year, the National Court of Appeals in Federal Criminal
and Correctional Matters handed down a sentence in
December 1985 condemning the members of the military
boards that ruled the country to life imprisonment.
The passing of the due obedience and full stop laws
in 1987 and the pardons issued in the 1990s to those
who had been convicted made it impossible to continue
with the ongoing trials regarding serious violations of
human rights.
In parallel, the so-called trials for truth took
place, which were judicial proceedings initiated with
the objective of determining the fate or whereabouts
of missing persons. The inter-American human rights
system played a central role in strengthening the right
to the truth in our country and in the region. Many
relatives, unable to obtain justice in local courts, went
to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights,
which ruled on the obligation of the State to punish
those responsible.
A decade later, the National Congress declared
the due obedience and full stop laws null and void,
and the Supreme Court of Justice declared them
unconstitutional, which led to the formal reopening of
more than 1,000 legal cases. According to information
provided by the Prosecutor’s Office for Crimes
against Humanity, from 2006 to 2019 238 sentences
were handed down for acts committed during the last
civilian-military dictatorship. There are currently 21
cases in oral proceedings; 70 cases are scheduled for
oral proceedings; and 260 cases are before the court of
first instance.
As the Special Rapporteur on the promotion
of truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of
non-recurrence has pointed out, in order to provide
effective reparation to victims it is essential to establish
appropriate systems of redress. In that regard, the
National Commission on the Enforced Disappearance
of Persons has recommended the adoption of the
necessary laws so that the relatives of disappeared
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

persons may receive economic assistance. At present,
a set of laws is in force that provides for economic
reparation for the serious violations committed during
the dictatorship. The Ministry for Foreign Affairs
of Argentina provides important assistance to those
applying for benefits under those laws in completing
the necessary formalities at consular offices.
To conclude, I would like to emphasize the central
role of the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Indeed,
the Convention provides all States with a basis for the
establishment of a solid legal framework in the areas of
prevention, punishment, reparation and non-repetition
of enforced disappearances and provides for mutual
legal assistance mechanisms between States. It should
be noted that the Convention is still young, with 62
States parties and 98 signatories to date. Therefore,
we invite States to cooperate on moving towards
its universalization.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank
the Belgian presidency of the Security Council for
convening this debate on the topic of the role of
transitional justice in ensuring sustainable peace.
Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will now make a few
remarks in my national capacity.
This important theme brings with it a conceptual
and practical challenge because of its many connections
and interlinkages with accountability, criminal
justice, democracy and the rule of law. Therefore, our
interpretation of transitional justice comprises a broader
sense than just a series of tribunals or commissions and
refers to the multitude of efforts to reach peaceful and
legitimate governance in the aftermath of repressive
regimes or widespread violence.
As a country that has undergone a democratic
transition that started 30 years ago, Romania represents
a successful example of such a process. We believe that
transitional justice can be successful only if it is rooted
in a holistic approach that encompasses the root causes
of conflict or repressive rule, individual prosecution,
institutional reform and respect for human rights.
Reforming institutions is a key component of
transitional justice. In the absence of reforms, trust and
reconciliation are impossible to achieve and institutions

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

will not be able to sustain and project peace, respect for
the rule of law and human rights. Further progress in
transitional justice could be achieved if more United
Nations peace operations were mandated to address it.
An effective way for the international community to
support institutional reforms, while safeguarding the
principle of national ownership, is to strengthen the
rule-of-law component of peace operations.
In that context, Romania has intensified its
cooperation with the Justice and Corrections Service
of the United Nations Department of Peace Operations
and has started the process of submitting nominations
for women corrections officers to be deployed in United
Nations peace operations. We have also increased our
participation in the activities of the Group of Friends
of Corrections in Peace Operations, and we encourage
other Member States to do so as well.
Another important component of transitional
justice is to make access to justice a reality for
the most vulnerable people, in the aftermath of
widespread violations, through criminal prosecution.
Accountability is primarily the responsibility of States
and their judicial systems; therefore, the need for
capacity-building and justice sector reform is of the
utmost importance.
However, when the national investigative
apparatus fails, the international community has a
responsibility to ensure a back-up justice mechanism
that can deliver justice and conduct fair trials. In
that respect, the establishment of the International
Criminal Court has been an incentive for adopting
relevant domestic legislation and consolidating national
justice mechanisms.
I would like to reiterate Romania’s full support
for that institution and our commitment to raising
awareness of the Court’s mandate and defending the
impartial and independent conduct of its functions.
My country has also continuously called for renewed
attention to supporting national proceedings, including
by mainstreaming the concepts of the Rome Statute in
the relevant assistance programmes dedicated to the
development of the rule of law.
Last but not least, I would like to emphasize the
importance of partnerships. In that regard, the role
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in advising
the Security Council, its focus on ensuring the peace
continuum and its convening role in bringing together
Member States, the United Nations system, international

20-0389021/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

financial institutions, regional organizations and civil
society are particularly important. In that vein, I would
like to reiterate that during Romania’s chairmanship of
the PBC in 2018, one of our priorities was to increase
synergies between the PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Security Council.
I believe there is a need to address the issue
of transitional justice as a building block towards
sustaining peace in a more comprehensive manner. We
therefore stand ready to engage in future discussions
on the full range of processes and mechanisms
associated with the effort to ensure accountability and
reconciliation in States emerging from conflicts or
repressive rule.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my delegation stresses that
justice was and will always remain the cornerstone on
which the founding fathers based the United Nations
75 years ago with a view to achieving the welfare, wellbeing and peace of the nations of the world, without
discrimination or selectivity.
In that regard, allow me to recall the provisions
of resolution 2282 (2016) underpinning this meeting’s
concept note (S/2020/98, annex). That resolution
reiterates that maintaining peace is both an objective
and a process towards building a common social
vision, including through efforts to prevent conflict
and its escalation, continuation or relapse; address its
root causes; achieve national reconciliation; and move
towards recovery, reconstruction and development.
The resolution stresses the primary responsibility of
Governments and national authorities in determining
the priorities, strategies and implementation activities
required to maintain peace.
However, the practical realities of today are in
stark contrast to those guiding principles. Some
Governments with political, economic and military
influence habitually misinterpret and violate to an
unprecedented extent the provisions of the Charter
of the United Nations and its working methods and
procedure. in an attempt to impose a unilateral view
on United Nations frameworks and take them in a
direction that would help those Governments interfere
in the affairs of other States. The same Governments
are trying to introduce divisive concepts that will
negatively affect the future of the Organization and its
22/34

13/02/2020

status, entrench differences and generate discord and
hostility in inter-State relations.
The Syrian Arab Republic, along with a
considerable number of Member States, warns against
a historic turning point, whereby those Governments
could use United Nations legal mechanisms as a tool
to apply political pressure on some States by linking
the principles of justice with divisive concepts such as
universal jurisdiction and the responsibility to protect.
We reject the policy of hypocrisy and double
standards practised by the Governments of Member
States that are negatively interfering in the political
process in Syria and are trying to hamper genuine
political reconciliation and impose an economic
blockade against the Syrian people, thereby undermining
reconstruction and recovery in my country. Those
are all part and parcel of the provisions of resolution
2282 (2016). The practices of those Governments in
the framework of the United Nations are dangerously
underpinned by an unethical principle — the end
justifies the means.
With regard to the misleading remarks of some
representatives about the so-called International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 (IIIM), we reiterate, through legal evidence,
that the so-called IIIM has been and will remain a
stark example of a breach of the Charter of the United
Nations, working methods and rules of procedure.
The General Assembly has encroached on the
mandate of the Security Council, violated Article
12 of the Charter and adopted resolution 71/248, in
which it established the so-called IIIM despite its full
knowledge that the Security Council is the sole organ
responsible for addressing the situation in my country,
Syria. The General Assembly has even ignored the fact
that its mandate, as provided in Articles 10, 11, 12 and
22 of the Charter, does not give it the right or authority
to establish any investigative body, legislative body or
a mechanism such as this one.
Let me remind the Council that my country — the
country concerned — did not request any technical
assistance from the United Nations to establish that
entity. I will conclude my remarks on the so-called IIIM
by saying that, in my country, there are long-standing
national legal and judicial bodies that are willing and
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

able to achieve justice and provide accountability and
reparations without the flagrant interference that seeks
to achieve distorted justice and reprisals rather than a
genuine transitional justice.
We call on all members to adopt balanced policies in
which principles are matched by action. We call on the
Council to convene a meeting on holding accountable
those Governments with direct or indirect responsibility
for the flow of thousands of foreign terrorist fighters
(FTFs) into my country, Syria, from more than 100 States
that are members of this international organization,
which promotes the peace and security of nations. All
member States of the European Union are among those
100 States. We call on those same Governments to
shoulder their responsibilities in taking back the FTFs
who hold their nationalities. They have wreaked havoc
and left a trail of killings and destruction in my country
and in Iraq and Libya.
As we talk about peace and justice, we call on the
Council to seriously consider an extremely dangerous
issue, namely, the attempt by some members of the
Council to use the Council as a media platform for
military coalitions, such as NATO, and for the purpose
of levelling threats of using military force against
States Members of the United Nations from the rostrum
of the Security Council, which deals with maintaining
international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mrs. Senewiratne (Sri Lanka): My delegation
warmly congratulates Belgium on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February, and we are confident of a fruitful tenure,
based on the country’s known diplomatic skills. We
thank the three briefers for their informative exposés.
Sri Lanka aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
As the Council is aware, after nearly three decades
of brutal separatist terrorism, Sri Lanka is presently
at a juncture of transition to an era of reconciliation
and sustaining hard-won peace. We believe, therefore,
that the deliberations of today’s open debate could
have some relevance to Sri Lanka’s envisaged path
to reconciliation. Sri Lanka’s engagement today is in
keeping with the Government’s vision for a country that
embodies the universal values of human rights, justice,

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

the rule of law and good governance, while ensuring
economic dividends to its people.
Members would no doubt agree that the postconflict milieu of each country is unique. There
are no two post-conflict situations in which similar
prescriptive remedies can be applied. The comparative
experiences of countries that have traversed the path of
post-conflict transition and reconciliation provide much
evidence of deliberate efforts to maintain a balance
between the speed of the transitional justice process
and the desired standard, including inclusiveness,
comprehensiveness and sustainability. The basic tenet
of a transitional justice process is the application of
its theoretical principles to State obligations. It is the
State that needs to pursue truth, justice, reparations and
guarantees of non-recurrence.
Sri Lanka is one of the oldest democracies in Asia.
The newly elected President of Sri Lanka, His Excellency
President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, in his address to the
nation at the seventy-second independence celebrations,
pledged to work to guarantee the human rights and
political and economic freedom of the people in a truly
democratic country. In that context, he espoused that
every citizen of Sri Lanka has the right to live freely
and securely, holding independent opinions, following
the religion of choice and freedom of association and
assembly, as they are rights of human beings that no
one can challenge.
It is pertinent to reiterate that the action taken
by the Sri Lankan security forces during the conflict
was in opposition to a group designated as a terrorist
organization by many countries — even described as
ruthless by some — and was not aimed at any community
in the country. The modus operandi of suicide attacks
by that terrorist group, which for the first time in recent
history deliberately targeted civilians, has now been
adopted expansively by similar groups globally.
It is therefore appropriate that, when seeking
mechanisms of transitional justice, simplistic theories
should take cognizance of the various historical, cultural
and religious sensitivities involved. Furthermore,
timelines for achieving stated objectives that have
evolved externally would only hinder the process
of reconciliation, since they would be bereft of any
genuine understanding of the situation on the ground.
Promoting a peaceful, just and reconciled society
is not only an objective in itself but also a prerequisite
for a sustainable and inclusive approach to development

20-0389023/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that leaves no one behind. As a sovereign State, Sri
Lanka will continue to establish its own priorities to
that end. In our experience, while certain lessons can
be learned from others, it is imperative to chart our own
path to reconciliation in order for it to be sustainable.
Sri Lanka is therefore committed to finding innovative
and pragmatic solutions that are driven by the domestic
context in order to protect the country’s national
interests, guided by the provisions of the Constitution
and the will of the citizens as expressed through
democratic means.
In that context, Sri Lanka looks forward to
continuing its cooperation with the international
community through capacity-building and technical
assistance in mutually agreed areas, in keeping with
domestic priorities and policies.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): It
is indeed a pleasure to see you, Madam President,
presiding over the work of the Security Council today.
First of all, allow me to congratulate Belgium
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of February and to thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to convene
today’s important open debate on transitional justice
in conflict and post‐conflict situations, presided over
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium (see
S/PV.8723).
I take this opportunity to thank Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for her comprehensive and enlightening
briefing. I would also like to thank and commend the
other briefers for their important briefings.
Justice and peace remain two fundamental and
complementary United Nations principles. There
can be peace only through the transformative power
of justice. According to resolution 2282 (2016) and
other United Nations resolutions, transitional justice
is an integral part of a comprehensive and lasting
peace. Transitional justice may be defined as having
four essential pillars — the right to truth, the right
to justice, the right to reparations and the guarantee
of non-repetition — and on the basis of institutional
reform it provides a number of mechanisms that a
society in conflict or a post-conflict society can employ
to restore calm and normality. We welcome today’s
24/34

13/02/2020

debate to share our views on the issue and would like to
emphasize the following points.
First of all, reconciliation and peacebuilding are
closely linked to promoting respect for the law in order
to ensure the effective implementation of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Member States should develop national policies based
on good practices to establish institutional bodies to
work in the area. Accordingly, whatever mechanism
is implemented, its success will depend above all on
taking into account the specificities of the society
in which transitional justice is to be implemented.
National ownership is therefore key in that regard.
Secondly, transitional justice mechanisms should
involve the participation of women and children in
reconciliation processes. The participation of women
and children in transitional justice is key to breaking
cycles of violence from generation to generation
and to preventing future violations. Not only is the
participation of children and women a right but it also
contributes to strengthening their ability to participate
actively as citizens.
Thirdly, we believe that it is important to prioritize
mediation and prevention. In that regard, the role of
religious leaders and mediators must be highlighted.
In traditional societies, such actors enjoy an influential
voice and authority that should be used for the
benefit of their communities in conflict and postconflict situations.
Lastly, I stress the need for all reconciliation
processes to take place at both the national and local
levels. To that end, it is necessary for dialogue at the
local level to evolve into dialogue at the national level,
thereby ensuring the inclusivity of the process and its
national ownership.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Zellenrath (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the European Union.
At the recent conference on mental health and
psychosocial well-being in Amsterdam, Abdelkarim, a
young Syrian refugee, said,
“To the people who see me as a traumatized refugee,
I tell them: Look at me now; I am no longer a victim;
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

instead, I am a person with skills and expertise to
support my community”.

views of women, children and youth and should do its
utmost to incorporate their needs into relevant mandates.

That quotation underscores three points that the
Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to contribute to
today’s important open debate — for which we thank
the Belgian presidency — concerning, first, victimcentredness; secondly, meaningful participation;
and, thirdly, the importance of mental health and
psychosocial support.

Thirdly, we urgently call for mental health not
to be neglected. Transitional justice takes place in
a context in which people, communities and whole
societies have gone through highly traumatic events. It
is meant to enable them to come to terms with the past
in order to restore trust and dignity. Mental wounds
need to be healed. Yet, in crisis situations, they are too
often disregarded.

Transitional justice is critical to sustainable peace,
breaking cycles of violence and preventing future
conflicts in order to build more just, peaceful and
inclusive societies, as well as preventing conflicts from
reappearing on the agenda of the Security Council,
which, like other parts of the United Nations system,
has an important role to play in transitional justice.
To that end, first and foremost, the victims of massive
human rights violations should remain at the centre of
transitional justice processes. In order to move forward,
transitional justice processes should acknowledge their
experiences, need for justice, need to recognize their
rights and need to restore their dignity.
There are good recent examples in which victims
have been actively involved in conflict and postconflict situations, such as in Colombia, where they
were heard directly during the peace process in Havana.
Their involvement showed that peace and justice are
not mutually exclusive. In fact, they run in parallel. In
future peace processes, victims’ voices also need to be
heard. That will also help avoid blanket amnesties that
violate international law.
Secondly, meaningful victim participation throughout
the entire process is essential. Delivering effective
transitional justice means that it is locally owned
and carefully crafted in relation to the context. It
should be experienced by victims and the affected
populations as truly transformative, as was the case in
South Africa. Civil society is often the driver of the
process, contributing directly through documentation,
mobilization and support for victims.
International mechanisms, such as international
tribunals, have a role to play, mainly in a complementary
capacity when local institutions fail to provide victims
with genuine justice. Victims and survivors have a
diversity of needs and perspectives, such as those of
child soldiers, women forced into marriage or their
children born from conflict. The Security Council
should listen more to their voices and the plight and

We call for structurally integrating mental health
and psychosocial support into our responses. They
should be part and parcel of any effort towards peace and
reconciliation from the start, thereby enabling people
like Abdelkarim to move beyond their victimhood.
In that way, societies can move beyond their troubled
past and consign their conflicts to memory and history.
Only recently, we have seen hopeful signals coming
out of the Sudan with regard to transitional justice
and perhaps one day the same will happen for Syria
and other countries that are desperately in need of
transitional justice processes.
Let me reiterate our gratitude to Belgium for its
outstanding effort and leadership in organizing this
open debate.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): We thank Belgium for
organizing this open debate on the role of transitional
justice in attaining and maintaining sustainable
peace and security by breaking cycles of violence
and delivering a sense of justice to the victims and
promoting accountability.
Malta fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the Permanent Observer of the
European Union. We would like to add a few remarks
in our national capacity.
Transitional justice processes and mechanisms are a
critical component of the United Nations framework for
strengthening the rule of law. They incorporate the key
elements of criminal justice, truth-seeking initiatives,
reparations for victims and reform of public institutions
that serve as our course of action and underpin the
practical side of delivering transitional justice.
In post-conflict situations, judicial and non-judicial
measures that are implemented to redress the legacies

20-0389025/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of human rights abuses are an obligation. The
international community, under the auspices of the
United Nations, has a particular obligation to ensure
that justice is served. It is imperative that, sooner rather
than later, the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes
against humanity be brought to justice.
That is the only way that a transition can really
and truly commence and that the victims who have
suffered the brunt of the atrocities committed against
them can move towards closure. Tragically, impunity
for perpetrators of conflict-related violence targeting
the most vulnerable in society continues, which is why
strengthening accountability for such crimes is crucial.
It is the responsibility of all States, in accordance
with their obligations freely undertaken under the
relevant multilateral treaties, and of the international
community as a whole, to address such crimes, protect
survivors and bring perpetrators to justice.
In that context, we commend the significant
progress on international justice made by the
International Criminal Court in combating conflictrelated sexual violence. Malta supports all efforts to
end impunity, including gender-sensitive transitional
justice processes and building the capacity of law
enforcement and justice systems to handle cases in a
gender-sensitive way.
The international community has come to
understand that transitional justice needs to be an
essential part of post-conflict reconstruction, including
national transition processes. It is a concept that
needs to be tailor-made — avoiding a one-size-fits-all
approach — according to which the sensitivities and
nuances of every scenario need to be considered. In
addition, the principles of accountability for violations
of human rights law and of international humanitarian
law should be upheld as overarching principles together
with international law obligations.
Malta believes that cooperation among different
international institutions under the aegis of the United
Nations is key to identifying appropriate common
strategies for an integrated response to post-conflict
reconstruction, based on the respective comparative
advantages. Against that background, we are pleased
that a number of United Nations agencies have already
identified how transitional justice can be best served
through their work on the ground in those situations.
In our view, prosecution is one of the key formal
mechanisms through which transitional justice is meted
26/34

13/02/2020

out. Malta reaffirms that prosecution initiatives should
be based on the clear principle of combating impunity
in compliance with international fair-trial principles.
In that regard, the link with the International
Criminal Court is crucial. Malta continues to support
to the Court as an independent transitional justice agent
within the framework of its wider commitment to a
rules-based international order. Furthermore, we laud
the invaluable work carried out by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda — strengthening
the rule of law and bringing justice to thousands of
victims, while spearheading the shift from impunity
to accountability.
Today we have mechanisms that are entrusted
with the responsibility of seeking to counter actions
that are not in conformity with the principles of justice
of international law. We recognize that, in its role to
maintain international peace and security, the Security
Council is ever more prepared to include human rights,
policing, judicial and legal systems and prison system
responsibilities in mandates. In that regard, we urge
the Security Council to take further proactive steps
to ensure that the voices of women and men and girls
and boys are heard equally when transitional justice
activities take place.
As we celebrate 20 years since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), achieving gender equality and
women’s empowerment — in particular by ensuring
the full and effective participation of women and girls
in all spheres — should become essential prerequisites
for the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda. Similarly, States have an important
responsibility to protect children worldwide. As we
celebrate the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention
of the Rights of the Child, Malta remains committed
to continuing to safeguard the rights of the child and
to contribute to efforts to render the use of children in
armed conflict a thing of the past.
In conclusion, those challenges demonstrate that
transitional justice is often the driver of political change.
Malta firmly believes that the objective of transitional
justice is to signal that impunity cannot triumph and
that justice will be served.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Ms. Blais (Canada) (spoke in French): I would like
to commend Belgium for putting forward this crucial
topic, which we hope will pave the way for us to explore
how the Security Council can foster peace by supporting
transitional justice initiatives in country-specific
contexts. I would also like to thank Her Excellency
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, Mr. Francisco de Roux and
Ms. Yasmin Sooka for their thoughtful and insightful
contributions to today’s debate (see S/PV.8723).
We must identify victims. We must support victims.
We must respond to their needs and ensure that they
are at the heart of transitional justice. Canada’s foreign
policy is based on the recognition of the importance
of reconciliation and survivor-centred approaches. We
know that the recognition of responsibility is essential
for a society to accept a history of widespread crime
and abuse and for a lasting peace to emerge. That
applies equally to war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.
(spoke in English)
Justice is also about establishing a historical
record on personal and institutional responsibility
for mass atrocities, addressing gender inequality
and social exclusion, providing access to remedies,
reforming institutions and bringing about a degree of
reconciliation between perpetrators and victims and
guarantees of non-recurrence. Transitional justice has
no magical powers. The journey to repairing harm is a
process, not an event, and it can be painful and lengthy.
While each country’s transitional justice path is
shaped by its own unique history and cultural context,
as we heard earlier this afternoon, the one striking
advance in the field of transitional justice is that victims,
often the most marginalized and vulnerable in society,
have become visible and their dignity is recognized and
respected. Transitional justice has helped victims and
their families articulate their demands for justice and
ensure that they are meaningfully engaged in shaping
the legal and social policies that affect them.
The centrality of the voice of victims and their
families was critical to our own transitional justice
processes. In seeking reconciliation with indigenous
peoples in Canada, we are undergoing a very difficult,
but necessary, exploration of our treatment of
indigenous peoples and providing reparations for the
harm that they have suffered. Their experience was
mostly one of humiliation, neglect and abuse, including
the economic disenfranchisement and exclusion from

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

traditional lands of Inuit and First Nations Peoples and a
systematic denial of the rights and history of the Métis.
We established two federal commissions: one
documenting the history and lasting impact of the
Canadian residential school system that separated
children as young as 5-years-old from their families,
punished them for speaking their own language and
sought to extinguish indigenous cultures entirely and
a commission into missing and murdered indigenous
women and girls that examined the systematic causes
of all forms of violence against indigenous women
and girls, including, sadly, sexual violence. As
Prime Minister Trudeau stated in 2017, the failure of
successive Canadian Governments to respect the rights
of indigenous peoples in Canada is our great shame.
And for many indigenous peoples, the lack of respect
for their rights persists to this day.
We are determined to bring the perspective that
we have gained about the importance of reconciliation
and a victim-centred approach into our work as Chair
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). The first
public hearings before the Truth, Reconciliation and
Reparations Commission in the Gambia have begun. I
believe that we will hear from the representative of the
Gambia shortly. Those hearings are set to last two years,
many of which will be televised. That is an incredible
step. It will likely be a long and, at times, distressing
journey full of sorrow and grief. We congratulate the
Gambia for its commitment to a credible and inclusive
transitional justice process and its engagement with the
PBC. As Chair of the PBC, we hope to continue working
with them this year and beyond. While reckoning with
its own legacy, we applaud the Gambia’s efforts to
foster such a process in Myanmar and contribute to the
prevention of future atrocities committed against the
Rohingya by launching proceedings against Myanmar
at the International Court of Justice.
In Argentina, the State worked long and hard to
confront past violations, including the disappearances of
30,000 people in the 1970s and 1980s. Innovations were
adopted that put the needs of victims first, such as the
truth trials that led to criminal trials and convictions and
an active judicial system on victims’ rights generally.
As highlighted by Ms. Bachelet, Chile embarked on
large-scale truth-telling processes that identified
victims and acknowledged the crimes committed
against them between 1973 and 1990. Innovations
included monthly reparations disbursements that were
paid to victims, who were also exempted from military

20-0389027/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

service. Most recently, moreover, earlier this week, the
Government of the Sudan announced several important
decisions that promise to pave the way towards
meaningful accountability for the Sudanese people.
Canada welcomes those decisions.
In conclusion, as the Security Council explores
how to integrate transitional justice considerations and
further build on its work, both in relevant countryspecific contexts and across thematic areas, Canada
believes that it will be critical to place victims at
the centre of that effort. It is critical because it is
empowering. It engenders dignity and fosters trust
and, as the evidence suggests, makes the possibility of
achieving the aims of transitional justice more likely,
which can only strengthen the State and society and
lead to a more lasting and sustainable peace.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Gambia.
Mr. Yabou (Gambia): Transitional justice is a longstanding concept, the success of which is evidenced
by the fact that countries in conflict and post-conflict
situations across Central and Eastern Europe, Africa
and Latin America have all adopted the outcomes of
its processes to usher in sustainable peace. We in the
Gambia are grateful to you, Madam President, for
organizing this open debate, which avails us of an
opportunity for countries like mine to contribute by
sharing our ongoing experience with this body. I also
join others in thanking all of our briefers today.
The Gambia has come a long way — from the
clutches of a brutal dictatorship through the dark days
of political impasse to our restored vibrant democracy
of today. Our story is one that should be shared
thanks to the progress we have managed to achieve
and continue to nurture with the support of the
international community. While attempting to limit my
intervention to the concept note (S/2020/98, annex) and
the questions formulated to guide the debate, allow me
to share with the Council the following key elements
that guided and informed our own transitional justice
as we endeavoured to consolidate and sustain the peace
that our electorates yearned to preserve following the
political impasse we endured in December 2016.
First, to establish a transitional justice process,
the Government thought it necessary to first embark
on a countrywide consultation with a view to gaining
the buy-in or consent of the population to support an
inclusive, nationally led and nationally owned process
28/34

13/02/2020

with the active inclusion and participation of women
and young people.
Secondly, after that countrywide consultative
process, the Government deemed it wise to set up
a truth, reconciliation, and reparations commission
that represented the views of the majority concerning
truth-seeking, reconciling communities and paying
reparations to victims by providing psychological
support and care, including medical and health care.
Thirdly, a successful transitional justice process
must take into account the need to establish the rule of
law by giving due consideration to concerns raised by
the population and civil society groups, including the
media. A fully participatory and inclusive constitutional
review commission was therefore set up to review the
current Constitution of the Gambia. The commission
did not limit its engagement to within the country, but
also reached out to the diaspora as part of its ongoing
consultations with all stakeholders.
Fourthly, in order to further strengthen the gains
made in human rights protection, the Gambia has,
for the first time, established a national human rights
commission that is now functional. Moreover, the
Government is now meeting its reporting obligations
under the various human rights instruments and treaties.
Fifthly, the population must be reassured of the
future by unveiling a truly inclusive development plan
that is capable of predicting a development trajectory
ambitious enough to restore hope.
Sixthly, and finally, is the issue of security sector
reform. Although a lot of work still needs to be done
in that endeavour, the Government of the Gambia has
established the Office of the National Security Adviser
to lead efforts towards the successful implementation
of security sector reform policy and strategy.
None of the six key elements I mentioned are
achievable without the timely intervention of the
international community. On the part of the Gambia,
our success and achievements are all thanks to the early
and timely support of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and the Peacebuilding Support Office, as well
as critical funding from the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
and other partners. The Gambia’s political transition
benefited immensely from a healthy dose of optimism
and catalytic transformation. With the launch of various
reform programmes and transitional arrangements and
thanks to the support of the PBF and other donors,
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

we are now witnessing good governance that is built
on the rule of law and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms
Political stability and participatory democracy
have become the order of the day. Freedom of press is
once again being consolidated with the proliferation
of more print media, private television stations and
new media houses. Civil society is now operating with
freedom, vibrancy and without fear of Government
clampdown or interference. Many of our young people
who undertook perilous journeys across the Sahara
and the Mediterranean are now returning home. They
need employment and social reintegration, for which
the Government continues to seek the support of
our partners.
Finally, the dividends of democracy, peacebuilding
and sustaining peace in the new Gambia must be
sustained. All the positive developments we have
witnessed would not have been possible without the
real-time support of the PBF and other partners.
The role of the PBC as a player in global peace and
security has transcended and must transcend beyond
its advisory role to the Security Council in the areas
of conflict prevention, development, peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
The President (spoke in French): I must remind
all speakers to limit their statements to four minutes so
that the Council can carry out its work in as timely a
manner as possible.
I now give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): We join other
delegations in thanking Belgium for convening today’s
debate. We also thank the briefers for their insightful
briefings (see S/PV.8723) and welcome the ministers
who spoke here today.
We thought it would be useful if Rwanda shared
its own experiences. In the aftermath of the genocide,
Rwanda had to think about the genocide itself and the
tasks of healing, reconciling the people and carrying
out justice. Rwanda had to seek justice to move forward
after that terrible and most disturbing time in our
history. The process of seeking truth and justice is not
about reprisal, but rather about healing, educating and
building relationships on the strength of communities
and collective interests. Rwanda has learned that
ensuring transitional justice and development

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

contributes to transformations that bring sustained and
meaningful improvement to people’s lives.
Our transitional justice involved a full range of
processes and mechanisms associated with our society’s
attempt to come to terms with a legacy of large-scale
past abuses in order to ensure accountability, serve
justice and achieve the reconciliation we needed.
The Government of Rwanda was quick to note that
a prompt response to the country’s problems was the
primary responsibility of the Rwandans themselves.
A homegrown and traditional solution, rather than
a classic judicial one, to their demands was needed
to redress the more than 1 million lives lost and the
thousands of cases piled up.
In order to address the issue of the thousands of
accused still awaiting trial and to bring about justice
and reconciliation at the grass-roots level, the Rwandan
Government re-established the traditional Inkiko
Gacaca, commonly known as the Gacaca courts. We
can happily say that it was a Rwandan solution to a
Rwandan problem that we had to address. The high
degree of popular participation generated a sense of
legitimacy among the population that, as result, brought
conflicting groups back together to move the country
forward. The Gacaca trials promoted reconciliation
by providing a means for survivors to learn the truth
about the death of their family members and relatives.
It also gave perpetrators an opportunity to confess their
crimes, show remorse and ask for forgiveness in front
of community members.
Rwandans considered the Gacaca courts to be
homegrown and that they fit into the underlying
objective of accountability, as well as balancing justice,
truth and peace and security in Rwanda. For Rwandans,
the Gacaca courts allowed ordinary Rwandan men and
women to play a central role in the proceedings and
outcomes of the entire process, which in fact sped up
the backlog of cases. In that way, the Gacaca courts
allowed Rwandans to own the justice process and work
together to find solutions to move forward. Today the
returns manifest themselves in a growing economy and
in a society in which the rights to a dignified life are
continuously embraced in our pursuit of unshakable
peace and unity. Rwandans can attest that the Gacaca
process played a key role in advancing peace and
reconciliation in the country.
It is important that we recognize that national
or homegrown initiatives such as the Gacaca courts

20-0389029/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

should be supported, as they have a more direct and
sustainable impact on affected populations. Those
initiatives, often referred to as transitional justice, are
most cost-effective, can more effectively contribute
to unity, reconciliation and peacebuilding, and have a
positive effect on broader justice reform.
To sustain the gains from transitional justice, Rwanda
has promoted inclusive and intentional leadership,
defined by three key pillars — unity, accountability
and thinking big. Those pillars have instilled in each
and every Rwandan a sense of responsibility towards
sustaining our collective gains and the discipline
needed to work towards our shared goal of realizing
peace and security in the country. Rwanda has also
adopted inclusive policies and structures and created
platforms — many of which were homegrown solutions,
at all levels — to encourage community involvement in
nation-building efforts and ownership.
In conclusion, in post-conflict situations, it is not a
flat principle that classic solutions will often redress the
situation. In Rwanda we have learned that transitional
justice can heal and contribute to reconciliation and
sustained peace, especially if it is context-based.
In 10 years, Gacaca courts tried more than
1.9 million suspects. But beyond the numbers, Rwanda’s
experiment in mass community-based justice shed
light on what happened in their local communities in
the 100 days, helped families find the bodies of their
loved ones, whom they could otherwise not have found,
ensured that tens of thousands of perpetrators were
brought to justice and set reconciliation in motion.
The Gacaca trials also served to promote forgiveness
and gave perpetrators the opportunity to confess their
crimes, show remorse and ask for forgiveness in front
of their entire community.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like, on behalf of my country, to thank
the Kingdom of Belgium for having organized this open
debate to arrange for an exchange of views on such an
extremely important subject. Transitional justice is an
essential pillar for strengthening security and stability
in States and societies that are going through a radical
political transformation. I also thank all those who have
given valuable briefings during this meeting.
30/34

13/02/2020

Iraq attaches the greatest priority to transitional
justice. We are strongly convinced that stability can be
realized only if we ensure justice for the victims of the
criminal acts committed under the former dictatorial
regime on the one hand, and by terrorist groups,
particularly the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh) and Al-Qaida, on the other. Perhaps the most
prominent example of those horrendous crimes is the
finding of hundreds of mass graves dug by the defunct
regime. We have also found more than 200 mass graves,
including 12,000 corpses, in various Iraqi governorates
that were under the control of Da’esh.
The legacy of violence and injustice left by the
previous regime, as well as the stark violations of
human rights perpetrated by Al-Qaida and Da’esh,
mean that transitional justice in Iraq faced a number of
political and security obstacles after 2003.
My Government is keen to achieve justice for the
victims of the dictatorial regime through a number
of mechanisms, starting with the holding of public,
transparent and fair trials of senior officials of the
former regime, and establishing many institutions to
implement transitional justice in order to ensure that
there is no impunity. The most important of them are
the Iraqi High Criminal Court, which deals with crimes
against humanity; the Supreme National Commission
for Accountability and Justice; the Property Claims
Commission; and the establishment of the Martyrs and
Political Prisoners Foundation. The Government also
provided financial and moral reparations to affected
victims, either through direct financial aid to the
victims or compensation for the families of martyrs
and prisoners.
The Government also provided young people,
women and children with financial and moral
compensation, as enacted in Law number 3 of 2006,
under article 132 of the Iraqi Constitution. Special
school opportunities are also provided for families of
martyrs and political prisoners in order for them to
complete higher studies in all specialties. Consecutive
Iraqi Governments created, after 2003, an environment
conducive to activating civil-society organizations.
Those organizations are playing an important role
in supporting the process of transitional justice by
collecting evidence and carrying out transparent
surveys among the population to see whether they are
satisfied with the progress made. They also deal with
the oppressed and defend them.
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The National Assembly also established an
advisory body that includes civil-society organizations
dealing with human rights. That was the first such body
in Iraq, with 19 representatives from different civilsociety organizations. It helps the parliamentary human
rights committee in effectively participating with civil
society in order to promote human rights in Iraq.
Given the Iraqi plan to create an environment
appropriate to preventing any recurrence of violations
and realizing the goals of transitional justice,
consecutive Governments were keen to strengthen
societal awareness supporting this process through
democratic education, with a view to supporting peace
and stability.

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

efforts to ensure accountability for terrorists, which
posed legal and logistical challenges for my country,
Iraq, at the domestic and international levels.
The President (spoke in French): I would like
to remind speakers one last time to kindly limit their
interventions to four minutes so that the Council may
finish its work within the allotted time.
I now give the floor to the representative of Angola.
Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): All protocol observed,
Angola is grateful to the delegation of Belgium for
promoting and convening this timely debate on such
an important and integral component of our common
efforts to advance sustainable peace and security.

Circumstances within Iraq are also connected
to circumstances outside the country that also affect
transitional justice. In May 2003, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1483 (2003), which considered Iraq
to be under occupation. The State institutions had
collapsed, and Iraq was managed by the authority of
the temporary coalition. Order number 1 of 16 May
2003 was adopted to eliminate the Baath Party, which
caused great social and political controversy. The
order was then superseded by Law number 10 of 2008,
based on national dialogue, giving way to a new stage
of evidence-collecting and holding accountable those
responsible for criminal acts against the Iraqi people
through a new institution, namely, the Supreme National
Commission for Accountability and Justice.

Transitional justice is a central component of
advancing sustainable peace in post-conflict States
and an important process through which the Security
Council has been promoting peace and security in order
to achieve global sustainable development. Along with
other United Nations peacekeeping processes such
as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security-sector reform and the strengthening of the rule
of law, transitional justice has significantly evolved,
from operating as a standard response to mass atrocity
to becoming the core component of peacebuilding
programmes. Despite the progress made to date, much
still needs to be done, and this open debate demonstrates
the Council’s renewed commitment to our common
efforts to maintain international peace and security.

Iraq seeks to strengthen its system, which is
based on institutional and constitutional legitimacy,
by implementing the provisions of its constitution of
2005 in order to overcome the heavy burden of the past
and through a number of measures aimed at promoting
stability and security. My country has nonetheless
faced serious challenges that have prevented us from
making progress — not only on transitional justice, but
in other areas as well.

The Angolan civil war raged from 1975 to 2002 and
was the longest-lasting conflict in Africa. It destroyed
roads, railways and bridges, decimated the agricultural
infrastructure and left much of the population with
no memory of what life was like in peacetime. Now,
in a time of peace and reconciliation, Angola has
focused on large infrastructure and public-works
projects, rebuilding important sectors of the economy,
in particular the education and health-care systems.
We also acknowledged the importance of building a
systemic plan on demobilization and reintegration, as
we recognized that these are not discrete activities,
nor are they simply adjuncts to demilitarization
programmes. Instead, they are part of a seamless web
of transition from military to civilian life.

The main challenge and threat was terrorism, as
manifested in the Al-Qaida and Da’esh terrorist groups.
Terrorism was not Iraq’s sole challenge; rather, it was
the prelude to and result of other challenges, including
administrative corruption, as well as economic and
financial challenges, along with their repercussions
in terms of deepening the development gap in the
various governorates of Iraq. In addition, the nascent
democracy and transitional justice aimed to achieve
justice for the victims. That was accompanied with

The Angolan Government acknowledges the
valuable impact of transitional justice in post-conflict
situations by promoting human rights, democracy,
the rule of law, reconciliation and peacebuilding.

20-0389031/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Transitioning from war to peace is a difficult task with
mounting challenges. We fully recognize that as the
process of transitional justice evolved and expanded over
the years, it also became increasingly normalized and
professionalized, with the same tools and frameworks
often used across different contexts without adequate
consideration of the everyday needs of the people across
the diverse and heterogeneous societies of post-conflict
States. That has been a roadblock and one of the key
challenges in making transitional justice more effective
at rooting out inequality, discrimination, societal
divisions and other structural root causes of violence
and conflict in post-conflict situations, particularly on
the African continent. We believe that those challenges
can be overcome by developing tailored transitional
mechanisms from a peacebuilding and reconciliation
perspective, taking into account the multiple justice
needs of the local population and other members
of society directly affected by the violence who are
intimately involved in reconciliation and peacebuilding.
The Angolan Government has made adhering to
international human rights standards one of its focus
points and has launched a model of transitional justice
rooted in the principles of reconciliation, forgiveness
and material truth, with an emphasis on attaining
long-term sustainable peace. The model encompasses,
among others, an interministerial reconciliation
commission established to develop a reconciliation
plan to honour the victims of political conflict during
the civil war that afflicted the country for more than
three decades. We firmly believe that such initiatives
are a critical step in linking the past and the future
as well as a building block for an integrated and
comprehensive peacebuilding process that can
serve as a model for neighbouring countries and the
international community. A comprehensive approach
to peacebuilding should allow for the establishment
of the security, legal, political, economic, structural,
cultural and psychosocial conditions necessary to
promote a culture of peace in the place of a culture of
violence. In that regard, justice as part of peacebuilding
must set up structures, institutions and relationships to
promote sustainability.
To conclude, please allow me to reaffirm the
Angolan Government’s commitment to advancing
peace, prosperity and human rights in Angola and
across the African continent.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
32/34

13/02/2020

Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union on behalf of its member States. I would like to
make some additional remarks in my national capacity,
focusing on lessons that can be learned from the
Croatian experience.
If I were to single out the most important lesson, it
is that transitional justice is a process that takes time.
Transitional justice activities started in Croatia as early
as the first half of the 1990s, during the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia, and some are ongoing, a quarter of a
century later. Both national and international criminal
proceedings against some of the alleged perpetrators
of war crimes started during the conflict but are also
continuing to this very day.
Croatia was a strong supporter of the establishment
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We have placed our trust in the
Tribunal to serve as an impartial international justice
institution that will help to establish the truth, punish
the perpetrators of the worst war crimes, provide
justice for the victims and shield populations from
future brutalities. Although it did not deliver as much
as we had optimistically hoped for, the Tribunal played
an important role in giving a voice to the victims. It has
demonstrated that crimes will not go unpunished and
that the international community has found a means
through which to react. Following the ICTY, other ad
hoc tribunals, as well as the International Criminal
Court, were established, learning from the ICTY’s best
practices and its shortcomings.
Croatia’s judicial system has also made significant
progress in its ability and willingness to deal with
war crimes. Public opinion towards war crimes has
also evolved. Some initial one-sided views have been
gradually replaced by the universalist paradigm that all
crimes should be punished, no matter the affiliation of
victims or the perpetrators. The clear lesson is that if in
the heat of the moment mistakes are made, we must be
brave enough to acknowledge and correct them.
For various reasons, including cultural ones, it may
take a long time for some victims to speak up and ask for
help, if they do it at all. It especially concerns victims
of sexual violence. Transitional justice also includes
an acknowledgement of the fact that victims have been
harmed and that they are entitled to an effective remedy
and adequate reparations. In Croatia, some victims of
sexual violence, their families and communities are
20-03890

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8723 (Resumption 1)

still coping with devastating and lasting consequences.
In 2015, the Croatian Parliament passed the Act on
the Rights of Victims of Sexual Violence during the
Military Aggression against Republic of Croatia,
which grants reparations that may include financial
compensation, a monthly stipend, access to free
counselling, as well as legal and medical aid. Those
benefits can be obtained through an administrative
process. A court sentence is not required, which makes
reparations faster and more accessible. The response of
victims was good, and a number of them were finally
compensated. Lessons were learned. First, to be able
to compensate victims effectively, we need a victimcentred approach and, secondly, we should tailor
restitution mechanisms accordingly.

that transitional justice is an important tool, which,
from its inception, continues to be developed not
only in the legal domain, but is also associated with
complex processes involving non-judicial instruments
and mechanisms employed to restore peace in postconflict circumstances.

Comprehensive transitional justice policy, if
designed and implemented with broad and inclusive
participation, in line with resolution 1325 (2000) and
following resolutions, has the potential to provide
recognition to victims, strengthen the rule of law, foster
trust, empower women and promote social integration
and reconciliation. It helps societies to heal and
decreases the likelihood of future conflicts. However,
transitional justice is a process. Sometimes we may
have to be patient, especially with regard to individual
accountability, but we should never quit. It may take
decades, but Al-Bashir, Mladić and others who enjoyed
impunity for their crimes while holding positions of
power must finally be brought to justice.

Taking into account my limited speaking time and
the late hour, I will not recall all of Ukraine’s actions
and judicial avenues to achieve justice in international
courts and tribunals, including the International
Criminal Court, and bring to account those responsible
for numerous war crimes and human rights violations in
the temporarily occupied territories of Ukraine. I will
also not delve into the details of the Ukrainian proposal
that dates back to early 2015 to deploy a peacekeeping
operation, under the auspices of the United Nations, with
a strong transitional justice component in its mandate.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We appreciate your
timely initiative, Madam President, to discuss this very
important issue.
I would like to put on record that my delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union.
At the outset, let me recall the widely recognized
notion that transitional justice is composed of different
sorts of regulations, including retributive justice,
restorative justice, reparatory justice, administrative
justice and constitutional justice — all of which shall be
understood as complementary to each other. We share
that vision and agree with the conclusion with regard
to the lack of a coherent and comprehensive approach
to the holistic implementation of all components of
transitional justice, as rightly mentioned in today’s
concept note (S/2020/98, annex). Still, there is no doubt

The subject of transitional justice gained special
importance for my country amid the ongoing foreign
aggression — almost six years of unprecedented, in
post-war Europe, violations of the basic norms and
principles of international law and order, the occupation
of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city
of Sevastopol and certain parts of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine.

Instead, I will focus on the practical realization of
transitional justice by the Ukrainian authorities. Before
doing so, it is important to refer to the 2010 guidance note
of the Secretary-General on a United Nations approach
to transitional justice and touch upon the normative
boundaries of the United Nations, in accordance with
international standards, in particular the fact that the
United Nations cannot endorse provisions in peace
agreements that include amnesties for genocide, war
crimes, crimes against humanity and gross violations
of human rights.
In 2019, the Legal Reform Commission was
established in Ukraine by presidential decree. The
Commission acts as a consultative and advisory organ
for the Head of State. The body includes a Working
Group on the Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied
Territories, which is tasked with the following: drafting
the national transitional justice model for Ukraine,
for both Crimea and Donbas, amending provisions
in Ukrainian legislation with regard to the residents
of temporarily occupied territories and drafting the
de-occupation and reintegration strategy for Crimea
and Donbas.

20-0389033/34

S/PV.8723 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

At present, the Working Group, jointly with
human rights non-governmental organizations and
international experts, developed the draft concept
of a State policy for the protection of human rights
in the context of overcoming the consequences of
international armed conflict on the territory of Ukraine.
The concept is a framework document and represents
an embodiment of the overall concept of transitional
justice for Ukraine. Its pillars relate to access to
justice and fair treatment, redress for victims of armed
conflict, restoration of violated rights, ensuring the
right to truth, the prosecution of perpetrators of serious
crimes and measures on non-repetition.
In conclusion, let me just note that almost in
all cases of recent conflicts, justice has become
transitional. Despite the absence of a universal solution
that would fit all scenarios, the establishment of truth,
justice, reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence
are among the preconditions for sustainable peace after
wars, conflicts and occupation. The ongoing RussianUkrainian conflict is not an exception here.
We hope that in the near future the efforts of
Ukraine, supported by the international community
and aimed at the peaceful settlement of the conflict
and the de-occupation of Ukrainian territories, will
serve as a historic example, including in the field of the
effective implementation of transitional justice during
ongoing conflicts, as well as post-war reintegration,
reconstruction and reconciliation.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.

34/34

13/02/2020

Mrs. Zabolotskaya (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We asked for the floor to comment on the
statements made by the delegations of Ukraine and
Georgia. In all United Nations meetings, regardless of
the subject at hand, those delegations continue to level
well-known mendacious accusations at my country.
We would like to underscore here that repeating such
statements does not make them truthful or convincing.
The representative of Georgia addressed the
circumstances surrounding the independent states of
South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Those tragic circumstances
were connected to the attack of the Saakashvili regime,
in power in Georgia in 2008, on the peaceful town of
Tskhinvali and on the peacekeepers stationed there,
under international mandate. As a result, both civilians
and peacekeepers died. To date, Georgia has not
taken responsibility for the attack or apologized to the
civilians of South Ossetia for the crimes perpetrated. It
has continued to attempt to lay its guilt on others.
The statement by the representative of Ukraine
has also shown nothing new. The delegation persists
in hiding the fact that Ukraine continues to wage
war against its people in Donbas, thereby violating
the Minsk agreements. It also continues to attempt to
impede the decision of the people of Crimea, which was
taken through a referendum to leave Ukraine, following
the violent overthrow of the legal President of Ukraine,
achieved with outside intervention.
We call on those delegations to make a positive
contribution to the work of the Organization and not to
consider issues that are not on the agenda of the meeting.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

20-03890
