18

General A1111embly-Twenty-eighth SeHion

2
Other decision, (continued)

Itnn

Date of
adoption

Appointments to fill vacancies in the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
Restoration of the lawful rights of the Royal Government of National Union of
Cambodia in the United Nations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Illegal occupation by Portuguese military forces of certain aecton of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau and acts of aggression committed by them against the people
of the Republic . .
........
... .....

99

14 December 1973

12

106

5 December 1973

12

107

18 December 1973

12

3050 (XXVIII). Admission of the German Democratic Republic and the Federal Republic of
Germany to membership in the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 22 June 1973 that the German Democratic
Republic and the Federal Republic of Germany should
be admitted to membership in the United Nations,1
Having considered separately the application for
membership of the German Democratic Republic 2 and
the application for membership of the Federal Republic of Germany, 8
I. Decides to admit the German Democratic Republic to membership in the United Nations;
2. Decides to admit the Federal Republic of Germany to membership in the United Nations.
2117th plenary meeting
18 September 1973

3051 (XXVIII). Admiseion of the Commonwealth
of the Bahamas to membership in the United
Nations

The General Assembly,
Having received the recommendation of the Security
Council of 18 July 1973 that the Commonwealth of
the Bahamas should be admitted to membership in the
United N ations,4
Having considered the application for membership
of the Commonwealth of the Bahamas, 11
Decides to admit the Commonwealth of the Bahamas
to membership in the United Nations.
2117th plenary meeting
18 September 1973
3056 (XXVIII). Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency to the General Assembly for
the year 1972/1973,6
1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 27, document A/9080.
2 A/9069-S/10945. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the Security Council, Twenty-eighth Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1973.
3 A/9070-S/ 10949. For the printed tex1, see Official Records
of the Security Council, Twenty-eighth Year, Supplement for
April, May and June 1973.
4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 27, document A/9097.

Aware that the statement of the Director-General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 29 October
1973 7 provides additional information on the main
developments in the Agency's activities,
I. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Acknowledges the action taken to expand· the
membership of the Board of Governors, providing for
increased representation of the developing countries;
3. Observes with appreciation that there has been a
further increase in the technical co-operation activities
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and in the
number of large-scale projects that the Agency is executing for the United Nations Development Programme;
4. Notes with appreciation the work carried out by
the International Atomic Energy Agency in surveying
present and future nuclear energy requirements in
developing countries and the Agency's aim of carrying
out such surveys as an ongoing activity of the Agency;
5. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency for the progress it has made in meeting its safeguards responsibilities and in negotiating agreements
for the application of safeguards with non-nuclearweapon States, in particular the agreements arrived at
with the European Atomic Energy Community and the
non-nuclear-weapon States of that organization;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency the records of the twenty-eighth session of the
General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities.
2159th plenary meeting
29 October 1973
3061 (XXVIII). Illegal occupation by Portuguese
military forces of certain sectors of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and acts of aggression committed hy them against the people
of the Republic 8

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence t9
Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Deeply concerned at the explosive situation resulting
from the continued illegal occupation by the armed
5 A/9088-S/ 10966. For the printed text, see Official Records
of the Security Council, Twenty-eighth Year, Supplement for
July, August and September 1973.
6 International Atomic Energy Agency, .Annual Report,
I July 1972-30 June J973 (Vienna, July 1973) and corrigendum; transmitted to the members of the General Assembly by
a note of the Secretary-General (A/9125 and Corr.1).
7 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyeighth Session, Plenary Meetings. 2159th meeting, paras. 2-28.
8 See also "Other decisions", p. 12.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

forces of Portugal of certain sectors of the Republic
of Guinea-Bissau and the intensified acts of aggression
committed by them against the people of GuineaBissau,
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter, refrain in their
international relations from the threat or me of force
against the territorial integrity or national independence
of any State or from taking any action inconsistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter,
Noting with satisfaction that the State of GuineaBissau assumes the sacred duty to expel the forces of
aggression of Portuguese coloniali:;m from that part
of the territory of Guinea-Bis.,;au which they still
occupy and to intensify the strugf!le in the Cape
Verde Islands, which form an integral and inalienable
part of the national territory of the people of GuineaBissau and Cape Verde,
A ware of the urgent need of the people of the newly
established State of Guinea-Bissau for all possible international assistance in its naticmal reconstruction programmes,
1. Welcomes the recent accession to independence
of the people of Guinea-Bissau, thereby creating the
sovereign State of the Republic of Guinea-Bi~sau;
2. Strongly condemns the policies of the Government of Portugal in perpetuating its illegal occupation
of certain sectors of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau
and the repeated acts of aggression committed by its
armed forces against the people of Guinea-Bissau and
Cape Verde;
3. Demands that the Government of Portugal des1st forthwith from further violation of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of GuineaBissau and from all acts of aggression against the
people of Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde by immediately withdrawing its armed forces from those territories;
4. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with AJticle 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations, to the critical situation resulting from the illegal presence of Portugal in GuineaBissau and to the urgent need for taking, as a matter
of priority, all effective steps to restore the territorial
integrity of the Republic;
5. Invites all Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system to render all necessary assistance to the Government of Guinea-Bissau in its national reconstruction
and development programmes;
6. Decides to keep the situation under continuous
review.

2 J63rd plenary meeting
2 November 1973

3065 (XXVIII). Scientific work on peace research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2817 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971 relating to scientific work on peace research,
Having considered with interest and appreciation the
first informative report on scientific works produced
by national and international, governmental and nongovernmental, public and private institutions with re-

3

gard to peace research, which was submitted by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly in pursuance of paragraph 1 of the above-mentioned resolution,
Conscious of the fact that, in such new and delicate
research, the bounds of information have by no
means yet been reached, and that it is necessary, in
such a wide and important field, to pursue research
in spite of its difficulties and short-comings, in order to
open the way to progress,
Considering that fundamental research on th· foundations of and conditions for peace, and on the origins,
motivations and spreading of conflicts. can contribute
considerably to the peace mission of the United Nations,
Considering it desirable further to promote the recording of the studies devoted to this subject, in pursuance of paragraph 1 of resolution 2817 ( XXVI),
1. Takes note of the first informative report submitted by the Secretary-General;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to draw once
more the attention of Member States to the invitation
extended by the General Assembly in paragraph 2 of
its resolution 2817 (XXVI) and to submit to the
Assembly, at its thirtieth session, a second informative
report containing, in addition to the titles of the studies
carried out, a brief summary of their contents;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Scientific work
on peace research".
2164th plenary meeting
9 November 1973
9

3066 (XXVIII). Co-operation between the Unite1l
Nations anrl the Organization of African
Unity

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2011 (XX) of 11 October
1965, 2193 (XXI) of 15 December 1966, 2505
(XXIV) of 20 November 1969, 2863 (XXVI) of
20 December 1971 and 2962 (XXVII) of 13 December 1972 on co-operation between the United Nat ions
and the Organization of African Unity,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations, the
specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to help to solve the serious
problemg which principally affect southern Africa,
Recalling in particular the urgent need to give effec-tive assistance to the victims of colonialism, racial
discrimination and apartheid resulting from political
and criminal acts of repression by the Governments of
Portugal and South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia,
1. Takes note with sati~faction of the report of the
Secretary-General on co-operation between the Unitc{l
Nations and the Organization of African Unity 10 and
commends his efforts in promoting such co-operation·
2. Reiterates the firm intention of the United N:1
tions, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to th::
present grave situation in southern Africa;
o A/9130 and Add. I.
10 A/9162.
