UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/44
1 November 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3708th meeting of the Security Council, held on 1 November 1996, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in the Great Lakes region", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is gravely concerned at the deteriorating
situation in the Great Lakes region, in particular eastern Zaire, and at
the effect which the continued fighting is having on the inhabitants of the
region and condemns all acts of violence. It underlines the urgent need
for a comprehensive and coordinated response by the international community
to prevent any further escalation of the crisis there.
"The Security Council calls for an immediate ceasefire and a complete
cessation of all fighting in the region. The Council calls on all States
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of neighbouring States
in accordance with their obligations under the United Nations Charter. In
this connection, it urges all parties to refrain from the use of force as
well as cross-border incursions and to engage in a process of negotiation.
"The Security Council, in the light of the letters of the
Secretary-General to the President of the Council (S/1996/875 and
S/1996/878), and the information received from the High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights regarding the
situation in eastern Zaire, is particularly concerned at the humanitarian
situation and the resulting large-scale movements of refugees and displaced
persons. It fully supports the efforts of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and humanitarian agencies to alleviate the
suffering. It calls on all parties in the region to allow humanitarian
agencies and non-governmental organizations to deliver humanitarian
assistance to those in need and to ensure the safety of all refugees as
well as the security and freedom of movement of all international
humanitarian personnel. It underlines the urgent need for the orderly
voluntary repatriation and resettlement of refugees, and the return of
displaced persons, which are crucial elements for the stability of the
region.

96-30063 (E)

011196

/...

S/PRST/1996/44
English
Page 2

"The Security Council agrees with the Secretary-General that the
situation in eastern Zaire constitutes a serious threat to the stability of
the Great Lakes region. It is convinced that the complex problems at issue
can only be resolved through early and substantive dialogue. The Council
urges the Governments of the region to pursue such a dialogue without
further delay in order to defuse the tension. The Council calls upon all
States in the region to create the conditions necessary for the speedy and
peaceful resolution of the conflict, and to desist from any acts that may
further exacerbate the situation. In this context, the Council welcomes
all regional efforts aimed at defusing tension in the region, in particular
the announcement of the meeting of regional leaders scheduled for
5 November 1996 in Nairobi, Kenya.
"The Security Council fully supports the initiative of the
Secretary-General to dispatch to the Great Lakes region a Special Envoy to
consult with all concerned in order to establish the facts relating to the
present conflict; to develop as a matter of urgency a plan to defuse
tension and establish a ceasefire; to promote a process of negotiation; and
to submit advice on the mandate to be given to a United Nations Special
Representative including on the size and structure of a United Nations
political presence which, in consultation with the Governments and parties
concerned, will be established in the Great Lakes region. The Council also
considers that the Special Envoy should be provided with adequate staff and
logistic resources in order to carry out his mission. The Council also
expresses the hope that the mediation efforts of the Organization of
African Unity and the European Union will complement those of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General. The Council calls upon all Governments and
parties concerned to cooperate fully with the mission of the Special Envoy,
and to contribute to the search for a comprehensive solution to the
problems facing the people of the Great Lakes region. Given the urgency of
the situation, the Council expresses the hope that the Special Envoy will
travel as soon as possible to the region and provide early information on
the situation there.
"The Security Council reiterates that the present situation in eastern
Zaire underlines the need to organize a conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region under the auspices of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity. To this end, it calls on
the Secretary-General to ask his Special Envoy to promote the convening and
to encourage the adequate preparation of such a conference on an urgent
basis.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

-----
