S/PRST/2003/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 December 2003
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4887th meeting of the Security Council, held on 18 December 2003, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council today heard a briefing from Ambassador Yuli
Vorontsov, the Secretary-General’s High-level Coordinator, on the fourteenth
report of the Secretary-General in accordance with paragraph 14 of Security
Council resolution 1284 (1999).
“The Security Council expressed its full support towards Ambassador
Vorontsov and for his tireless efforts on the issues of Kuwaiti and third country
nationals and the return of all Kuwaiti property. The Security Council agreed
that his mandate should continue in accordance with paragraph 14 of
resolution 1284 (1999).
“The Security Council shared the views expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report. The Security Council has strongly condemned the killing
of Kuwaiti and third country nationals by the previous Iraqi regime in violation
of international law, especially the removal from Kuwait of civilian men and
women, their execution in cold blood in remote sites in Iraq and a decade long
cover-up of the truth. The Security Council expressed its strong hope that
those responsible for these horrendous crimes should be brought to justice.
“The Security Council expressed its deep condolences to all of the
families of the Kuwaiti and third country nationals. The Security Council
expressed its continuing concern for the plight of the families of those persons
whose whereabouts are still unknown.
“The Security Council stressed the importance of the work of the
Coalition Provisional Authority, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the Tripartite Commission and its Technical Subcommittee and called on all
parties concerned to continue to work towards a satisfactory solution to all of
the outstanding humanitarian aspects covered by Ambassador Vorontsov’s
mandate.
“The Security Council expressed its deep regret that Kuwaiti property,
including its national archives, has not yet been returned to Kuwait and
encouraged the Coalition Provisional Authority and other parties concerned to
continue their commitment to the search for, and return of, all Kuwaiti
03-66313 (E) 181203

*0366313*

S/PRST/2003/28

properties and archives, in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 1483
(2003). The Security Council agreed to continue to keep Ambassador
Vorontsov’s mandate under review and looked forward to receiving his next
report.”

2
