S/PV.7064

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-eighth year

7064th meeting

Tuesday, 19 November 2013, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(China)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Azerbaijan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Guatemala. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Togo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Bliss
Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Rosenthal
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laassel
Mr. Masood Khan
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Gasana
Mr. M’Beou
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and
1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2013/631)

13-56988 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1356988*

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2013/631)
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort him
to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic
of Serbia, was escorted to his seat at the Council
table.
The President (spoke in Chinese): Under rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim Thaçi to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2013/631, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.
Mr. Zarif: Since my last briefing to the Council
in August (see S/PV.7026), the implementation of
the 19 April first agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations between Pristina and
Belgrade has passed an important milestone. It has
entered a critical and broadly more challenging phase.
The milestone was reached through the extensive
preparations and successful conduct of Kosovo-wide
municipal elections on 3 November.

2/25

19/11/2013

Despite the brief window opened for the preparation
of these elections, a significant number of Kosovo
municipalities recorded substantially higher turnout
than was the case in the most recent local elections,
held in 2009. For example, turnout in the Serb majority
municipalities south of the Ibar River was far higher
than during previous local elections over the past
decade. In municipalities north of the river, turnout
was comparatively lower, yet significant, despite a
frequently contentious atmosphere and numerous
practical challenges.
On election day, serious problems occurred in
northern Mitrovica, which unfortunately drew the
greatest part of attention from the international media.
Towards the end of the day, masked persons forced
their way into three major polling centres and managed
to destroy or otherwise contaminate many boxes of cast
ballots. Instances of voter intimidation and the stoning
of some vehicles belonging to the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
was also witnessed. These reprehensible criminal acts
were universally condemned by local and international
actors. A full investigation into the break-ins was
launched by the Kosovo Police, with the support of
EULEX.
On 6 November, a principal-level meeting of the
political dialogue was held in Brussels by European
Union (EU) High Representative Catherine Ashton
in order to jointly assess the situation. Taking into
account the irreparably damaged integrity of the
voting materials in northern Mitrovica, a repeat vote
at the three affected polling centres was subsequently
ordered by the Central Election Commission. Thanks
to extensive additional security measures, the re-vote
at all three centres was successfully organized two
days ago. The re-vote proceeded peacefully, without
significant incidents or problems.
Where required, the second round of the elections
of mayors will take place on 1 December. Due to some
procedural irregularities, the Electoral Complaints
and Appeals Panel has recommended to the Central
Electoral Commission a re-vote for two polling centres
in Zvečan municipality in northern Kosovo.
I have commended both parties to the Brussels
negotiations, as well as participating political entities
and the public at large, for their conduct during a
largely peaceful electoral process, which produced

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

unprecedented turnout in many areas. I take this
opportunity to commend the very close mutual
coordination carried out among the international
presences during the elections, and to express
special gratitude for the efforts undertaken by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to ensure timely registration and voting procedures in
the northern municipalities and to facilitate the voting
outside Kosovo.
The perpetrators of the crimes committed in
northern Mitrovica on election day need to be brought
to account. Equally, it is important to observe that these
deplorable incidents were isolated ones, and did not
reflect the positive conduct of the elections overall. The
results of the 3 November vote clearly demonstrated
the growing maturity of Kosovo’s polity, as well as a
strong public desire and motivation for participation in
the democratic process.
The United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) is continuing to focus its greatest
efforts and resources in support of the EU-led political
process and towards the fulfillment of its mandate. In
particular, the mission is making this support available
to the newly elected municipal authorities, especially
in the North, where significant tensions still persist
and where the high demands and expectations of the
population will accordingly be directed to newly
elected municipal presidents and councils.
The formation of the future association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities, a key component of the
19 April agreement, will require major efforts during the
forthcoming period, demanding the close attention not
only of the parties, but of the international community
as well. UNMIK intends to play its role as part of a
carefully coordinated collective effort, drawing on the
comparative advantages and resources of all those who
are ready to contribute.
The municipal elections were an indispensible step
forward towards securing fully legitimate and fully
empowered representation of the local communities in
Kosovo, both in the North and the South. At the same
time, no one involved can afford to close their eyes to the
deep uncertainties that persist among significant parts
of the population. Enthusiasm over the considerable
success achieved through these local elections must be
tempered. This success marked an essential but still
preliminary step in translating progress at the high
political level into local confidence and ownership on

S/PV.7064

the ground. Achieving this latter result will necessarily
be a gradual process. To succeed, it will demand the
continuous effort and attention of all those in a position
to assist.
Influential actors on every side should pursue a
more sustained engagement with the local stakeholders
in northern Kosovo. Effective partnerships and
cooperation with newly elected municipal leaders, along
with the provision of appropriate resources and support,
will be some of the critical elements; improving the
extent and quality of communication and dialogue at
local levels throughout Kosovo will be another, and one
which we believe demands closer attention. UNMIK
has committed its own resources to supporting such
comprehensive dialogue, including through a range of
local initiatives. We hope that this same commitment
will run across the board of all stakeholders; the process
demands combined and mutually reinforcing effort.
The aspirations of the people to fuller association
with the institutions of Europe continue to be a
crucial factor underpinning the current process of
normalization agreed between the leaders of Pristina
and Belgrade. At the top level, the European Union is
poised in one month’s time to take important decisions
regarding the further integration of States of the
Western Balkans. In late October, talks commenced on
a Stabilization and Association Agreement between the
European Union and Kosovo, which, when completed,
will mark the first contractual relationship established
between these two parties. Serbia is expecting detailed
consideration of its accession negotiating framework at
the forthcoming European Council meeting scheduled
for December. We welcome these developments as they
are fundamental to the further consolidation of peace
and security in the region.
These steps are much more than formalities. Both
Pristina and Belgrade have committed themselves
to the institutional steps required for a closer future
association with the European institutions. The
myriad reforms demanded for closer association must
be carried out alongside the dialogue process and in
harmony with the provisions specified in that process.
In Kosovo, this means, among other things, significant
reforms of public practices, not just in the crucial area
of the rule of law, but across the full range of Kosovo’s
public services and institutions.
The members of the Council continue to play
a key role in supporting the long-term prospects of

13-569883/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

the process under way in Kosovo. This encompasses
not simply the provision of resources adequate to
safeguarding the progress achieved, but also continued
political engagement with the parties to ensure that
their commitments hold fast through future challenges
and occasional setbacks.
Besides the difficult and often complex issues
involved in the direct implementation of the 19 April
agreement, attention must be focused on pressing
economic issues, as well as some fundamental
humanitarian issues. Recently, it has proved significant
that Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb family
associations of missing persons — those who have
suffered so deeply — have been able to lead the way
in working together to pursue progress. It is incumbent
upon political leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to engage
one another in the same spirit, as well for international
partners to ensure the adequate resources and other
support needed for the parties to persevere along the
path they have so wisely chosen.
The period ahead will be essential in consolidating
the positive outcomes of the Kosovo elections and the
important progress achieved in the Belgrade-Pristina
dialogue. Sustained engagement by the two parties will
also be important in securing the advancement towards
European integration, the normalization of relations and
inter-community reconciliation and lasting stability in
Kosovo.
I wish to express my deep appreciation to the
members of the Council for their continuing engagement
with the parties in that regard, despite the number of
other pressing matters that demand their attention.
Such engagement is indispensable to keep the process
moving forward. For our part, UNMIK continues its
close engagement to the same ends, both at political and
ground levels. The Council’s continuing support for the
work of UNMIK is deeply appreciated.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Zarif
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Serbia.
Mr. Dačić (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text
provided by the delegation): Allow me once again to
thank the members of the Security Council for the
attention they accord to the question of Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as for the understanding they show
by convening regular meetings under resolution 1244

4/25

19/11/2013

(1999) to discuss this matter every three months. Such
meetings continue to be necessary in spite the fact that
more than 10 years have elapsed since the first meeting.
I would also like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, who continues
to work with dedication to address questions upon which
normal life in the province depend, notwithstanding the
calls from Pristina to end the Mission.
Significant political breakthroughs were made
last year. The first agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations was reached — but
it does not mean much unless it is followed up with
consistent implementation of what has been agreed. As
acknowledged by many international officials and stated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/631),
the Republic of Serbia has demonstrated a high level
of flexibility in the dialogue and invested significant
efforts, in the belief that the negotiating process may
lead to a long-term and generally acceptable solution.
The Brussels agreement is the result of the political
dialogue; it determined the framework for local elections
and provided for the establishment of the community of
Serb-majority municipalities in Kosovo and Metohija.
Under the agreement, the community will have
competencies in the areas of economic development,
education, health and urban and rural planning. The
community will have an assembly, president and
executive organ. In addition, the community has had
certain security guarantees and guarantees in the field
of the judiciary confirmed, such as the appointment of a
regional commander for northern Kosovo and Metohija
from the ranks of Kosovo and Metohija Serbs and the
establishment of a chamber of the Court of Appeals in
Pristina, to be comprised of Kosovo and Metohija Serb
majority judges, with jurisdiction in all municipalities
with a Serb majority.
Guided by the desire to make their everyday lives
easier, the Government of the Republic of Serbia has
called on Serbs from Kosovo and Metohija to delegate,
at the local elections, their representatives to the
community of Serbian municipalities, who would be
their legitimate representative in talks with Belgrade
and Pristina. We consider that this is the only way to a
lasting and sustainable solution, and that the legalization
of the status of the Kosovo and Metohija Serbs before
the international community strengthens their position.
Whereas Serbia invested maximum efforts to
encourage the Kosovo and Metohija Serbs to participate

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

in the elections in great numbers, the Provisional
Institutions in Pristina did not bother to create an
appropriate climate, and often not even the basic
conditions, to bring that about. It is therefore possible
to say that the community of Serbian municipalities
will be formed not thanks, among other things, to the
efforts of the Provisional Institutions in Pristina but in
spite of them.
Although we arrived at precise agreements
in Brussels on all the details of the pre-election
process, we found ourselves before the voting in a
situation of having to go to European Union (EU)
headquarters anew in order to establish once again
the list of conditions — already established long
before — because Pristina did not fulfil almost any
of the conditions in the intervening period. It did not
prepare status-neutral election materials, no member
of the Central Election Commission from the ranks
of the Serbian community was elected in time and the
majority of displaced persons were effectively made
unable to vote. Besides, no legal framework was set
up to facilitate the establishment of the community
of Serbian municipalities. But, 6,000 Albanians who
had never lived in northern Kosovska Mitrovica were
entered in its voters list, while a significant number of
Serbs who lived in the northern part of the town were
entered into the voters list of the southern part, with the
intent to influence elections results.
In addition, the candidates of the Serbian minority
were intimidated, in more ways than one. The mayoral
candidate for northern Mitrovica was physically
attacked, and four candidates from the Serbian list
were accused of war crimes. Assurances that secret
indictments against Serbs for alleged war crimes did
not exist were invalidated by the accusations made
on Kosovo television that four Serbs from the Civic
Initiative Srpska were under suspicion of having
committed war crimes. It is indicative that none of them
had been suspected before they became candidates for
local elections in Kosovo and Metohija.
The suspicion of a problematic war past, however,
was no obstacle for Albanian candidates. Thus, we have
found ourselves in a situation where elections in two
constituencies will most probably have to be repeated,
as the candidates who won in the first round have been
indicted of war crimes in the meantime. The group of 15
indicted by the EU Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) also
includes a number of other high-level representatives of

S/PV.7064

the Provisional Institutions in Pristina, including their
representative in Tirana.
In such an atmosphere it was not easy to canvass,
let alone vote in the elections. Nevertheless, the
Government of the Republic of Serbia is very satisfied
with the fact that more than 45,000 people turned out to
vote in the Serbian municipalities. Although our highestranking officials were often banned from travelling to
Kosovo and Metohija, we did manage to motivate Serbs
to go out to vote. Just today, we received the news that
Mr. Aleksandar Vulin, a minister without portfolio
of the Government of Serbia, was again banned from
going to Kosovo and Metohija. At the same time, the
highest State representatives of other countries, such
as Albania and Turkey, were able to travel there and
participate in campaigns for local elections.
I would like to take this opportunity to call on
Pristina and international actors to ensure conditions
for the holding of the second round of local elections
in municipalities with Serb majorities, in order to avoid
a repetition of the gross violations of the elections
procedure that we witnessed on 3 November, when
necessary security measures were not taken to ensure the
free expression of the will of the citizens. We condemn
once again the violence responsible for the repetition of
the first round of the elections in Kosovska Mitrovica.
I underscore the resolve of Belgrade to help, as much
as it can within its powers, to bring the perpetrators to
justice. I am pleased with the success of the repeated
first round of the elections in northern Kosovska
Mitrovica, which was completed without incident, even
though it is not clear why the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe requested the counting of
the votes to take place outside Kosovska Mitrovica, in a
locality in which Albanians live, as no reasons existed
for that.
It is very important for the Republic of Serbia that
agreements on the implementation of the Brussels
agreement take place in accordance with the will
and intentions of the negotiators who initialled the
agreement, so that the position of the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija is defined and presented in clear terms.
The agreements were not easy to arrive at for our
delegation, but we were determined from the very
beginning to fulfil what we put our signature to. We
therefore weighed each and every detail and assessed
its applicability carefully before we signed on the
dotted line. That is why we succeeded in fulfilling our

13-569885/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

commitments, as stated in the report. I believe that this
statement would differ considerably from those I have
made previously in this Chamber if the other side had
also approached the implementation of the agreements
with equal seriousness, because at least some of the
problems would have been overcome. The climate
before the local elections would also have improved,
and the encouragement to minority communities to take
part in the elections would have been much stronger.
However, Priština has not yet taken the necessary
steps in key areas, including the adoption of laws in
accordance with the agreements reached by the two
sides in Brussels, in particular the laws on amnesty,
the local Kosovo budget and local self-government, the
fulfilment of its obligations with regard to integrated
boundary management, the establishment of a new
network of judiciary organs, and the appointment of
members of the Regional Command Team North in
northern Kosovo and Metohija.
In the draft law amending the Law on Local SelfGovernment, which was supposed to incorporate
the community of Serb-majority municipalities into
the legal framework of the provisional institutions of
self-government, the community of Serb-majority
municipalities is mentioned only in supplemental
paragraph 4 of article 32, which provides for the
abolition of the community by a two-thirds decision of
its members. The draft law makes no other reference to
the community, despite the provisions of the Brussels
agreements. We therefore conclude that Priština is
interested only in regulating the procedure for abolishing
the community of Serb majority municipalities.
The report also states that the Law on Amnesty has
been adopted. Yet, in assessing the constitutionality of
that law, the Constitutional Court of Kosovo found some
of its articles to be unconstitutional. Acts that have not
been incorporated into the Law on Amnesty include
those for which the judiciary organs of the provisional
institutions of self-government may prosecute persons
of Serbian nationality in Kosovo and Metohija. Some
international judges of the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo, in particular Robert Carolan of the United
States and Almiro Rodrigues of Portugal, rendered
dissenting opinions in which, contrary to the Court’s
decision, they argued that amnesty for such acts does
not contravene the Constitution.
Pristina has not fulfilled its obligation to establish
a new functional network of courts in the territory

6/25

19/11/2013

of Kosovo and Metohija. Under the agreements that
have been reached, the courts in northern Kosovo and
Metohija that functioned within the judiciary system of
the Republic of Serbia ceased to try cases in anticipation
of the establishment of new courts that would take over
and continue to process those cases. The buildings
that will house the new courts and prosecutor’s offices
have not yet been designated, and neither the number
of employees to work in the individual institutions nor
the concrete conditions they will have to fulfil has been
established. Besides, Pristina does not agree with the
establishment of a basic court but only of a court of
appeals, which is totally unacceptable to our side.
Likewise, the Deputy Regional Commander of the
Kosovo police for the north was appointed, without the
agreement of our side, from among members of the
Albanian community south of the Ibar River, namely,
from the municipality of Vučitrn, contrary to the
agreement on ethnic representation within the regional
command of the Kosovo police.
Once again, I have focused on problems that were
discussed at the last meeting, as they concern questions
of vital importance for the Serbian community in
Kosovo and Metohija. They concern its legal status,
its financing, and the physical, legal and economic
security of all those who belong to it. I consider it my
duty to warn of the lack of good will that exists on the
Pristina side.
The community of Serbian municipalities is
necessary as a mechanism for the protection of
minority interests in Kosovo and Metohija because
of the experiences those municipalities have had,
even after the arrival of international forces. Since
10 June 1999, when the international civil and military
presences in Kosovo and Metohija were established,
over 7,000 physical attacks have been registered, while
three-fourths of the localities in which Serbs lived
before the war have been ethnically cleansed.
In the Third Opinion of the Advisory Committee
on the Framework Convention for the Protection of
National Minorities, mentioned in paragraph 39 of
the report, concern is expressed over the increase in
the number of security incidents directed against
non-Albanian communities during the past several
years. Approximately 2,000 such attacks were
registered in the period between January and October
2012 alone, 70 per cent of which were directed against
the Serbian community.

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

The Government of the Republic of Serbia has also
condemned in the strongest terms the attacks on the
international forces in Kosovo and Metohija. Allow
me to express on this occasion our profound regret at
the death of Audrius Šenavičius, a Lithuanian member
of EULEX. Belgrade is ready to participate in the
investigation of that case. I would also like to express
the hope that there will be no more victims in Kosovo
and Metohija.
This is the first time that the institutions of
Serbia, including its Government, its church and the
vast majority of the political parties represented in its
Parliament, have joined forces in calling on Serbs in
Kosovo and Metohija to come out and vote. However,
this is not the first time that they voted. In the 2001
elections, their coalition, Return, received almost
90,000 votes.
It cannot be said that Serbs did not try to participate
in organizing their life in the province or that they did
not attempt to protect their interests by creating fertile
conditions for the progress of society as a whole. They
did not boycott the sessions of the local Parliament,
although they had to travel to them in armoured vehicles
of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). They acquiesced to that
solution in the hope that it would be temporary and that,
in the end, it would lead to further solutions and make
life more normal.
Regrettably, there were no such results. The desired
changes failed to materialize. Over time, even the name
of their coalition and their main objective began to
sound bitterly ironic. Coalition Return could do nothing
to achieve the return of displaced Serbs, because,
instead of the assistance promised, it was met with
outright obstruction from Priština and a lack of interest
on the part of the representatives of the international
community.
According to data from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), in the almost
15 years since June 1999, out of the 230,000 people
who left their homes in Kosovo and Metohija, 18,000
have returned. In our assessment, no more than 4,000
of these are sustainable returnees. Only between 1 to
2 per cent of the internally displaced persons (IDPs) has
managed to stay for good. Of particular concern is the
drastic decrease in the number of returnees registered
in 2013 compared to the two previous years. According
to the UNHCR data, 122 displaced persons returned to
Kosovo and Metohija by the middle of August, whereas

S/PV.7064

442 returnees were registered in 2012. Meanwhile, in
the latest privatization round in September, the Kosovo
Privatization Agency, about whose unlawful operations
we have already warned — just as we warned of the
destructive effects of the sale of companies in Serbian
localities — put up for sale the Silovo refrigerator
complex, in which the collection centre for IDPs from
the Kosovo Morava river basin is situated.
The IDPs did try to effect legal regulation of at least
some of the issues. Slightly more than 30 per cent of the
displaced households sued to protest the usurpation of
their property, but as many as 70 per cent of those claims
remained unanswered by the provisional institutions in
Priština. I would also like to draw attention to the large
number of decisions by the Kosovo courts throwing
out Serbian and non-Albanian claims for destroyed
property against UNMIK, KFOR and the provisional
institutions, with the boilerplate explanation that there
is no legal responsibility. Moreover, plaintiffs who lose
their cases are asked to pay high legal fees, even though
they are IDPs and the request runs counter to the socalled Pinheiro Principles on the rights of displaced
persons.
All of this indicates that the rule of law has not
yet been established in Kosovo and Metohija and that
human rights are not properly protected, especially the
rights of minorities. The case of Fatmir Limaj, former
Minister for Transport and Telecommunications in
the Government of Kosovo, and his co-defendants,
indicted for the killing, torture and threats to the health
of Serbian and Albanian civilians and prisoners of
war in the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) base in the
village of Klecka is a textbook example of the weakness
of the Kosovo and Metohija judiciary and the influence
of the politically powerful, most of them recruited from
the ranks of the erstwhile KLA, on the political, legal
and social system in Kosovo and Metohija as a whole,
including the international judiciary component. All
developments in connection with the Klecka case,
beginning with the disallowing of the testimony of key
witness owing to the change in the Kosovo criminal
law and the acquittal, all over again, of Limaj and
his associates, mentioned in the report, cast a long
shadow of doubt over the functioning, independence
and impartiality of the judiciary system in Kosovo and
Metohija. Serbia is disappointed with the decision, but
it hopes that the EULEX prosecutor will appeal it.
We once again call attention to the importance of
a full and efficient investigation of the allegations of

13-569887/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

19/11/2013

trafficking in human organs, contained in the report of
Mr. Dick Marty. To that end, Serbia is ready to continue
to cooperate with the EULEX investigation team and
hopes that the investigation will yield results soon.

normalize relations between Belgrade and Pristina
does not mean that our position has changed regarding
non-acceptance of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence.

Regarding our activities, the report fails to mention
the readiness of the institutions of the Republic of Serbia
to cooperate with UNMIK with regard to documents on
unpaid pensions to persons from Kosovo and Metohija.
The activities of UNMIK are mentioned in paragraph
26, but no reference is made of the request on the part
of the Office for Kosovo and Metohija to UNMIK,
on two occasions, to provide data that would make it
possible for the Office to implement the decision of
the European Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg
under which the Republic of Serbia is required to take
measures to regulate those pensions.

We expect that all the issues I have mentioned will
be the subject of the resumed dialogue in Brussels on
5 December. We have achieved very important results
in strengthening peace and stability in the region and
in addressing many problems in the relations between
Belgrade and Pristina. The Republic of Serbia continues
to be committed to continuing the Brussels process in
the best interests of all, in good faith and with a good
will.

The Republic of Serbia is strongly committed to
pursuing active and constructive negotiations with
Pristina at all levels, as well as to implementing the
agreements reached so far. We expect that Pristina
will make additional efforts to ensure that mutually
acceptable solutions can be reached and agreements
implemented. It is particularly important that Pristina
refrains from unilateral moves in the forthcoming
period that could threaten the future of the dialogue and
destabilize the security situation in the province.
What we all want, once the community of Serbmajority municipalities is established, is to set out
together along the road to building a society that will
head towards the future while addressing, not forgetting,
the problems of the past. If I may, I would like to cite
a definition of reconciliation that I came across while
reading about transional justice, according to which
reconciliation implies a society that has rediscovered
the capacity to manage conflicts in a non-violent way;
a society that can live with a multitude of opinions,
races, cultures and religions and that sees in them the
basis for its identity; a society whose structures create
the conditions for development that includes rather
than excludes individuals and that is based on ethics
accepted by all. The Government of the Republic
of Serbia is doing its utmost to build such a society,
and we would be very happy to see the same efforts
made in Pristina, too. We have made difficult decisions
this year, and the stable support we enjoy among our
voters is indicative of the support of the majority of our
citizens for our policy.
I would like to reiterate once again that the dialogue
in Brussels is status-neutral, and that the desire to
8/25

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to Mr. Thaçi.
Mr. Thaçi (spoke in Albanian; English interpretation
provided by the delegation): It is a special pleasure for
me to address the Council at this final meeting on
Kosovo for the year, and to discuss the progress made
in Kosovo during the past three months, particularly
the holding of the first local elections in the entire
territory of the Republic of Kosovo and the process of
European Union (EU) integration, as well as the most
recent results in the dialogue on the normalization of
relations between Kosovo and Serbia.
I would first like to express my sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his continuing
support of peace and progress in Kosovo and the region.
Before sharing my views on those developments, I
would like to point out, as we approach the end of the year,
that 2013 has been a historic year for the region, largely
for two major reasons. First, on 1 July, the European
Union accepted Croatia as its twenty-eighth member
State, making it a model and an inspiration for the other
Western Balkan countries pursuing EU integration.
The second was the first inter-State agreement reached
on the normalization of relations between Kosovo and
Serbia, facilitated by EU High Representative Baroness
Ashton. The historic agreement between Kosovo and
Serbia, reached in the early part of the year, is firm
evidence of the transformative power that the European
Union holds for countries that wish to join it. The EU
remains the only alternative and the only hope for the
people of our part of Europe.
In that European spirit, on 3 November, following
laws enacted by the Assembly of Kosovo, the Republic
of Kosovo for the first time organized local elections
for mayors and municipal assemblies throughout its
13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

territory, which served as an inspiration to all the
communities of Kosovo. With a high turnout that
exceeded 50 per cent of those with the right to vote in 38
municipalities of the country, this democratic process
expressing the will of the people was carried out freely
and peacefully, enabling citizens throughout Kosovo
to choose legitimate municipal leaders, including in
four municipalities in northern Kosovo — Leposaviq,
Zveçan, Zubin Potok and northern Mitrovica — for the
first time since the war of 1999. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Central Election Commission
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe for their technical facilitation of the elections
in the North, along with the EU Election Observation
Mission, which was strongly committed to monitoring
and observing the process.
The Government of the Republic of Kosovo has
been committed to fair and free democratic elections,
as well as to encouraging broad participation by all its
citizens in the 3 November elections, which were highly
praised by international observers and undoubtedly
constitute an important moment for Kosovo’s maturing
statehood, for the internal institutional consolidation
of the political and constitutional system, and for
meeting all the requirements resulting from the
Ahtisaari Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo
Status Settlement package. It has closed the door on all
possible scenarios for partitioning Kosovo’s terrritory
or federalizing it on ethnic grounds.
For that reason, the elections were a victory for the
adherents of every political party and institution in the
Republic of Kosovo. We have shown in the best possible
way that Kosovo is a democratic country and that we
can hold an election process in the spirit of a superior
political culture. I am confident that its success will be
repeated on 1 December in the 24 municipalities that
will hold runoffs in mayoral elections.
In most of Kosovo, election day passed peacefully
and calmly. Only at three polling stations in northern
Mitrovica were there isolated incidents involving
Serb extremist groups. They were orchestrated and
organized attacks on the fundamental right of citizens.
The obstruction, intimidation, blackmail and violence
shown towards the people at those polling stations by
certain groups in northern Kosovo was contrary to
society’s democratic principles, hinders the process
of building an inclusive and tolerant State and affects
Kosovo’s path to European integration. However, the
fact that the people came out to vote was the best

S/PV.7064

response to the boycott, and it failed. The decision of
the Central Election Commission, as an independent
body, to repeat only the elections in northern Mitrovica
on 17 November was welcomed and accepted by all
the political stakeholders. The repeat vote was held
this past Sunday, 17 November, and the entire process
occurred without problems.
The importance of the elections of 3 November was
that they served as a direct test as well as a result of the
direct inter-State dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia,
and also to legitimize our joint efforts to build an
inclusive society based on the European Charter of Local
Self-Government, in which municipalities function
as the legitimate units of basic local Government. My
Government is convinced that this turning point will
speed up the improvement in inter-ethnic relations in
Kosovo and accelerate Kosovo’s progress on the road to
European integration.
The 3 November elections and acceptance of
their legitimate results are also a prerequisite for
establishing the community of Serb-majority Kosovo
municipalities, based on the 19 April Brussels
agreement. However, the community, which will be
established in accordance with the laws of Kosovo and
will be similar to the model of the existing association
of Kosovo municipalities, will have no executive or
legislative functions. That means that it cannot serve
as a substitute for municipal assemblies, and thus that
municipal responsibilities cannot be transferred to it.
No one can replace or relativize the direct power of the
free vote of the citizens of Kosovo.
I would like to also inform the Security Council
of our progress regarding the European Union. On
16 October, we received a progress report from the
European Commission for Kosovo affirming the
progress of our European agenda and the challenges
on the road ahead. The progress report is positive
and objective and praises Kosovo’s relations with its
neighbours as an achievement exemplary of peace,
stability and the European perspective of Kosovo and
the region in general. We have taken into consideration
all of the recommendations emanating from the
progress report, with the highest level of State and
institutional seriousness and responsibility, and are
seriously engaged in working to meet these criteria.
In the context of the dialogue on visa liberalization,
Kosovo has changed and has adopted important
legislation, including on asylum and the financing

13-569889/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

of political parties and against trafficking in human
beings, as noted in the report. The report also specifies
the criteria for economic progress that Kosovo must
meet, confirming that Kosovo is moving towards
establishing a functioning market economy.
I am therefore proud that all of these positive
developments identified in the EU progress report
are the results of the hard work of the institutions of
Kosovo in pursuing an ambitious agenda. In this regard,
the Republic of Kosovo achieved a historic milestone
during the reporting period. Following the EU decision
to start negotiations for the signing of a Stabilization
and Association Agreement on 28 October, that decision
was materialized with the onset of the first round of
negotiations between the EU and Kosovo.
The start of negotiations between Kosovo and
the European Commission on the Stabilization and
Association Agreement opens a new chapter for
Kosovo and the EU. It is a process of modernization
for the country and society. The Agreement is the
foundation of our relations with the EU and the first
formal step towards EU membership; it is the only way
to achieve EU membership. Only prospective accession
candidates may conclude such an agreement with the
EU. The launch of negotiations on the Stabilization
and Association Agreement has placed Kosovo in the
formal and official process of EU membership.
The institutions of the Republic of Kosovo are
committed to successfully concluding the negotiations
before next spring, with the aim of opening the way to
Kosovo’s EU accession process. The European agenda
is a priority of the Republic of Kosovo that unites all
political parties, communities and civil society, and
reflects the desire and will of all of the citizens of
Kosovo.
The Structured Dialogue on the Rule of Law
between Kosovo and the EU has also continued to
function, representing a long-term commitment
between the EU and Kosovo to strengthening the rule
of law. The dialogue between Brussels and Pristina
focuses on the judiciary and the fight against organized
crime and corruption.
During the reporting period, the Republic of Kosovo
was recognized by four additional States Members of
the United Nations — El Salvador, Grenada, Libya and
Thailand — increasing the number of international
recognitions to 104, representing more than half of
the States Members of the United Nations. I take this

10/25

19/11/2013

opportunity to once again thank those countries for
their decisions to formally recognize Kosovo. This
ongoing process has proven to be based on Kosovo’s
consistent, positive achievements, especially this year.
We expect the number to grow further with countries
from all continents of the world. Therefore, in this
Chamber, where I have always had the satisfaction of
representing a just cause, I invite other countries to
recognize the Republic of Kosovo.
The most recent recognitions demonstrate that this
process has a global reach and further consolidates the
international position of the Republic of Kosovo as a
geopolitical and legal reality. Our interactions have
advanced at the multilateral level, through which we
aim to build bridges and make our contribution to
building peace and security through foreign policy. The
Republic of Kosovo has also strengthened its position
in international indices.
For the reporting period, I draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that the World Bank, in its credible
Doing Business 2014 report, ranks Kosovo 86 out of
189 countries in ease of doing business and positively
praises the dynamic changes and concessions that have
been made in the business environment of Kosovo. Over
the past two years, Kosovo has improved its ranking by
40 places overall. For the first time since it was included
in the Doing Business report, Kosovo has been named
one of the top five or 10 countries in the world with
respect to reform, making the most progress on three or
more indicators measured by the Doing Business report
On 2 September, the Constitutional Court of the
Republic of Kosovo concluded that the procedure for
the adoption of the Law on Ratification of the First
International Agreement on Principles Governing
the Normalization of Relations between the Republic
of Kosovo and the Republic of Serbia and the
implementation plan for the agreement are in accordance
with the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.
On 3 September, the Court also decided that the
procedure followed for the adoption of the Law on
Amnesty was in accordance with the Constitution
of the Republic of Kosovo. The Constitutional Court
also declared inadmissible the motion of a group of
deputies on amendments to the Law on the Budget of
the Republic of Kosovo, which provides a fund for the
North. Therefore, that Law is considered complete.
The decisions of the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo show that democracy is functioning and

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

further strengthen the political cohesion of Kosovo in
agreements reached with Serbia, thereby demonstrating
the deep commitment of Kosovo society to moving
forward on the path towards the full normalization of
relations between the two States.
I am also pleased to report that the Kosovo police
has assumed the responsibility from the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) for the protection of Serb religious and
historical sites. To date, only the Dečani Monastery
remains under the protection of KFOR. The protection
of the Pejë/Peć Patriarchate was transferred from
KFOR to the Kosovo police at the end of August of this
year. The formation of the seven-member Commission
for the Council of Heritage Protection in Prizren, as
required by the law for the protection of the historical
centre of Prizren, was completed on 24 September.
Kosovo’s legal framework continues to guarantee
minority representation in all areas of Kosovo society.
Kosovo supports the rights of persons belonging to
minorities and protects their vital interests and cultural
rights, including those of the Serbian Orthodox Church,
thereby becoming a model for other countries of the
region. In this spirit, the promotion of inter-religious
dialogue and coexistence has become a long-term
priority. One of the largest international conferences
of its kind, with the participation of representatives of
various communities — Islamic, Serbian Orthodox,
Catholic, Protestant, Evangelical and Jewish — was
organized on 17 September in the city of Pejë/Peć. Such
events will follow in the future.
Following the adoption of the law on public
broadcasting, a Serbian television channel was
licensed, becoming the second channel of the State
public broadcaster Radio Television of Kosovo (RTK).
RTK2 began broadcasting in June and became fully
operational in August. As an important medium for
the Serb community in Kosovo, it has been welcomed
by the whole of Kosovo society. Now every family
has access to this medium, and as such it has become
an important source of information and promotes the
interests of the Serb community.
It is worth noting that the security situation has
been and remains calm in most parts of the territory of
the Republic of Kosovo. However, on 19 September, a
member of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) was killed in northern Kosovo. Lithuanian
officer Audrius Šenavičius was shot with a firearm in
a European Mission car in which six members of the

S/PV.7064

Mission were traveling to the border crossing between
Kosovo and Serbia in Jarinje. This murder of the
customs officer from Lithuania was the most serious
attack since the inception of the Mission and came at a
time when the EU is strongly committed to normalizing
the situation between Kosovo and Serbia, especially in
the North, where Serbia still has extensive structures.
Violence against EULEX troops violates law and order
throughout the territory of Kosovo. The murder of a
EULEX member is a direct attack against the European
Union.
We do not want to prejudge the outcome of the
investigation, but the motives for the murder of the
Lithuanian customs officer may be related to the
normalization of relations between the Republic of
Kosovo and Serbia and the efforts of extremist groups
in the North to prevent that process. The Government
of Kosovo has made it clear that the killing of a member
of EULEX was an attack on the values of the State of
Kosovo. The Government, in cooperation with EULEX,
KFOR and other international partners, is dedicated
to continuing to perform its constitutional and legal
obligations to strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo,
especially in the northern part of the country.
The implementation of the agreements reached in
the framework of the dialogue with Serbia in Brussels,
with the help of the European Union, has led to positive
developments, but serious delays have also arisen in
the implementation dynamics. It is worth mentioning
that our efforts as two sovereign and neighbouring
countries during the reporting period have given rise
to the conclusion of a number of new agreements, such
as the agreement on telecommunications and energy.
After many efforts, as a result of the agreement on
telecommunications, Kosovo will finally achieve one
of the important attributes that has been missing from
its statehood. Kosovo will have its own telephone code,
to be issued by the International Telecommunication
Union. Ultimately, that means establishing legality and
regulation. In practice, it means that other operators
from Serbia should stop unauthorized operations and
service delivery, which have caused great cost to the
Kosovo budget.
Besides the telecommunications agreement, we
have also reached another very important energy
agreement. The agreement on electricity ultimately
ends Serbia’s illegal interference in Kosovo’s electricity
system.

13-5698811/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Success has been achieved in the consolidation
of the customs system with respect to the collection
of taxes in the north at two border crossings between
Kosovo and Serbia. Kosovo customs will start the
collection of taxes beginning from 14 December. The
income from those taxes will be assigned to the fund
for the development of the northern municipalities on
the basis of the legal framework of Kosovo customs.
We remain committed to continuing the dialogue
with Serbia in 2014 and to opening talks on new issues
that are important to good-neighbourly relations and
the quality of life of our citizens.
Finally, I want to reiterate that all United Nations
institutions have played a crucial role and have been
involved in State-building in Kosovo, namely, in the
process of the declaration of independence under
the Ahtisaari plan as a result of United Nations
negotiations, and the confirmation of its independence
by the International Court of Justice in July 2010.
The Republic of Kosovo is grateful for that colossal
contribution, it being one of the greatest success stories
in the history of the United Nations. However, I will
reiterate our position that it is time for the Council
to take into account the transformation of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo into
a United Nations political office that would coordinate
all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
while supporting Kosovo’s path towards United
Nations membership and the effective fulfilment of its
obligations under international conventions.
I would also like to inform members of the Security
Council that we have already begun the process of
transforming the EULEX mission, which will be done in
full coordination with EU member States and the laws of
Kosovo. Kosovo will always be an independent country
on the European continent with a clear perspective for
the integration of the Euro-Atlantic family.
Kosovo has already taken the place that it deserves
among the free nations of the world and has become a
European State that contributes in a dignified way to
peace and stability in the region and beyond.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the members of the Security Council.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome to the Council His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and His
Excellency Mr, Hashim Thaçi, Prime Minister of

12/25

19/11/2013

Kosovo. I would also like to welcome Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and to thank him for his
briefing.
The municipal elections of 3 November were the
first to be held throughout the territory of Kosovo under
Kosovo law. The first round of the elections took place
calmly in most of the municipalities and participation
was generally satisfactory. The elections in the
northern municipalities were a key element of the first
agreement on principles governing the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina, concluded in
Brussels on 19 April 2013. A new and important stage
in implementing the agreement is therefore under way.
I pay tribute to the Serbian and Kosovo
Governments, which have honoured their commitments
and encouraged citizens to take part in the elections.
I also convey our gratitude to the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which has an
important role in facilitating the elections in the four
northern municipalities, and to the European Union,
which deployed election observers to Kosovo.
Luxembourg, however, is forced to condemn the
violent incidents that occurred in a number of polling
stations in northern Mitrovica. Such an attempt to deny
voters their right to express themselves in democratic
elections is unacceptable. We welcome the strengthened
presence provided by the Kosavo police, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and
the Kosovo Force during the second ballot, which took
place without incidents the day before yesterday in
northern Mitrovica. We hope that the second round, to
take place on 1 December, in the relevant municipalities
will enable the election to be concluded in the calm that
befits a democracy.
The EU-facilitated dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade continues to produce tangible results.
In that context, we commend the crucial role that the
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton, continues to play. On
8 September in Brussels, an important agreement on
energy and telecommunciations was reached. We
encourage the two Prime Ministers and their teams
to step up their efforts in order to complete in the
coming weeks the implementation of the 19 April
agreement in the areas of customs, the police and the
judiciary, in particular, by regulating the modalities

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

for the transfer of Serbian police officers and Serbian
judicary to Kosovo’s institutional structures. The
full implementation of the 19 April agreement will
contribute to continuing negotiations on the conclusion
of the stabilization and association agreement between
the European Union and Kosovo, the second round
of which is scheduled for 27 November, and to the
opening of accession negotiations with Serbia, whose
first intergovernmental conference must take place by
January 2014.
The normalization of relations between Serbia and
Kosovo must go hand in hand with the firm pursuit of
reforms to guarantee the rule of law in Kosovo. The
Kosovo authorities must continue to work closely with
the European Union’s Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Samuel Žbogar, and EULEX. The EULEX mission
continues to play a vital role in achieving normalization
between Belgrade and Pristina, combating organized
crime and corruption, the prosecution of perpetrators
of war crimes and the fight against impunity for the
most serious crimes.
In that regard, Luxembourg condemns in the
strongest terms the attack of 19 September on a EULEX
convoy, which took the life of a customs officer of the
mission. We offer our condolences to the European
Union, the Lithuanian authorities and the family of
the deceased. The perpetrators of that attack must be
brought to justice. Threatening the security of EULEX
personnel, who work daily for the benefit of Kosovo
citizens and for their protection. cannot go unpunished.
Luxembourg welcomes the positive developments
in Kosovo since the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999) and the establishment of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo. More than
half the States members of the United Nations have
recognized Kosovo’s independence. Implementation
of the 19 April agreement will normalize the relations
between Belgrade and Pristina. The time has come
for the international community to take into account
their new realities in its approach, including that of the
Security Council, and to adapt, in the middle term, the
presence of the international community on the ground.
As the European view of Serbia and Kosovo develops,
the United Nations presence will become less of a
factor.
Serbia and Kosovo know that they can count on the
consistent support of Luxembourg on the path towards
a shared European future.

S/PV.7064

Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing and Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr, Hashim
Thaçi, Prime Minsiter of Kosovo, for their statements.
The Security Council is meeting for the third
time since the historic agreement of 19 April between
Serbia and Kosovo, concluded under the auspices of the
European Union. The hopes that arose in the spring as
a result of this historic compromise have been fulfilled
by subsequent developments. Indeed, the momentum
created in April was followed by regular meetings
between the authorities of Serbia and Kosovo, while the
foundations laid by the implementation plan of 22 May
allowed for substantial progress to be made in the
relations between the two countries.
We also welcome the agreement reached between
the parties on 8 September in Brussels on issues of
energy and telecommunications. Furthermore, the
dismantling of Serb parallel structures in northern
Kosovo continues. Finally, we note with satisfaction
that laws ratifying the agreement of 19 April were
adopted in early September by the Parliament of Kosovo
following a review by the Constitutional Court. All of
this, we believe, reflects the commitment of the parties
to respecting and quickly implementing the pledges
they gave in the spring.
Over the past few weeks, municipal elections
were also organized and held throughout Kosovo, with
the essential help of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We commend
the parties for their work with local communities
throughout the countryside with a view to ensuring
high participation rates. The first round of municipal
elections, held on 3 November, took place in generally
satisfactory conditions, thereby strengthening the
implementation of the 19 April agreement. In southern
Kosovo, the overall participation rate of the Serbian
population was even higher than that observed in 2009.
All of this is proof of the beginnings of the Serbian
community’s ownership of institutions in Pristina.
Despite the incidents that occurred during the
first round of elections, which were very localized, the
elections in and of themselves constitute undeniable
democratic progress. The smooth holding of the repeat
vote, held on 17 November in the three polling stations
in north Mitrovica, seems to further suggest that the
lessons of the incidents of 3 November were quickly

13-5698813/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

learned. The second round of elections will be held
on 1 December, and France calls on the Kosovo and
Serbian Governments, as well as all communities in
Kosovo, to demonstrate the same maturity and the
same courage during this second phase of the elections.
Finally, like the Secretary-General, we encourage them
to continue their education and reconciliation efforts in
the post-election period.
In his report (S/2013/631), the Secretary-General
re-examines the incident that took the life of an
officer of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) on 19 September. Like all parties,
we regret the death of a European officer, who fell in
service to the rule of law. We commend both parties
for their assistance to the criminal investigation opened
by EULEX to bring the perpetrators of that murder to
justice. The attack shocked us all, and as noted by the
Secretary-General, stands in contrast to the security
situation in Kosovo, which otherwise remains calm.
We wish to acknowledge once again the work of the
EULEX mission, which, alongside the Kosovo police
and the Kosovo Force, plays a key role with the OSCE
in ensuring the smooth holding of the elections.
The decision to open European Union accession
negotiations with Serbia on the one hand, and to authorize
the European Commission to negotiate a Stabilization
and Association Agreement with Kosovo, on the
other, was made after both countries made ​​significant
progress in normalizing their relations. That standard
was set by the European Union as a common criterion
for their respective European rapprochement processes.
We must therefore ensure that both parties remain
constructively engaged in the long term in improving
their relations. With respect to Serbia, that will involve
the effective opening of accession negotiations, which
the Commission now recommends. It also involves
ongoing discussions aimed at concluding a Stabilization
and Association Agreement with Kosovo.
Beyond the normalization of their relations, we
encourage Belgrade and Pristina to continue to pursue
their internal reforms, particularly in terms of the rule
of law and the protection of minorities. That is the only
way to enable Kosovo and Serbia to together turn over
a new leaf in their history and resolutely turn towards
regional peace and cooperation.
The international community must take note of
these positive developments. In this respect, we invite
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo to adapt its presence to the situation on the
14/25

19/11/2013

ground, in agreement with the Kosovo authorities and
according to their actual needs.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for
his briefing. We also thank Prime Minister Ivica Dačić
of Serbia and Prime Minister Hashim Thaçi of Kosovo
for their statements. We commend their determined
efforts to move the two sides closer to a negotiated
solution and achieve sustainable peace in the region.
The violence during the local elections in northern
Kosovo held on 3 November was worrisome. We
welcome the decision of the Government of Kosovo
to annul its results. While the re-run on 17 November
was not marked by violence, low voter turnout was
cause for concern. We call on those who boycotted the
elections to join the political process. Participating in
the elections would have been a better way for them to
secure their rights.
Despite challenges, the two sides have maintained
the political momentum and made tangible progress
towards the implementation of the framework agreement
of 19 April and the implementation plan of 22 May. The
continued engagement of the two Prime Ministers, who
met four times during the current reporting period,
played a key role in facilitating the process. The two
sides have reached agreements on telecommunications
and energy. They have also agreed on handling longterm cooperation in the energy sector at a later stage.
We note that progress has been made in other key
areas, including the police and the judiciary, as agreed
in the framework agreement. It is expected that two
further draft laws foreseen in the agreement — a law
on local self-government and a law on the rights of
communities — which are under consideration in the
Assembly of Kosovo, will be enacted before the end of
the year.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/631)
notes that the overall security situation in Kosovo
remained generally calm, with occasional incidents
reported in ethnically mixed areas. That is encouraging.
The number of reported incidents against minority
communities has declined. To us, all sides seem to be
demonstrating an increased commitment to preventing
tensions in order to enable the high-level dialogue and
implementation process to move forward.
Those are all encouraging signs that prove that,
when the leadership is determined, they can overcome
even serious obstacles. As the two Prime Ministers
13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

indicated in their detailed statements today, there are
many problems that need to be resolved. What is most
important is that they continue to build and sustain
mutual trust so that their engagement does not falter.
We acknowledge the vital role of High
Representative Catherine Ashton and the European
Union in this process. Both remain indispensable to the
dialogue. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, under the leadership of Special
Representative Farid Zarif, continues to play a critical
role in the stabilization of Kosovo.
Finally, I would like to wish both Prime Ministers
success on the difficult road ahead. They have broken
fresh diplomatic ground. They must take it to its logical
conclusion. We are confident that, with commitment
and dedication, conditions of peace, stability and
prosperity will be created in Kosovo in the near future.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dačić.
We share his views.
We listened closely to Mr. Thaçi. He was obviously
lacking certain elements of self-criticism.
We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for presenting the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2013/631) and briefing
us on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
Russia supports the efforts of Belgrade to reach a
settlement to the Kosovo problem through dialogue,
and we note with understanding the compromise
decisions that were acceptable to the Serbian sides.
In particular, we hope that the emerging community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo would be granted
genuine executive authority for the effective protection
of the interests of citizens residing in their territory.
We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in effect and is still the universally binding,
international legal basis for a settlement of the Kosovo
issue. The international community, above all the
United Nations, must stay focused on the situation
in the province. UNMIK plays a key role among all
elements of the international presence, particularly in
northern Kosovo, where tensions persist. The Security
Council has authorized UNMIK to tackle its mandated
tasks, notwithstanding any obstacles in its path. To
do so, the Mission requires appropriate personnel and
financial resources.

S/PV.7064

One very important stage in the implementation of
the arrangements agreed between Belgrade and Pristina
on 19 April was the holding of municipal elections in
the province. The conduct of the electoral process was
far from smooth, however. Cases of violence and voter
intimidation during the elections of 3 November have
once again highlighted the fragility and volatility of the
situation. We condemn those acts.
We are also concerned about the killing of a customs
officer of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We call on all of those responsible
for law and order in the province to carry out a thorough
investigation of the crime and its underlying causes.
The perpetrators must be brought to justice.
The plight of the Serb minority in Kosovo remains
disturbing. There has been no progress in efforts to
return refugees or internally displaced persons (IDPs).
People are afraid to go to Kosovo because of ethnically
motivated threats of violence and the absence of
security guarantees from local authorities. Moreover,
an analysis of the situation shows that the Kosovo
Albanian authorities have, with the acquiescence of the
international presence, effectively paralysed the return
to the province of more than 200,000 Serbian refugees
and IDPs, denying their property rights and violating
internationally recognized fundamental human
rights. We are convinced that there can be no national
reconciliation in the province until those people return
to their homes.
In the annex to the report of the Secretary-General,
EULEX addresses the difficult situation involving
organized crime in Kosovo. However, once again
it avoids virtually any mention of progress in the
investigation of allegations of illegal organ harvesting,
identified by Council of Europe Special Rapporteur
Dick Marty. In too few words, the report testifies to
the absence of any progress in that important highprofile case. A full investigation is required and the
perpetrators, regardless of their identity, must be
brought to justice.
In that light, it is strange to hear calls from Pristina
for the drawdown of EULEX, particularly the office
responsible for the aforementioned investigation. We
recall that EULEX was deployed with the consent of
the Security Council. With that approval, it received
several mandates from UNMIK that the European
Union Mission was unable to cope with unilaterally.
As resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in effect, those

13-5698815/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

powers are assigned to UNMIK under international law
and cannot be transferred to a third party, particularly
not to Pristina’s institutions.
We are troubled by reports of Al-Qaida affiliated
groups operating in the province. We believe that
both UNMIK and EULEX should be addressing that
problem.
Mr. Bliss (Australia): I would like to join others
in thanking Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for presenting his quarterly
briefing on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Australia acknowledges
UNMIK’s continuing efforts, together with the
European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX), the Kosovo Force and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), to
promote security, stability and respect for human rights
in Kosovo.
We extend a warm welcome to Mr. Ivica Dačić,
Prime Minister of Serbia, and to Mr. Hashim Thaçi,
Prime Minister of Kosovo, and thank them for their
statements today.
Australia welcomes the concrete progress made
towards the implementation of the 19 April agreement on
normalizing relations between Serbia and Kosovo. The
progress made in key areas, such as the establishment
of the regional police command in northern Kosovo,
are good first steps. That progress is due, in no small
part, to the leadership of both Prime Ministers. We
commend them for their determination to overcome the
many political, security and administrative challenges
to the implementation of the agreement. We would also
like to acknowledge the central role of the European
Union, and High Representative Catherine Ashton in
particular, in facilitating dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina.
The key political development in recent months
has been, of course, the holding of municipal elections.
Australia welcomes the holding of the elections,
which are evidence of the commitment of the Kosovar
authorities to the realization of a democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. We also acknowledge the positive
role played by the Serbian leadership in support of
participation in the elections, and by the OSCE in
facilitating logistical and procedural arrangements in
challenging circumstances.
Australia condemns the attacks on three polling
centres in northern Mitrovica and other disruptive
16/25

19/11/2013

actions during the first round of the elections held on
3 November. We welcome the commitment of Serbian
and Kosovar authorities to ensuring that those who
have triggered the violence are prosecuted. Despite
the intimidation of voters in northern Kosovo, we are
encouraged by the turnout across the country, including
by Serbian Kosovars, especially south of the Ibar River,
in the first round.
Despite the temporary setback witnessed in
northern Mitrovica on 3 November, we are very
encouraged by reports of the smooth and peaceful
conduct of the repeated elections there on 17 November.
We hope that the success of those rerun elections will
contribute towards permanent peace and stability in
Kosovo, for all of its citizens.
This year’s municipal elections are critical to
ensuring the legitimacy of Kosovo’s local governing
institutions, particularly in the North, thereby
providing a basis for further implementation of the
19 April agreement. It is now imperative that no effort
be spared to ensure the broad participation of Kosovars
of all ethnic backgrounds in the second round of the
elections, scheduled for 1 December, where such
elections are taking place.
Despite generally positive developments during
the reporting period, there have been some incidents
of serious concern. Australia unreservedly condemns
the attack perpetrated against two EULEX vehicles in
the vicinity of Zvečan municipality in northern Kosovo
on 19 September. We were saddened by the death of
a Lithuanian member of EULEX in the attack and
welcome the efforts made by all parties to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
The good progress achieved over the reporting
period has allowed Serbia and Kosovo to advance on
their respective paths towards European integration.
Serbia will soon commence accession negotiations
with the European Union (EU), and in October
Kosovo commenced negotiations on a Stabilization
and Association Agreement. We commend both Prime
Ministers for their continued active engagement in the
EU-brokered dialogue to help achieve a peaceful and
prosperous future for their countries.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. We also welcome Prime
Minister Thaçi and Prime Minister Dačić back to
the Council, and thank them for their statements. I

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

S/PV.7064

commend the Prime Ministers for their dedication to the
dialogue process and their resolve to address, quickly
and constructively, matters of contention as they arise.
Their leadership has shown the inherent value of direct
communication as a way to reduce tensions and increase
cooperation among States.

The municipal elections in Kosovo are just one albeit
highly vital element of the 19 April agreement. We
look to the Governments of Kosovo and Serbia to move
forward with the full implementation of all aspects of
the agreement and all previous agreements, including
on integrated border management.

Let me extend the deepest condolences of the United
States to the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) and the family of the customs officer
who was killed in northern Kosovo on 19 September.
EULEX plays an invaluable role in Kosovo, and the
officer paid the ultimate price for the prospect of peace.

We commend both Governments for concluding
additional agreements in recent weeks, particularly
with regard to telecommunications and energy. The
Prime Ministers and EU High Representative Ashton
deserve our praise and continued support for their
efforts. We also thank EULEX and NATO for their
support in implementing the dialogue agreements.

I would like today to address the recent elections,
the continuing implementation of the agreement on
normalization of relations, and progress made on
European Union (EU) integration.
First, the United States congratulates Kosovo,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and all of the individuals and organizations
that contributed to the success of the 3 November
municipal elections, and applauds Kosovo and Serbia
for their efforts to encourage voter participation. The
elections were orderly, transparent and credible in
most areas, and an important step in facilitating the
participation of all communities in Kosovo’s political
and administrative infrastructure. We are heartened to
see that voters felt free to report sporadic irregularities
to Kosovo’s authorities, reflecting both their respect for
Kosovo’s institutions and a genuine commitment to the
democratic process.
All people in Kosovo should be able to exercise
their right to vote for their representatives without fear
and intimidation. We therefore condemn the incidents
of violence at several polling stations in northern
Kosovo. We must not let the actions of a few dampen the
progress Kosovo has made on the path to democracy. In
that light, we were encouraged by the turnout in orderly
voting in northern Mitrovica on 17 November. Those
elections have demonstrated that Kosovo is capable
of conducting future elections that are consistent with
international standards and its European aspirations.
We now look forward to the peaceful conduct of the
run-off polls on 1 December.
Secondly, the United States supports the
normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia,
which is crucial for stability and reconciliation in
the region. We are pleased by the progress that both
countries have made in the EU-facilitated dialogue.

Finally, the United States views the elections and the
progress of the dialogue as positive steps on Kosovo’s
and Serbia’s respective paths towards EU membership.
We strongly support Serbia’s commitment to joining the
European Union and, with the full implementation of
the 19 April agreement, look forward to the European
Council’s vote on starting accession talks with Serbia.
We also welcome the 28 October start of
negotiations between the European Union and Kosovo
on a Stabilization and Association Agreement. That
milestone demonstrates the progress that Kosovo
has made both on internal reforms and towards
normalization of relations with Serbia. So does Kosovo’s
growing number of recognitions, which now represent
a majority of States Members of the United Nations.
The United States stands ready to support
Kosovo’s efforts to implement the reforms necessary to
achieve its Euro-Atlantic integration goals, including
strengthening the rule of law and the fight against
crime and corruption, the protection of minority rights
and the development of a strong market-based economy.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Farid Zarif,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2013/631) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and on
recent developments in Kosovo during the period from
16 July to 15 October. I would like to thank Mr. Ivica
Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Hashim Thaçi
for their clarifications.
We welcome the commitment of UNMIK to
promoting constructive dialogue between the parties
concerned in close cooperation with regional and
international stakeholders, highlighting in particular

13-5698817/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

19/11/2013

the positive rule of Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). At
the political level, we also take note of the high-level
meetings held during the reporting period between
the Serbian Prime Minister and Mr. Hashim Thaçi in
Brussels under the auspices of the European Union as
part of the implementation of the first agreement on
principles governing the normalization of relations
reached between Belgrade and Pristina on 19 April.

The International Migration Organization plays an
important role that is worth highlighting, in particular
in terms of assistance given to host communities,
returnees and members of the minority communities
in Kosovo with assistance from the European Union
stabilization programme. Those collective efforts
have helped to keep the security situation generally
calm, giving rise to the high-level dialogue. They have
contributed to the reduction in the number of incidents
in the period concerned.

In that regard, we welcome the important role
played by the High Representative of the European
Union, Baroness Catherine Ashton, and her unswerving
efforts to resolve all stalemates between Kosovo and
Serb officials. The aforementioned meetings and the
technical discussions in working groups have been very
useful in overcoming the inflexibility of the parties
in a number areas, particularly in terms of preparing
the Kosovo municipal elections on 3 November
and the rapprochement of views with respect to
telecommunications, energy, security and justice
issues.

Nevertheless, the grave incident of 19 September
that cost the life of a EULEX customs officer interrupted
the period of calm and plunged the region into a climate
of political uncertainty, raising fears that could have
repercussions on socioeconomic life. We condemn that
loss of human life. That reversal calls for additional
efforts to establish a lasting climate of trust to resolve
all pending issues.

That having been said, the 19 April agreement on
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina continues to encounter difficulties due, inter
alia, to the failure to adopt laws for its implementation
and to the scepticism of certain political factions,
which has led to political tensions in northern Kosovo,
above all with respect to the elections, leading even to
campaigns against voter participation in the municipal
elections. The dissolution of the administrations of
four municipalities in northern Kosovo and fears of
socioeconomic repercussions have also exacerbated
tensions.
The efforts of UNMIK in a number of
areas — in particular in promoting a convergence of
views, assisting the parties in making positions more
flexible, facilitating the circulation of INTERPOL Red
Notices, fostering regular communication between
Kosovo, INTERPOL and its member States, certifying
documents, as well as its efforts to uncover the fate
of missing persons — should be encouraged and
appreciated. We also welcome the efforts of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which has repatriated 313 people between January
and September 2013 and between July and September
registered 90 persons from minority communities
brought to be repatriated in Kosovo.

18/25

The protection of cultural heritage and religious
shrines is a shared responsibility. Moreover, the holding
of interreligious dialogue through a conference attended
by representatives from the Islamic, Serbian Orthodox,
Catholic, Evangelical, Protestant and Jewish faiths can
help to calm tensions and establish tolerance with a
view to definitively turning the page on a tumultuous
period in order to start a new period based on tolerance
and dialogue.
Finally, we welcome the commitment and efforts
of UNMIK and KFOR, which continue to play an
extremely important role alongside the parties with
a view to making progress on issues where there
are divisions and to move them towards a political
solution that should be comprehensive and inclusive,
in accordance with the provisions of resolution 1244
(1999).
Mr. M’Beou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like thank Mr. Farid Zarif for his presentation of the
quarterly report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/631)
on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also welcome the presence of
the Prime Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo at today’s
meeting and congratulate them on their statements.
I will limit my statement to a few comments on
the progress of the process of normalizing relations
between Kosovo and Serbia, in the light of the historic
agreement they signed on 19 April and in view of the
security situation in Kosovo.

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

Despite repeated obstacles resulting notably from
differences in occasional interpretation that might have
impeded the process of normalization, Kosovo and
Serbia continue tirelessly with their efforts to implement
the aforementioned agreement. Togo welcomes the
major role that the European Union (EU) continues to
play in helping the parties overcome their difficulties.
High-level meetings between Serbian and Kosovo
authorities, organized under EU sponsorship, and the
ongoing meetings of bilateral technical working groups
have indisputably facilitated significant progress in
implementation of the agreement.
My country notes with satisfaction that the
dynamic of dialogue made it possible in November to
hold municipal elections for the first time in Kosovo.
Indeed, by committing to lifting the obstacles of a
procedural or political nature, grappling with logistical
problems that marked the organization of the election,
and agreeing, inter alia, to the participation of displaced
persons and the representation of Kosovo Serbs in the
Central Election Commission, the parties opened the
way to a transparent and credible election. Their robust
involvement aimed at ensuring significant participation
in the elections on the part of of Kosovo Serbs and
ensuring that the elections were held successfully
reflects their strong commitment to work definitively
towards normalizing relations between Kosovo and
Serbia.
Ultimately, the elections were held, on the whole in
a satisfactory manner and with significant participation
by Serbs living in the municipalities of the south,
which my country commends. However, we condemn
the attempt by some Serbian nationalists opposed to the
normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo
to compromise the elections through acts of violence
and threats. My country believes that this protest
approach is counterproductive. It is in the interests
of all Serbs of northern Kosovo to take control of the
destiny of their communities by getting involved in
the implementation and operation of the association
of Serbian municipalities, which, in accordance with
the 19 April agreement, are provided with a certain
degree of autonomy, including in the areas of economic
development, health and education.
As noted in the report under review, the
implementation of the 19 April agreement is ongoing
in many other areas. On the positive side, important
arrangements were arrived at by the parties on
8 September on the issues of telecommunication and

S/PV.7064

energy. Similarly, we welcome the efforts undertaken
by the Serbs to transfer the parallel structures in
northern Kosovo to Kosovo authorities, including the
police and judiciary.
It would appear that those developments were made
possible thanks to the leadership, political courage and
commitment of the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo to
gradually settle the disputes between the two parties in
the interests of their people. Togo would like to applaud
their efforts with a view to reaching that goal. The
difficult compromises they had to reach should be able
to open the way to European integration for Serbia and
Kosovo. We urge them to pursue the dialogue on the
outstanding issues in the same spirit, so as to ensure the
full implementation of the 19 April agreement.
Stability and security continue to prevail in Kosovo
overall. However, as mentioned earlier, political
tension and acts of violence continue in the north and
are the work of a part of the population that refuses
to join in the process of normalizing relations between
Kosovo and Serbia. We condemn the assassination
in that context of a customs officer who was part of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) on 19 September. No effort should be spared
in bringing the perpetrators of that crime to justice. We
are concerned about such incidents, which are related
to the uncontrolled use of firearms and explosives
and which target both civilians and Kosovo and
international security personnel. The use of violence
and intimidation to try to impose political views is
unacceptable. We urge Kosovo’s senior officials, in
particular those in charge of the police, to continue
their efforts to investigate each incident and bring the
perpetrators to justice.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my
congratulations to the European Union, especially its
High Representative, for its pivotal in bringing about
significant progress in the implementation of the
19 April agreement, including the holding of the recent
municipal elections.
We would also like to thank UNMIK, the Kosovo
Force, EULEX, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and all partner organizations
that support the authorities of Kosovo and Serbia in
normalizing their relations.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing today. I am delighted to

13-5698819/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

also welcome to the Council His Excellency Mr. Hashim
Thaçi, Prime Minister of Kosovo, and His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dačić, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia.
The United Kingdom joins others in welcoming
the largely successful local elections held in Kosovo on
3 November and the efforts of both Serbia and Kosovo
to encourage a large turn out. I also commend the
contribution of international organizations, including
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the
European Union Election Observation Mission.
The United Kingdom condemns the violent actions
of a minority of extremists on 3 November, including
the storming of three polling stations in northern
Mitrovica. We call on the relevant authorities to ensure
the perpetrators are swiftly brought to justice.
It was important that all constituencies in Kosovo
were able to participate in the elections. We welcome
the commitment shown by Prime Ministers Thaçi and
Dačić to the municipal elections, particularly in their
prompt meeting after 3 November to discuss next steps
for the electoral process. That underlines the value
of the dialogue they have established as a means of
carefully managing potentially sensitive situations.
We welcome the peaceful conduct of the rerun
polling in northern Mitrovica on 17 November.
Cooperation between the OSCE, the Kosovo police,
EULEX and KFOR was exemplary. Those timely reruns
prove that political will and coordination can translate
into a broadly secure and successful outcome. Ahead of
the parliamentary elections next year, Pristina should
implement a wider reform of its electoral process.
The United Kingdom is encouraged by the renewed
momentum in the European Union-facilitated KosovoSerbia dialogue, including the progress made on
energy and telecommunication. We look forward to
seeing both parties continue to implement the relevant
agreements faithfully and to resolve any outstanding
issues expeditiously. We welcome the commitment to
that dialogue shown by the Governments of Kosovo
and Serbia and agree with the Secretary-General that
both Belgrade and Pristina are displaying vision and
perseverance through their commitment to dialogue.
The normalization of relations between Kosovo
and Serbia is integral to both countries’ European

20/25

19/11/2013

Union accession paths. Both parties must continue to
implement fully the dialogue agreement in order to
unlock progress. Kosovo and Serbia must also continue
to communicate the benefits of the agreement and work
together to improve the integration of Kosovo Serbs
in the north. The continued assistance of EULEX in
the implementation of the dialogue agreements will be
indispensable.
Let me take this opportunity to condemn
wholeheartedly the attack on EULEX on 19 September
and pay tribute to Audrius Šenavičius, EULEX’s first
fatality by hostile action, and to call for the perpetrators
of that attack to be brought to justice.
We fully and wholeheartedly support the important
work of EULEX in Kosovo, including the integration
of institutions in the north under Kosovo’s jurisdiction.
We welcome the renewed engagement by both Belgrade
and Pristina in the dialogue and we look forward to
further tangible results.
The United Kingdom welcomed the launch of
negotiations on 28 October for a stabilization and
association agreement between Kosovo and the
European Union, the first milestone on the path to
eventual European Union membership. That step marks
a new phase in Kosovo’s relationship with the European
Union, NATO and the United Nations. Kosovo is now
recognized by over half of the United Nations States
Members. We encourage those countries that have not
yet recognized Kosovo to do so.
Finally, I would like to comment on the welcome
way in which the climate of discussion in the last few
debates on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo in the Council has become markedly
more positive, as most Council members have been able
to come together around welcoming progress in the
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina and welcoming
also the increased cooperation and stability that has
resulted. Today’s meeting so far has sustained that
trend. Against that backdrop, we wonder whether the
Council should be considering reducing the frequency
with which it meets to discuss this matter.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for his briefing. I would also like
to welcome Prime Minister Ivica Dačić and Prime
Minister Hashim Thaçi at this Council meeting. Today
I wish to make three points on the situation in Kosovo.

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

First, the Republic of Korea welcomes the
substantial progress achieved in the implementation of
the historic 19 April agreement between Belgrade and
Pristina. Thanks to the excellent political leadership
of Prime Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Thaçi,
numerous challenges have been overcome and progress
has been sustained in many important areas, including
law enforcement, telecommunication and energy. The
active engagement of the European Union, in particular,
of High Representative Catherine Ashton, was also
instrumental in to those achievements. In that light, we
call on Belgrade and Pristina to continue building on
those hard-earned achievements and to scale up ongoing
efforts towards the normalization of their relations.
Secondly, we are pleased to note that the 3 November
municipal elections in Kosovo and the rerun election in
northern Kosovo were carried out in a largely successful
manner. Both Belgrade and Pristina, with the support
of the international community, particularly of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
devoted every effort to ensuring the success of the
elections. We believe the latest elections demonstrate
positive prospects for the future consolidation of peace
and stability in Kosovo as well as the region. Against
that backdrop, however, the need to rerun the elections
in northern Kosovo highlights the difficult challenges
facing both Belgrade and Pristina. That reminds us that
the grievances and concerns of the Serb minority in
northern Kosovo remain an impediment to achieving
durable peace and genuine reconciliation. Moving
forward, it will be vital for Kosovo and Belgrade to
engage in post-election efforts to win the hearts and
minds of ethnic Serbs. As such, we call on both sides to
work closely together to find practical ways to address
both their economic and political concerns and to
enhance their integration into Kosovo society.
Finally, we are concerned about incidents of
violence such as that which caused the tragic death of
the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX)
customs officer, as well as about the violence that affected
the elections in northern Kosovo on 3 November. Such
violence, which served no one’s interest, only damaged
the fledgling peace and security on the ground. We
urge all the parties concerned to work closely together
to hold the perpetrators accountable and to prevent any
reccurance of violence. Once again, we commend all
the staff of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, EULEX and other international
partners for their tireless efforts and sacrifices towards
the continued peace and stability of Kosovo.

S/PV.7064

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank
Mr. Farid Zarif for his comprehensive briefing. Rwanda
commends the work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in the
implementation of its mandate under the leadership
of Mr. Zarif. I appreciate the statement made by
Mr. Dačić, Prime Minister of Serbia, and Mr. Thaçi,
Prime Minister of Kosovo. I welcome them both to New
York.
On the political arena, we are pleased to hear that,
as reported in our last briefing (see S/PV.7026), Serbia
and Kosovo have continued to work together in the
implementation of the first agreement on principles
governing the normalization of relations, on 19 April
2013. Rwanda welcomes the successful elections
conducted in Kosovo between 3 and 17 November.
While we condemn the violence and interruptions
at three polling stations in northern Kosovo caused
by some groups, we commend the role played by the
parties for the successful completion of those historic
elections. It is very important for all parties to continue
to work together towards the resolution of oustanding
issues, especially the establishment of administration
and security institutions.
On the security situation, while we note that it
has remained generally calm, we are very concerned
about incidents reported in ethnically mixed areas. We
strongly condemn the attack on the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) convoy on
route to gate 1 in northern Kosovo on 19 September,
which resulted in the death of a EULEX officer. We
extend our condolences to EULEX and Lithuania, as
well as to the family of the deceased. But we believe that
it is a good sign that Belgrade and Pristina, northern
Kosovo Serb leaders as well as international actors
have condemned those attacks. All parties concerned
must work together to bring the perpetrators to justice.
On the rule of law, we welcome the positive steps
undertaken by the Assembly of Kosovo, especially the
adoption of several laws aimed at improving rule-oflaw standards. We also commend the continued
implementation of the protocol on integrated border/
boundary management between Serbia and Kosovo,
signed on 19 March.
As the report (S/2013/631) of the Secretary-General
makes clear, much more effort is still needed on the
issue of finding missing persons and on the performance
of the Kosovo judiciary. We commend the continued

13-5698821/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

support of UNMIK and the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo in that regard.
On human rights, it is clear that Kosovo is
making tremendous efforts aimed at promoting the
rights of minorities. We welcome the adoption of
the comprehensive policy documents related to the
promotion of the rights of minorities, as well as the
recommendations to increase the allocation of funds
from the central budget for that purpose.
The finalization of the action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
inclusion on the Kosovo legislative agenda of the new
draft law on gender equality are also commendable
steps. While urging Kosovo to translate all those efforts
into tangible actions, we commend UNMIK, UNESCO
and the European Union for their invariable support in
that regard.
Before I conclude, allow me to emphasize that
coexistence and tolerance among all communities
in Kosovo is very crucial for a brighter future and
reconciliation in the region. I commend UNMIK for
its continued facilitation of activities by UNESCO in
Kosovo with regard to cultural and religious heritage.
We also urge local authorities to refrain from obstructing
the implementation of decisions taken in that regard.
Finally, it is very important for the authorities in
Kosovo to redouble their efforts in creating a conducive
atmosphere for the safe return of refugees to their
homes. We believe that that could bolster the number
of refugees willing to return to their homes, which is
inevitable for ensuring sustainable peace.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for presenting the report
(S/2013/631). We are also grateful for the presentations
by Prime Minister Dačić and Prime Minister Hashim
Thaçi.
A notable aspect of the report is the progress made
in implementing the first agreement of principles
governing the normalization of relations between Serbia
and Kosovo, signed on 19 April. The recent elections
are key to beginning to implement the agreement. We
regret the incidents of violence that occurred in northern
Kosovo during the municipal elections on 3 November,
which posed the risk of compromising the agreement
reached between the parties. Nevertheless, we note
that the elections that were cancelled and rerun on

22/25

19/11/2013

17 November took place without major difficulties. We
should now focus on the post-election period, during
which the representatives who were elected will have to
continue to work together to implement the agreements
between Belgrade and Pristina. This is a critical
moment in the relations between Serbia and Kosovo,
and the Security Council should carefully follow their
evolution. The international community’s support and
its commitment to Kosovo also continue to be essential.
As we mentioned in our previous discussion of
this topic (see S/PV.7026), we believe that the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) has a central role to play in this new stage
of the implementaiton of the 19 April agreement.
We welcome the fact that UNMIK is intensifying its
efforts and cooperation with all the parties concerned
regarding the main problems on the ground. We support
UNMIK’s mediation and facilitation efforts in northern
Kosovo. We also support efforts made for UNMIK to
serve as a communications medium between municipal
representatives and minority communities in order to
guarantee the effective provision of public and social
services.
In short, UNMIK continues to use its capacity and
resources in a wide range of activities to help reduce
tensions and the number of incidents. Therefore, it
is important that UNMIK continue to enjoy all the
necessary support to strengthen its presence in Kosovo,
especially in the north.
Turning to the topic of security, we see that, on the
one hand, the overall situation remained calm during the
reporting period; on the other hand, tensions continued
in the northern Kosovo. Like others before us, we
condemn the death of a European Union Rule of Law
Mission (EULEX) customs officer on 19 September.
We hope that everything will be done to prevent such
incidents from recurring. We trust that the event will be
investigated in order to find the perpetrators and bring
them to justice.
With regard to the Special Investigative Task Force
in charge of looking into allegations of the inhumane
treatment of immigrants and trafficking in human
organs, we note with interest the information set out
in the EULEX report (S/2013/631, annex I). We will
follow with interest the progress on that matter.
Finally, we reaffirm the primacy of resolution 1244
(1999) as the applicable legal framework in Kosovo, as
well as the importance of full respect for international

13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

law. We thank the Special Representative for his
sustained efforts to promote reconciliation among
Kosovo’s communities.
Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Farid Zarif for his presentation of
the report (S/2013/631) on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We also
welcome the participation of Serbian Prime Minister
Ivica Dačić and Mr. Hashim Thaçi.
First of all, Argentina would like to highlight the
vital role played by the United Nations in Kosovo
through UNMIK by promoting security, stability
and respect for human rights. We also welcome its
cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), while maintaining a status-neutral position
under the auspices of the United Nations. Argentina
voted in favour of resolution 1244 (1999) — at a time
when it was also a Security Council member — and
believes that it continues to serve as the international
legal basis applicable in Kosovo in the quest to find an
overall solution through a political political process and
negotiations.
The importance of UNMIK on the ground is
clearly evident in the successes recorded during the
Kosovo municipal elections. We would like to express
our concern with regard to the incidents of violence
and intimidation that prevented the free exercise of
democratic rights in northern Kosovo during the
3 November elections. The role of the Mission was key
in that regard. Thanks to the efforts of the parties, we
can today welcome the fact that the process culminated
as expected in the completion of the electoral process on
17 November, during which the rest of the voters were
able to exercise their rights. We can only agree with
the Secretary-General in acknowledging the efforts
made by the parties in order to conclude the process.
We highlight the constructive spirit that prevailed to
help resolve matters related to the elections, especially
agreements that helped to facilitate the elections in the
north, including voting by displaced persons.
The Republic of Serbia in particular demonstrated
its firm commitment to the success of the process under
the April agreement and the dialogue facilitated by
the European Union. The Serbian political leadership
responded with political vision and perseverance to the
many challenges that arose by taking steps to make the
participation of all groups possible.

S/PV.7064

As indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report, commendable progress was recorded in the
transition of local State structures, especially with
regard to encouraging the population in the north to
take part in the elections by building trust, answering
their questions and addressing their concerns.
Commitment is key with regard to the first
agreement on the principles governing the normalization
of relations is evident, so as to stabilize the situation
through compromise, trust and dialogue. We hope
that meetings will continue to be held between the
parties to move forward with the implementation of
the agreement and speed up the search for a political
solution to pending matters. We encourage the parties
to continue along that path to progress, in keeping with
resolution 1244 (1999). We also encourage them to
respect the letter of the agreement while also healing
the wounds of the past, peaceably and in good faith.
Although we are encouraged by the fact that the
overall security situation in Kosovo remained calm
during the period under review, we should not stop
paying attention to the security situation in northern
Mitrovica. That situation requires coordinated action
in order to resolve the problems in good faith so as to
avoid future tensions.
We condemn the tragic death of a EULEX officer in
September. We join others in calling on all the parties
to closely cooperate with the investigation to identify
those responsible and bring them to justice, as well as
to do everything possible to prevent such incidents in
the future.
It is also important to reiterate that UNMIK’s
work continues to be essential in providing maximum
support for the political processes while paying special
attention issues relating to the implementation of the
19 April agreement.
With regard to the protection of cultural and
religious heritage, we are greatly encouraged by the
progress made in the area of reconstruction, which is an
UNMIK priority. We hope that the activities under way
will continue so as to contribute to reconciliation among
communities. We also hope for the greatest success in
the restoration process to carried out by UNESCO in
the next three years in coordination with the Mission
and with financing from the European Union.
Argentina believes that it is extremely important to
achieve full respect for the human rights of internally
displaced persons, who should be able to return to

13-5698823/25

S/PV.7064

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

their places of origin and have access to substantive
rights without being subject to discrimination. It is
fundamental to continue working to ensure the return
and definitive reintegration of internally displaced
persons, in particular by facilitating their access to
housing, basic services and employment, expediting
the issuance of documentation relating to their civil
status, and preventing any security incidents. The
technical assistance provided by UNMIK is crucial in
that regard.
It is also important to continue to accord priority to
efforts to resolve the legacy of the conflict, including
pending cases involving disappeared persons, as well
as to promote and protect all human rights. In that
regard, we are encouraged by the fact that UNMIK
continues to support efforts to determine the fate of
the disappeared. Of course, we also take note of the
joint press conference, held in Pristina and Belgrade,
with the participation of Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo
Serb representatives of the association of families of
disappeared and abducted persons. We join the call
for a redoubling of efforts and cooperation in order
to prevent having impunity be the response to serious
violations of human rights.
We highlight UNMIK’s work and its activities to
support the rule of law, especially in collaboration with
all the relevant interested parties, with regard to the
major problems on the ground. As rightly pointed out
by the Secretary-General in his report, it is also key
that the international presences in Kosovo continue to
strengthen mutual cooperation with the common aim of
helping to establish appropriate conditions for the next
stages of the implementation of the 19 April agreement.
We conclude by highlighting the work done by the
Special Representative to promote security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for
his briefing.
We welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
the Prime Minister of Serbia, His Excellency Mr. Ivica
Dačić, and thank him and Mr. Thaçi for their statements.
I would like to reaffirm the position of Azerbaijan,
which is based on respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of
independence.
24/25

19/11/2013

Resolution 1244 (1999) remains the binding
international legal framework for a comprehensive
settlement through a political process and negotiations.
Once again, we want to underline the important role
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). It is noteworthy that the Mission
continues to work closely with the communities on
the ground and to collaborate with all other mandated
international presences to enhance the prospect of
success in the political dialogue. UNMIK should
maintain and further develop its key role in ensuring
the coordination of all international efforts on the
status-neutral framework as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999).
Azerbaijan welcomes the commitment of the parties
to the European Union-facilitated dialogue and the
progress achieved so far in the implementation of the
agreement on principles governing the normalization of
relations of 19 April and the subsequent implementation
plan of 22 May. We take positive note of the fact that
the sides met on a regular basis during the reporting
period and commend both Belgrade and Pristina for
their efforts towards consolidating their important
achievements. Recent agreements in the fields of
telecommunications and energy, as well as the police
and the judiciary, can be seen as a good starting point
that can be replicated for securing agreements in other
relevant areas.
We take note of the efforts towards the seamless
conduct of the Kosovo municipal elections. We
encourage the sides to continue to remain committed to
reaching an agreement on the contentious issues through
mutually acceptable solutions. That is indispensable to
greater stability and well-being in the region.
Except for sporadic violence in northern Kosovo,
it is a positive sign that the overall security situation in
Kosovo remained generally calm during the reporting
period. However, it is clear that much work is yet
anticipated for the maintenance of permanent stability.
The unresolved legacies of the conflict should remain
among key priorities so as to ensure that all those
responsible for war crimes and other criminal acts
are brought to justice. More efforts are also needed to
resolve the fate of persons who are still missing as a
result of the conflict.
The voluntary return of internally displaced
persons to Kosovo, although not significant,
nonetheless improved during the reporting period. In
that connection, we commend the efforts of the Office
13-56988

19/11/2013

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo

of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the International Organization for Migration and
UNMIK in monitoring the process and implementing
the necessary policies towards the facilitation of
returns. The question of security should be of high
priority, among others.
We also commend the efforts of UNMIK and
contributions by other international partners to facilitate
UNESCO’s activities in Kosovo for the purposes of the
restoration of the culture and religious heritage.
In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its sustained efforts towards the maintenance of
peace and stability in Kosovo and overcoming multiple
challenges to make that objective possible.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
I wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif for his briefing. I also welcome
His Excellency Prime Minister Dačić of Serbia to
this meeting, as well as his statement. I also listened
carefully to the statement by Mr. Thaçi.
China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands the legitimate
concerns of that country on the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides the essential legal
basis for finding a solution to the question of Kosovo.
China believes that the best approach in that connection
is to find a mutually acceptable settlement through
dialogue and negotiations on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and within the framework of the relevant Council
resolutions. China commends Serbia for its efforts in
finding a political solution to the question of Kosovo
and welcomes the pragmatic and constructive dialogue

S/PV.7064

that is being actively pursued by both Belgrade and
Pristina. We also welcome the agreements that both
parties included recently on telecommunication and
energy.
China has taken note of the fact that the overall
security situation in Kosovo remains calm, thanks to
the efforts of the parties concerned. In the wake of
the violence during the elections in northern Kosovo
on 3 November, Prime Minister Thaçi and others
concerned appealed to the electorate in northern
Kosovo to put aside past grievances and participate in
the elections in a responsible manner. China commends
Prime Minister Thaçi for his efforts and is happy to see
that the relevant elections were rerun on 17 November.
We encourage both parties to continue the process of
dialogue, effectively implement the agreements that
have been signed and work in a way so as to maintain
peace and stability in the Balkans and Europe at large.
China commends the efforts carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative Zarif, and supports UNMIK’s efforts to
continue to discharge the Council’s mandate. We hope
that the international presences, including UNMMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, will strengthen their coordiantion and
work in synergy so as to play a positive and constructive
role in facililating a solution to the question of Kosovo.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speaker. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

13-5698825/25
