S/2021/325

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 1 April 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, Permanent Representative of Mexico,
in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), as well as the statements delivered by the representatives
of China, Estonia, France, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, the Niger, Norway, the
Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in
connection with the video-teleconference on “Non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction” convened on Tuesday, 30 March 2021.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, this
briefing and these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Dinh Quy Dang
President of the Security Council

21-04440 (E) 050421 300421

*2104440*

S/2021/325

Annex I
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Juan Ramón de la
Fuente Ramírez
[Original: English and Spanish]
I am honoured to have the opportunity to brief the Security Council, as the
Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), on the work of the Committee since the previous briefing (see S/2020/1143),
as contained in the Chair’s letter dated 25 November 2020. I wish to express my
gratitude to my predecessor, Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani, and his staff for
their steady chairmanship of the Committee, followed by a smooth handover to my
team.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a vital component of the global nonproliferation architecture aimed at preventing non-State actors, including terrorists,
from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. States have made significant
progress in the full implementation of the resolution. Nevertheless, some gaps remain,
and the Security Council recognizes that the full and effective implementation of the
resolution is a long-term task that will require continuous efforts at the national,
regional and international levels.
During 2020, owing to travel and other restrictions imposed so as to manage
the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Committee took precautionary measures in
conducting its business, which it did largely by virtual means. The Committee held
one in-person meeting and undertook no in-person visits to States. In contrast with
59 in-person events in 2019, in 2020 the Committee participated in 19 events, most
of them virtual, organized by States, international and regional organizations, and
other United Nations bodies and committees to promote the full implementation of
the resolution by all States. By virtual means, 24 informal consultations were also
undertaken with Member States to discuss and clarify additional information they
provided relevant to Committee matrices. Two virtual meetings were also held to
discuss assistance requests, submitted to the Committee by Mongolia and Panama.
The Committee finalized the updating and review of all matrix information in
preparation for the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) that was initiated
in 2019. On 2 March 2020, the Committee sent draft updated Committee matrices
to all Member States, inviting comments and additional information on national
implementation so as to provide the Committee with a more accurate set of data to
assist in discharging its responsibilities. A total of 66 Member States responded to the
invitation, of which 56 provided substantive comments and additional information.
In December, the Committee finalized the review of 193 Committee matrices and
published on its website updated matrices in respect of 190 Member States with their
consent.
To date, 184 countries have submitted initial reports providing the Committee
with information on the measures that they have taken, or plan to take, to comply
with their obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). The effectiveness of the
practical steps taken by States to implement the resolution is important. One of the
activities in that respect is for States to develop voluntary national implementation
action plans, as encouraged by operative paragraph 5 of resolution 2325 (2016).
These help to identify actions to close any gaps and vulnerabilities in regulations
and national control frameworks, foster inter-agency cooperation and identify areas
where assistance may be required. In 2020, Colombia and the Dominican Republic
submitted their second national implementation action plans, and the number of
States that have submitted such plans to the Committee since 2007 now stands at 35.
2/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Member States are in the best position to identify effective national practices,
to be shared with the 1540 Committee and other partners. During the last few
years, an increasing number of States have undertaken peer reviews. In 2020, the
Committee received reports from the Dominican Republic and Panama, and from
Paraguay and Uruguay, respectively, on the outcome of two peer reviews organized
in 2019, with a view to sharing experiences and good practices in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). To date, five peer reviews have been held globally, three
of which were in the Latin American and Caribbean Group region. The Committee
looks forward to hearing about the results of further peer reviews and will continue
to support States that wish to conduct them, where appropriate.
With regard to the national points of contact, in support of the resolution’s
implementation, to date a total of 127 Member States, compared with 119 in 2019,
have informed the Committee of their points of contact for resolution 1540 (2004).
No regional points of contact training courses were conducted in 2020 owing to
restrictions related to the pandemic.
The Committee plays an important role in facilitating assistance to Member
States to fulfil their 1540 obligations by matching assistance requests from States
with offers of assistance, from States or international, regional or subregional
organizations. In 2020, States submitted six new requests for assistance to the
Committee, compared with 11 in 2019. The Committee received assistance requests
from Chile, Colombia, Panama and Zambia, and two from Mongolia. The Committee
web page lists States and international, regional and subregional organizations that
offer 1540-related assistance. The Committee stands ready to add new programmes
or updated information on assistance to its website. In addition to assistance
provided by States and international, regional and subregional organizations, the
Committee will undertake visits to States, at their invitation, to discuss national
reporting, national implementation action plans, Committee matrices and assistance
on implementation measures.
The Committee continues to use its website for outreach to the public. For
example, a message from the Chair is published every quarter to those who have
subscribed through the website.
In accordance with operative paragraph 3 of resolution 1977 (2011), the
Committee is conducting a comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) prior to
renewal of its mandate in April 2021. The review is an inclusive process. Contributions
by Member States are particularly important, and the Committee will invite States,
as well as international, regional and subregional organizations and the relevant
civil-society organizations, as appropriate, to participate in open consultations. The
Committee began its preparatory work for the comprehensive review in October
2019, but, owing to delays caused by the pandemic, and in order for States to be able
to plan accordingly, the Chair informed the Security Council, by means of a letter
dated 27 August 2020, that the Committee had decided that all remaining activities
related to the review, including the open consultations, should be postponed until
2021, with the exception of the process then under way of revising the Committee
matrices, and any other activities that could be undertaken in an online format.
Member States and international, regional and subregional organizations can submit
written comments to the review. In that regard, on 2 June letters were sent to United
Nations bodies and international, regional and subregional organizations, inviting
them to submit written inputs. To date, 12 have done so.
A central theme of the comprehensive review is the status of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) by the States Members of the United Nations. The
Committee will also address its role in facilitating assistance matchmaking, its
outreach activities and its collaboration with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations and other United Nations bodies. The Committee is
21-044403/24

S/2021/325

mandated to include recommendations, if needed, on adjustments to its mandate. A
report on the comprehensive review will be submitted to the Security Council.
The Committee has made progress in the discussion on the period of the
technical extension of its mandate, as well as on the contents of its programme
of work. Although consultations are still under way, I look forward to reaching
agreement on those issues in the near future.
The 1540 Committee regards the successful completion of the comprehensive
review as its highest priority.
I am grateful for having been given the opportunity to brief the Council today.

4/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: Chinese and English]
China congratulates Ambassador de la Fuente Ramírez, Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), on assuming this
important post, and welcomes his briefing to the Council on the work of the Committee.
Since last year, the 1540 Committee has actively adjusted its work model
to minimize the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It has
done a lot of work and achieved positive results in promoting the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), advancing the comprehensive review process and updating
information on countries’ implementation of the resolution. China appreciates the
efforts made by the Chair, the Group of Experts and the Secretariat, and hopes
that all parties will continue to improve their communication and cooperation in a
constructive manner for the success of the Committee’s work this year.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means
of delivery puts international peace and security at stake and poses a common
challenge to the international community. Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first
Council resolution dedicated to non-proliferation and is an important part of the
international non-proliferation regime. Over the past 70 years, we have deepened
international consensus on non-proliferation and made steady progress in advancing
the non-proliferation regime and building cooperation in this area. At the same time,
the risk of proliferation by non-State actors is on the rise, and the economic and
social impact of COVID-19 has also affected international non-proliferation efforts.
The situation remains grave. In view of the current international security situation,
especially the developments in the field of non-proliferation, China wishes to make
the following propositions to facilitate the comprehensive review of resolution 1540
(2004) and advance international non-proliferation process.
First, we must achieve non-proliferation goals through multilateralism. Nonproliferation is a global challenge. As such, it cannot be solved without multilateral
cooperation and the guidance of the United Nations. All parties should be guided
by the shared vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable global
security, accommodate the legitimate concerns of all countries, eliminate the root
causes of proliferation and seek common security. It is imperative to strengthen the
collective security mechanism, with the United Nations at its core, to uphold the
authority of the Council and to address non-proliferation via political and diplomatic
means through dialogue and consultation.
Secondly, we must consolidate and improve the international non-proliferation
regime. The international community should further enhance the universality of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the Biological Weapons
Convention (BWC) and the Chemical Weapons Convention so as to ensure their
comprehensive, effective and balanced implementation. The tenth NPT Review
Conference, the ninth BWC Review Conference and the comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) should be used as opportunities to strengthen these treaties
and mechanisms.
Thirdly, we must consider the proliferation risks associated with emerging
technologies. New technologies such as artificial intelligence, 3D printing, gene
editing and synthetic biology can be used for the proliferation of WMDs and
their means of delivery. Countries should bolster Government monitoring and
cooperate with international partners to effectively prevent non-State actors from
21-044405/24

S/2021/325

abusing new technologies for proliferation activities. At the same time, we must
not sacrifice scientific and technological progress for the sake of achieving nonproliferation goals.
Fourthly, we must promote the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
through the comprehensive review, which should enable the Committee to fairly
evaluate each country’s implementation of the resolution. While fully respecting
each country’s sovereignty, the Committee should objectively assess evolving
proliferation risks and support each nation’s efforts to develop priority goals and
areas for implementation, in accordance with its international obligations and
specific conditions. More targeted international cooperation is needed to support
developing countries in building non-proliferation capacities. Efforts should be
made to ensure an open, inclusive and transparent comprehensive review process, in
which all countries, especially developing countries, can participate and have a say.
China firmly opposes the proliferation of WMDs and their means of delivery.
China has always fulfilled its international non-proliferation obligations and taken
concrete actions to contribute to strengthening the non-proliferation regime at the
national, regional and international levels. China’s export control law entered into
effect in December. It marks a shift in China’s non-proliferation export control from
an administrative model to a law-based model, and fully demonstrates China’s will
and determination to strengthen non-proliferation export control.
China was a pioneer in training national points of contact and — with the
Committee — organized three training workshops for national points of contact in
the Asia-Pacific. We are ready to continue to play a role in strengthening capacitybuilding in the Asia-Pacific and promote the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), and will actively participate in international cooperation and exchange with
regard to non-proliferation legislation, enforcement, outreach and more. China will
continue to work with all parties to promote the effective implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), advance the comprehensive review of the resolution and make positive
contributions to strengthening the global governance of non-proliferation.

6/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex III
Statement by the Political Coordinator of Estonia to the
United Nations, Kristel Lõuk
Let me begin by thanking Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez for
his briefing and for his and his team’s work since he assumed the position of Chair
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). I
also wish to commend the dedicated and professional work of the 1540 Committee’s
Group of Experts. Their expertise and knowledge provide greatly support the work
of the Committee and have been instrumental in strengthening the implementation
of the resolution.
The risk of terrorists or other non-State actors acquiring weapons of mass
destruction is a real and serious threat to international security. The use of chemical
weapons in Syria and Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the proliferation
of missiles and its components to non-State actors in the Middle East are some recent
reminders of the risks involved.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains one of the most critical instruments for
preventing and countering those threats. Over the years, it has demonstrated its
relevance in guiding Member States to take all necessary measures to prevent nonState actors from acquiring nuclear, chemical, biological or radiological weapons, or
the equipment necessary for their production. We need to ensure that the resolution
and its implementation remains effective and strong.
In that context, it is encouraging to see that the number of States that have
submitted their first reports to the Committee has reached 184. We encourage those
States that have not yet submitted their reports to do so without delay. We also
agree with the Chair of the Committee that national implementation action plans
are useful tools for identifying gaps and vulnerabilities in regulations and control
mechanisms so that necessary and appropriate action can follow. We like to see
that States continue to submit their national implementation plans and share their
best practices.
Assistance and cooperation measures can help make the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) more effective. We welcome the Committee’s efforts to
provide assistance by matching States’ requests with offers of assistance from other
States or international, regional and subregional organizations. We also welcome its
active engagement and cooperation with the Office for Disarmament Affairs, with
international organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and INTERPOL, as well as
with civil society, industry and academia. The biannual Wiesbaden Conferences are
a good example of how private sector engagement can provide support by identifying
measures to prevent non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
Despite the disruptions caused by coronavirus disease pandemic, we are
hopeful that the Committee can soon finalize the comprehensive review on the
status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The comprehensive review
is an excellent opportunity to reflect on the scope of the resolution and the mandate
of the Committee and its Group of Experts. Estonia stands ready to ensure that the
review process is inclusive, thorough and substantive, and that it takes into account
the evolving nature of risks of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. As
terrorists and non-State actors adapt to new realities and technologies and the threat
landscape evolves, so too must our responses.
Resolution 1540 (2004) is an essential part of the international disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture. Estonia remains fully committed to supporting
and contributing to the work of the 1540 Committee.
21-044407/24

S/2021/325

Annex IV
Statement by the Political Coordinator of France to the
United Nations, Sheraz Gasri
[Original: French]
I too would like to thank Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
and assure him of our full support as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
For more than 15 years, resolution 1540 (2004) has been a pillar of our
collective security system. Today, the threat remains and is evolving. The channels of
proliferation are diversifying. The risk of biological, chemical and nuclear materials
falling into the hands of terrorists remains high.
In that context, the 1540 Committee is more essential than ever. I would like
to highlight three aspects of the Committee’s work.
First, the resolution must be implemented in a very concrete way. That includes
securing sensitive materials and goods, strengthening border controls, setting up a
legal framework to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery and establishing export control mechanisms. The prevention
of proliferation financing must also improve. Like others, France has a solid national
legal framework in that regard.
Secondly, France attaches particular importance to its coordinating role in the
Assistance Working Group. We stand ready to help States that request assistance.
We must also strengthen cooperation with the relevant organizations, particularly
the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, the Biological Weapons Convention, the export control regimes,
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, AlQaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning
counter-terrorism.
Finally, the full review of resolution 1540 (2004) continues this year, despite
difficult health conditions. The work on the matrices has been largely completed and
we can congratulate ourselves on this. We hope that the Committee will very soon be
able to agree on an extension of its mandate, which must be long enough to allow an
in-depth review. It is also urgent to agree on the work programme and the timetable
of activities associated with it.
In conclusion, let me pay a heartfelt tribute to the Group of Experts, whose
analytical and advocacy work remains indispensable.

8/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
I thank my dear friend Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing on the Committee’s activities. I would also like to express
my appreciation to his predecessor, Ambassador Djani, of Indonesia, for his
chairmanship of the 1540 Committee.
Let me begin by reaffirming India’s firm and unwavering commitment to
global efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).
Access to these weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors adds a serious
dimension to the threat such weapons pose to international peace and security.
Resolution 1540 (2004) identifies terrorists and terrorist groups as key nonState actors who may acquire, develop, traffic in or use weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery. My country has been a victim of terrorism for several
decades. As such, we are fully cognizant of the cataclysmic dangers that terrorist
access to WMDs could entail. In that regard, since 2002 India has consistently cosponsored the annual resolution in the General Assembly on measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, which was adopted by
consensus (resolution 75/58).
Preventing non-State actors, including terrorists, from acquiring and using
weapons of mass destruction is among the most important responsibilities of the
international community. Biosecurity and biosafety measures have assumed
particular salience in the context of the pandemic in order to prevent non-State actors,
especially terrorists, from taking advantage of the situation. The focus on non-State
actors, however, should in no way diminish State accountability in preventing access
of non-State actors to these weapons, criminalizing and controlling such access
and dismantling its support infrastructure of non-State actors. In that regard, my
delegation accords great importance and support to the 1540 Committee’s mandate
and its work.
In furtherance of its long-standing commitment to global non-proliferation,
India has established a strong law-based export control system to implement resolution
1540 (2004). I am happy to note that India is among the few countries that regularly
provide the Committee with national reports on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We have also offered to share our knowledge and technical expertise
in various areas as part of the Committee’s assistance framework. In that context,
India — in collaboration with Germany, the 1540 Committee and the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs — hosted a two-day India-Wiesbaden Conference
on “Securing Global Supply Chains through Government-Industry Partnerships
towards Effective Implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution
1540 (2004)” in New Delhi in April 2018. India also hosted the “Implementation and
Assessment Group Meeting of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism”
in February 2017. We fully support enhanced cooperation with international
organizations like the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and other relevant United Nations bodies in order
to prevent non-State actors from acquiring WMDs.
The Committee’s work last year was affected by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which is why much of the Committee’s planned activities could not take
place. But the Committee can derive satisfaction from the fact that it was one of
the few committees to hold an in-person meeting in 2020. We recommend that the
Committee should take a similar lead this year as well and set an example.
21-044409/24

S/2021/325

The year 2021 holds great significance for the 1540 Committee. Understandably,
the focus should be on the comprehensive review, which has already been delayed by
a year. As part of the review, this year, we expect the Committee to undertake a series
of activities that will chart the future course of the Committee and its mandate. The
completion of a robust comprehensive review before the end of the year should be
a common objective and priority. We are therefore concerned that the Committee’s
programme of work for 2021 has not yet been adopted. The Committee has already
lost two months, and we urge it to adopt the programme of work as soon as possible
so that its activities can commence without delay.

10/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I would like to thank Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez for his
briefing on the work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). I would like to assure him and his team of our full support in
the demanding task that lies ahead of them.
Ireland attaches great value to the work of the 1540 Committee. Any threat or
use of weapons of mass destruction is quite simply abhorrent. The full implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) will ensure that non-State actors are prevented from
acquiring and using such weapons. Resolution 1540 (2004) forms an essential part
of the global non-proliferation architecture in this regard. We encourage States to
continue to take their responsibilities under this resolution seriously.
This year much of our focus will be on the comprehensive review of the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). The review provides an opportunity for
us to reinforce our collective resolve to advance our work under the resolution.
We thank Ambassador Dian Triansyah Djani and his team for the work
carried out last year. The restrictions caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic have meant that much of the work still needs to be completed.
Ireland sees monitoring, assistance and outreach as vital to fulfilling the
Committee’s mandate. Through its monitoring, outreach and assistance work, the
Committee can help States to identify any gaps and vulnerabilities in regulations
and national control frameworks. It can also help in areas where assistance may be
required. We hope to see this work further strengthened under the comprehensive
review.
International and regional organizations and civil society, including academia
and the private sector, also have an important contribution to make. The Committee
should be open to all views and experiences to ensure the best outcome for the
review. It is also important, in our view, to maintain continued cooperation between
the 1540 Committee and the Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and 1373 (2001). However, while the comprehensive review
is a key part of the Committee’s work this year, it is also vital that the Committee’s
regular work continues in parallel.
In the next month, the Council will need to decide on the rollover of the
Committee’s mandate. Given the continuing uncertainties caused by COVID-19, it is
important that we give ourselves time and flexibility to complete the comprehensive
review in the best way possible. For this reason, we see a timeline to April 2022 as
the most suitable option.
Finally, we hope that the Committee can quickly finalize its programme of
work so we can get down to business.

21-0444011/24

S/2021/325

Annex VII
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations, Michael Kiboino
I welcome the briefing by Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
and commend him on his leadership of the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
The work of the 1540 Committee is a critical component of the global nonproliferation architecture designed to prevent non-State actors, including terrorists,
from gaining access to weapons of mass destruction. Kenya therefore takes the
work of the Committee seriously, as it considers that the threat of weapons of mass
destructions remains real and continues to evolve.
It is clear to all that the coronavirus disease pandemic has made the logistics
of the work of the Committee, and indeed, the Council generally, more complex.
However, the past year has also shown that there are innovative ways, to ensure
that the important work of the Council goes on. We note in this regard that the
Committee took precautionary measures in conducting its business, which it did
largely by virtual means.
As we consider the way forward for the 1540 Committee, Kenya is eager to
see two things: first, that the work of the Committee moves forward, and secondly,
that Committee meetings that require the involvement of experts from capitals
can attract and receive the broadest possible participation. In this regard, we duly
acknowledge the various concerns expressed in relation to the options for extension
of the Committee’s mandate and the programme of work.
We all agree that the comprehensive review and its open consultations constitute
a key part of the work of the Committee, and, with both pending, it is important to
remain flexible and open to options that would ensure that the Committee resumes
its important work. That is why I wish to reaffirm Kenya’s flexibility on any agreed
path that would get us back to the substantive work of the Committee.
I reiterate Kenya’s full support for Ambassador De la Fuente Ramírez as
Chair of the Committee and reaffirm our readiness to constructively engage in this
important work.

12/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
I will make a very brief statement in my national capacity.
Mexico reiterates its conviction that the multilateral non-proliferation
architecture needs to be strengthened to prevent the catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of weapons of mass destruction and to build a more peaceful and
secure world.
The international situation shows us once again how multilateral cooperation
is indispensable to addressing global challenges, including those related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Much in the world may have changed
with the coronavirus disease pandemic, but if there is one thing that has not
diminished, it is the threat of non-State actors acquiring weapons of mass destruction.
However, and somewhat paradoxically, advances in science and technology, with all
the benefits they bring to humankind, also represent, as noted in this context, a new
proliferation-related challenge.
Accordingly, the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004) offers an
important opportunity for members of the Security Council and the wider membership
of the United Nations to reflect on what needs to be done to strengthen and adjust the
mandate to this new reality. We will also be able to reflect on how to enhance the role
of the Committee in supporting States in fulfilling their obligations. I am confident
that, together, we will be able to identify elements that will help strengthen the work
of the Committee and thereby prevent the continuation of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction to non-State actors.

21-0444013/24

S/2021/325

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
I would like to thank Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez for his
briefing on the work of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), which he chairs.
The threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is a
growing concern, and the work of the 1540 Committee is more important than ever to
preventing and deterring the proliferation of these types of weapons and their means of
delivery. My delegation welcomes the significant progress made in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) despite the difficulties caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and commends the work of its Panel of Experts as well as the
headway made by a majority of States in implementing the resolution.
We stress that national Governments have the primary responsibility for
ensuring the effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and call on them
to take the necessary steps to strengthen their capabilities to counter the threats
posed by the possibility of terrorists acquiring weapons of mass destruction. Equally
important is the need to maintain contact with specialized international, regional
and subregional organizations, particularly in the area of capacity-building.
Accordingly, we call on the Committee to find a consensus on adopting its
programme of work for this year, which usually revolves around four main themes:
national monitoring and implementation, assistance, cooperation with international
organizations and other relevant United Nations bodies, and transparency and
media outreach.
In conclusion, my delegation has no objection to a possible extension of the
Committee’s current mandate, which expires on 25 April 2021, to allow for the
completion of the remaining activities of the comprehensive review, which have been
disrupted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

14/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex X
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Norway to the
United Nations, Mona Juul
Norway would like to thank Mexico and Ambassador Juan Ramón de la
Fuente Ramírez for taking up the task of chairing the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and for briefing the Council today.
We would also like to thank the Panel of Experts for its excellent work in very
challenging circumstances — not least because of the restrictions necessitated by
the current environment surrounding the coronavirus disease. The Panel of Experts
has Norway’s full support.
We note that a number of activities were postponed as a result of the pandemic.
But we are pleased to see that the Committee and the Panel of Experts have been able
to adjust to new working methods and that the work on the Committee matrices was
completed last year.
I have two comments on the work of the Committee going forward.
First, the 1540 Committee focuses on the important work of preventing
the proliferation and use of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
We reiterate our concern regarding the continually evolving nature of the risk of
proliferation, including the rapid advances in science, technology and international
commerce. In this respect, I can assure the Chair of the 1540 Committee that Norway
looks forward to constructively engaging with him and all Council members on the
comprehensive review, leading up to the renewal of the Committee’s mandate. The
open consultations are a key part of the comprehensive review. It is important that
these consultations are robust and that a broad range of stakeholders are included.
Secondly, to achieve the full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), we
must ensure that States requiring and requesting assistance receive it. An efficient
and regularly updated process that matches requests with offers of assistance is
therefore essential.
The prospect of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is of real and
continuous concern. Resolution 1540 (2004) is a vital component of the global nonproliferation architecture, and the work of the Committee is as important as ever. We
look forward to contributing to that work in the years ahead.

21-0444015/24

S/2021/325

Annex XI
Statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We thank the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), the Permanent Representative of Mexico, Ambassador
Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, for his substantive briefing.
As this was his first briefing in his capacity as Chair of the 1540 Committee,
I would like to wish him every success in his work at the helm of this subsidiary
body of the Council. We count on his honourably discharging his role as Chair and
brokering the Committee’s negotiations work in a fair manner.
Russia consistently and deeply relies on resolution 1540 (2004) as one of the
few universal instruments in the area of the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. Indeed, the resolution has been incorporated as a priority into Russia’s
foreign policy strategy.
The successful implementation of the resolution at national levels should
be promoted by the efforts of this specialized Security Council committee, which
should monitor and coordinate global efforts to provide technical support to States
in need upon their request. Although the 1540 Committee functions on the basis of
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, it is not mandated to force any “services”
on the States Members of the United Nations. The resolution does not restrict the
sovereign right of States to define their own ways of implementing its provisions.
Much needs to be done to meet the basic goal, which is the full and universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Unfortunately, the circumstances of
force majeure created by the coronavirus disease pandemic have had an ongoing
negative impact on the work of the 1540 Committee, with many tracks on the nonproliferation agenda suffering as a result. We nevertheless remain convinced that the
interruptions occasioned by this emergency must not undermine the effectiveness of
the Committee in its efforts.
We are faced with the pivotal task of completing the comprehensive review
of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which began last year pursuant
to resolution 1977 (2011). We expect the review to be productive and enhance
the effectiveness of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), as well as the
work of the 1540 Committee and its Panel of Experts. We believe that our main
task is to preserve the spirit of cooperation that surrounds the resolution, which is
particularly important considering the current turbulence in international affairs.
The resolution remains one of the few islands of stability and non-confrontation in
multilateral diplomacy.
Provision of technical assistance to States should remain a priority track for
the 1540 Committee. It is of principal importance that the Committee be the central
coordinator of global efforts in relation to the resolution and that it be able to define
the goals and priorities of this work.
We believe that we all have an interest in enhancing the 1540 Committee’s
effectiveness and that the Committee should rely upon the unifying principles set
forth in resolution 1540 (2004). Otherwise, our controversies at this non-proliferation
platform will play into the hands of those whom resolution 1540 (2004) was designed
to counter, namely, non-State entities, including terrorists, who seek to possess
weapons of mass destruction and their precursors.

16/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex XII
Statement by the Counsellor of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to
the United Nations, Diani Jimesha Prince
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks Ambassador Juan Ramón de la
Fuente Ramírez for his informative briefing, and we express our support for Mexico
in its ongoing efforts as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains a vital element in the global architecture to
prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means
of delivery and related materials to non-State actors. The threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction to and through non-State actors is constantly evolving.
Therefore, it is imperative that perpetrators be held accountable, as the use of these
weapons remains unacceptable.
The significant progress that States have made since the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004) is quite encouraging. However, as mentioned by the Chair,
its full and effective implementation is a long-term task that will require continuous
efforts at all regional and international levels. In this regard, we are particularly
pleased by the precautionary measures taken by the Committee during 2020 to
maintain the coordination between the Committee and international, regional and
subregional organizations, despite the many challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
The Committee must be commended for finalizing the review of 193 matrices
and for publishing 190 updated matrices on its website. We also applaud the 184
Member States that submitted implementation reports on measures they have taken
or plan to undertake in compliance with their obligations under resolution 1540,
(2004) as encouraged by paragraph 5 of resolution 2325 (2016).
We also take this opportunity to encourage the Committee to continue its
efforts in facilitating technical assistance to Member States to review and strengthen
their mechanisms for safeguarding against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction as well as to strengthen dialogue and cooperation.
To conclude, we reaffirm our commitment to contributing to the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), including the implementation of
our obligations to enhance the security of nuclear materials and their means of
delivery. We reiterate our support for the activities of the Committee and the Group
of Experts, and we express our full support for the extension of the mandate of
resolution 1540 (2004).

21-0444017/24

S/2021/325

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, I should like to thank the Permanent Representative of Mexico,
Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, for his valuable briefing on the activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). We also
welcome the progress made by States in implementing the resolution and commend
the efforts of the Group of Experts that assists the Committee and of the Office for
Disarmament Affairs to support States’ implementation of the resolution, which is
one of the most important components of the international non-proliferation regime
and is intended to prevent non-State actors, including terrorist organizations, from
gaining access to weapons of mass destruction.
The threat of terrorist groups acquiring weapons of mass destruction remains
cause for great concern and seriously jeopardizes international peace and security.
Efforts to address the threat must be intensified, particularly in the light of emerging
trends in terrorism and scientific and technological developments.
We look forward to the renewal of the mandate of the Committee, which
must continue to provide all necessary information and updates so that States
can understand their commitments under the resolution and learn about emerging
threats. In the same vein, we call for cooperation with international, regional and
subregional organizations to be strengthened in order to support the work of the
Committee and help Member States to honour their commitments.
With regard to the Council’s decision that the Committee should conduct a
comprehensive review of the status of the implementation of the resolution prior to
the renewal of the Committee’s mandate, we welcome the Chair’s statement in his
briefing that Member States, international, regional and subregional organizations
and the civil society organizations concerned will be invited to participate fully in
the process.
Tunisia submitted its first report on the implementation of the resolution
in October 2004 and an additional report in November 2019. It has also appointed
national points of contact and completed the process of updating the matrix of
information on its implementation of the resolution. The matrix was approved by the
Committee in December 2020.
Tunisia also emphasizes the importance of universal adherence to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and
Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, and the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction. All States parties must meet their obligations in order to maintain
the credibility of the treaties.
We reiterate our concern that the continuing lack of tangible progress in the area
of disarmament, particularly nuclear disarmament, and successive announcements
of programmes for the modernization of nuclear arsenals will weaken the entire nonproliferation regime.
The establishment of a Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction is essential to achieving the objectives of disarmament
and non-proliferation. The decision to establish such a zone was and remains an
integral part of the 1995 deal to extend the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons indefinitely.
18/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

The Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear
Weapons and other Weapons of Mass Destruction, the first session of which
was held in 2018, is a positive step towards achieving that goal and deserves full
support, particularly from the depositary States of the Treaty, which sponsored the
1995 resolution on the Middle East. We once again call on all parties concerned to
participate constructively in future sessions of the Conference.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our conviction that efforts to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction must be strengthened. Tunisia
stands ready to cooperate closely in support of those efforts, including through the
activities of the Committee.

21-0444019/24

S/2021/325

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
We would like to thank the Mexican Permanent Representative and his team
for their hard work in chairing the Security Council committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). We also extend warm thanks to the Group of Experts that
supports the committee.
Resolution 1540 (2004) remains an essential component of the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture that protects all States from the use
by non-State actors of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and the means of
delivery of these weapons.
The threat posed by these weapons has evolved since the Council adopted
resolution 1540 (2004) in 2004. The United Kingdom remains particularly concerned
about non-State actors’ attempted use of crude toxin weapons such as ricin.
The comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004), delayed from last year,
is essential to ensuring that the Committee’s work remains fit for purpose. There are
three key elements to making the comprehensive review a success.
First, it should be open and transparent so all States can engage and the
Council can ensure that the renewed mandate addresses their needs.
Secondly, it should focus on assistance. Tackling the proliferation of these
weapons and their delivery means is complex, so we need to ensure States receive
the comprehensive and effective assistance they require.
Thirdly, the review needs adequate time. Therefore, the Council should
agree a sufficiently long extension of the Committee’s current mandate to allow the
thorough review process that the Committee previously agreed, despite the current
challenging circumstances.
For our part, the United Kingdom stands ready to provide legal and regulatory
expertise as well as broader support to States looking to meet their obligations and
strengthen their national regulatory frameworks, including their ability to implement
their laws and regulations governing chemical, nuclear and biological activities.
Finally, let me stress that resolution 1540 forms part of the wider international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture, which includes the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, the Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention and the various multilateral export control regimes. The
strength of this international architecture comes from all parts of it working together
effectively, so we continue to support strong cooperation between the resolution
1540 (2004) Committee and the Group of Experts with these institutions.

20/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex XV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
Let me start by thanking Ambassador de la Fuente Ramírez, as others have
done, for his briefing and for Mexico’s leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery,
including to terrorists and other non-State actors, remains among the most serious
threats facing the international community. Our collective efforts to address this
threat are as important now as they have ever been.
The 1540 Committee continued to undertake important work this past year,
despite the unprecedented challenges posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The United States very much appreciates the engagement of the
Committee’s Group of Experts with other international organizations. Those include
the International Atomic Energy Agency, INTERPOL, the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Similarly, the Committee’s regional collaboration with the Organization of
American States, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Caribbean Community has also helped promote the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). We appreciate their efforts with the regional offices of the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs over the past year.
These are important instances of the cooperation and outreach undertaken
by the Committee and its Group of Experts. Their work protects us from the worst
consequences — non-State actors acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction.
Their actions save lives.
While the COVID-19 pandemic prevented the scheduled comprehensive review
from taking place in 2020, we, like others, look forward to a technical extension of
the mandate of the 1540 Committee for a period of one year, through April 2022. A
technical extension should leave sufficient time for the Security Council to benefit
from the robust discussions of the comprehensive review before undertaking a
substantive update to the Committee’s mandate.
On the comprehensive review’s content, we need to further focus and
streamline the 1540 Committee’s engagement with Member States. States must
have access to the Committee’s information and its resources. And they must have
the opportunity to collaborate with the Committee to best formulate their national
assistance requests. The Committee, in turn, will then be better able to identify
appropriate assistance providers.
The Committee must also adapt to evolving proliferation threats. That
includes making all States aware of emerging technologies, like synthetic biology or
unmanned aerial vehicles, that could be used to deliver weapons of mass destruction.
We also must fully empower the Group of Experts to independently promote
the Committee’s work to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. This includes the panel’s engagement with Member States, regional
and subregional organizations, 1540 regional coordinators and civil society.
In the meantime, Member States can take forward steps even before the
comprehensive review to help promote the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
One simple step would be to appoint national 1540 points of contact. National points
of contact are an important resource for enhancing States’ interactions with the
21-0444021/24

S/2021/325

Committee and for promoting effective coordination within Member States as they
seek to implement the resolution. We encourage all Member States to identify their
1540 points of contact for the Committee to aid in these efforts.
We look forward to working with the Chair, the members of the Council and
all United Nations States Member to ensure a successful comprehensive review.
This is one of the few established, authoritative international measures in place
to address the threat of weapons of mass destruction being acquired and used by
terrorists or non-State actors. The comprehensive review and the 1540 mandate
renewal can have a defining role in our efforts to address the threat. We ask the
members of the Council to be united in ensuring that we are successful. The stakes
could not be higher.

22/24

21-04440

S/2021/325

Annex XVI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Pham Hai Anh
I thank Ambassador Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez, Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), for his first briefing to the Security
Council. I would like assure him of my delegation’s full support and cooperation for
the success of this important Committee.
The implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) has achieved many positive
results since 2004. The high level of cooperation among States stands out, as
manifested by their submissions to, and interactions with, the Committee and with
each other. However, the threat landscape on weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
is continuously changing. Terrorism and proliferation continue to pose a grave threat
to international peace and security.
We are concerned over the complexity of the issue and potential proliferation
threats, as well as risks of WMDs falling into the hands of non-State actors and
risks of new technologies being used by terrorists. The current coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic reminds us of the importance of preventing such great forces
from being used by malicious entities. We must not let our guard down.
We therefore stress the importance of the implementation of all nonproliferation frameworks, especially the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), the Chemical Weapons Convention, the Biological Weapons
Convention and resolution 1540 (2004).
This year is special, as we will hold the tenth NPT Review Conference
and the comprehensive review of resolution 1540 (2004). We need to ensure the
success of these reviews for better and more effective implementation on the nonproliferation of WMDs in the coming years. We note with appreciation the efforts
of all Committee members, its four working groups, the Chair, the Group of Experts
and the Secretariat in promoting the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
We commend the Committee’s efforts in discussing the technical extension of
its mandate, as well as on the contents of its programme of work and the completion
of its important tasks of updating and reviewing all matrices for the preparation
of the upcoming comprehensive review. We specially commend the efforts of the
Committee to continue to engage with and assist Member States virtually over the
past year in the context of COVID-19. Looking ahead, I would like to stress two
areas of focus for the Committee.
First, the Committee should further strengthen its assistance for States in need
of capacity-building and technical assistance, including with a tailored approach that
responds to regional and national particularities.
Secondly, it should strengthen the cooperation among relevant regional and
international organizations and other Council’s committees, especially in terms of
the sharing of information and best practices among themselves.
Viet Nam reaffirms its consistent policy of supporting the non-proliferation of
WMDs with a view to their general and complete disarmament, as well as the right
of States to peaceful applications of related technologies.
We have been continuing to strengthen our domestic implementation of all
non-proliferation obligations, including through solidifying the legal framework and
implementation mechanisms, and actively participate in international cooperation
frameworks at regional, interregional and global levels.
21-0444023/24

S/2021/325

In conclusion, we are committed to the full implementation of all the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 1540 (20040. We will continue to
support the work of the Committee and its Chair, the success of the comprehensive
review of resolution 1540 (2004)this year and the global non-proliferation regime
at large.

24/24

21-04440
