A/58/PV.93

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

93rd plenary meeting
Thursday, 5 August 2004, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of a member of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/58/111)
The President: As indicated in document
A/58/111, in accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and having consulted the regional
group concerned, as well as through a consultation by
secret ballot with the General Assembly, I requested
Japan to propose a candidate.
As further indicated in document A/58/111, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of
the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I submit to the Assembly the candidature
of Mr. Tadanori Inomata of Japan for appointment as a
member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year
term of office beginning on 1 January 2005 and
expiring on 31 December 2009.

(Saint Lucia)

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint that candidate?
It was so decided.
Mr. Ozawa (Japan): As the General Assembly
has just decided to appoint Ambassador Tadanori
Inomata as a member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a
five-year term beginning on 1 January 2005, I would
like to take this opportunity to express my delegation’s
appreciation for that decision. I also wish to express my
firm belief that Ambassador Inomata, a person of superb
qualifications for that appointment, will make significant
contributions to the work of that important body.
The President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of sub-item
(h) of agenda item 17.
Agenda item 23 (continued)
Sport for peace and development
(a) Building a peaceful and better world through
sport and the Olympic ideal (A/58/863)
The President: I should like to draw the attention
of the General Assembly to document A/58/863, which
contains the text of the solemn appeal that I made on 4
August 2004 in connection with the observance of the
Olympic Truce.
I will now read out the solemn appeal:

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-45044 (E)

*0445044*

A/58/PV.93

“On 3 November 2003, the General
Assembly adopted resolution 58/6, in which it
urged Member States to observe the Olympic
Truce during the Games of the XXVIII Olympiad
to be held in Athens from 13 to 29 August 2004.
“The sacred Greek tradition of ekecheiria
(truce) constituted the cornerstone of the Olympic
Games in ancient times, providing safety and a
peaceful environment for both the athletes
competing in the Games and for the spectators in
attendance. Its very adoption was dictated by the
oracle of Delphi as a way to put an end to the
wars that at the time devastated the Peloponnese.
The longest lasting peace accord in history was
thus created.
“Olympism was revived in 1896, aiming at
contributing to a peaceful future for mankind
through the educational value of sport. The
Olympic Movement brings together the youth of
the world in a great sports festival, promoting
peace, friendship, solidarity and fair play.
“Since 1993, support for the Olympic Truce
has grown steadily within the General Assembly,
reaching the unprecedented unanimous cosponsorship of last year’s resolution. During
these turbulent times, Member States are
demonstrating their confidence in the Olympic
Truce Ideal.
“This year, for the first time in the history
of the United Nations, we received the Olympic
Flame at United Nations Headquarters. It
travelled around the globe, through 26 countries
and 34 cities, covering all five continents. It
carried the message of hope for a world free from
hatred and war, a world where ideals of peace,
goodwill and mutual respect form the basis of
relations among peoples and countries.
“Observing the Olympic Truce means
constructing bridges of communication between
adversaries, allowing the youth of the world to
peacefully participate in the Olympic Games and
creating the necessary infrastructure for the
continuation of dialogue and the renewal of hope
for reconciliation, both during the Games and
throughout the four-year period of Olympiads.
“In times of violence and uncertainty, of
war and struggle, when security becomes a

2

pressing concern, we must always remember that
defensive mechanisms need to be paralleled by
resolute efforts to promote dialogue and
understanding among peoples and Governments
and to adhere to the ideals for which the Olympic
Truce stands.
“We are confident that the appropriate
measures taken by Greece, in close cooperation
with the international community, will ensure the
staging of the Games in a safe and peaceful
environment.
“I, therefore, solemnly appeal to all States
to demonstrate their commitment to peace in the
world by observing the Olympic Truce during the
XXVIII Olympic Games in Athens. While
conflicts in the world will not cease overnight, if
we could have peace for sixteen days, then,
maybe, just maybe, we could have it forever.”
(A/58/863)
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
take note of the solemn appeal made in connection
with the observance of the Olympic Truce?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 23 and of agenda item 23
as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 59 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/58/L.67/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly held the debate on this agenda item,
together with agenda items 55, 57 and 58, at its 43rd to
46th plenary meetings.
I give the floor to the representative of Malaysia
to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): On behalf of the
countries members of the Non-Aligned Movement, I
have the honour to introduce to the General Assembly
a draft resolution under agenda item 59, entitled
“Reaffirming the central role of the United Nations in
the maintenance of international peace and security and

A/58/PV.93

the promotion of international cooperation”, contained
in document A/58/L.67/Rev.1 dated 30 July 2004.

commitment to multilateralism and express support for
the strengthening of the United Nations system.

Developments in global affairs in recent years
have raised, and continue to raise, serious concerns
about the primacy of the United Nations and its
relevance in the multilateral decision-making process.
The consequences of those circumstances have, inter
alia, given rise to expressions of grave concern by
many countries over the gradual erosion and
weakening of the role of the United Nations as the
primary interlocutor in addressing global challenges in
the political, economic and social fields and in
fulfilling its responsibility as envisaged in the Charter.

The operative paragraphs touch on the core issues
central to the United Nations and several items on its
agenda, including international cooperation for
development, the right to self-determination,
disarmament, human rights and terrorism. I must admit
that that is not an exhaustive list of issues confronting
the international community in our efforts to establish
peace and security and a prosperous world for all. It is
just a reflection of the many fundamental issues that
must be addressed collectively by the international
community, with the United Nations playing the central
role and providing a level playing field for all nations,
big and small, rich and poor, based on the principle of
the sovereign equality of all its Members.

That weakening of the role of the United Nations
and the need to restore and strengthen the
Organization’s position in the multilateral system was
emphasized by almost every leader who addressed the
general debate of the current session of the General
Assembly last September. Public perception of the
erosion and weakening of the role of the United
Nations has also been repeatedly echoed by the general
public, civil society and mass media all over the world.
The Non-Aligned Movement remains convinced
that the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations remain paramount and relevant today.
In fact, the founding principles of the Non-Aligned
Movement, as well as those of many other
intergovernmental
organizations,
are
primarily
premised on the very purposes and principles embodied
in the Charter of the United Nations. They have proven
to be the most universal and effective tool and code of
conduct in addressing the challenges faced by the
international community. The Non-Aligned Movement
therefore believes that it is incumbent upon the General
Assembly, as the chief deliberative and policy-making
organ of the United Nations, to reaffirm these
overarching elements in the face of the current state of
global affairs.
The draft resolution contains five preambular
paragraphs and 14 operative paragraphs. It is intended
to be a broad-based initiative for States Members of the
United Nations to reaffirm their support for and
political commitment and adherence to the central role
of the United Nations in the fulfilment of its role and
responsibilities as envisaged in the Charter. It
essentially calls for Member States to, inter alia, fully
respect, comply with and observe the principles of the
Charter and international law, reaffirm their

In the face of the serious challenges confronting
this Organization, the Non-Aligned Movement strongly
believes that it is timely for Member States to reaffirm
their unequivocal support to the United Nations,
pledging full observance of the Charter and respect for
the principles and purposes enshrined in it. It is our
sincere intention that the draft resolution, once it has
been adopted, will provide a strong political platform
and commitment that will pave the way towards
facilitating all efforts to enhance the role of this most
universal international Organization in the maintenance
of peace and security and the promotion of the
economic and social advancement of all peoples.
As an attempt to facilitate consensus and
minimize differences on the text, several paragraphs,
and the central ideas contained therein, have been
inspired by or extracted from the Charter, relevant
United Nations resolutions adopted by consensus and
landmark declarations. The new ideas proposed in the
text are intended to add value to the thrust of the draft
resolution and are confined to its context. In addition,
the sponsors of the draft resolution have carefully
refrained from incorporating into the text details or
specifics concerning several issues. This reflects our
desire to respond to the call for short and concise
General Assembly resolutions, in keeping with the
spirit of the revitalization of this principal organ of the
United Nations.
The sponsors of the draft resolution would like to
express the most sincere appreciation to all States
Members of the United Nations for their views,
comments and suggestions in the process of the

3

A/58/PV.93

drafting of the resolution. It is our fervent hope that,
after its adoption by the General Assembly, the draft
resolution will serve as an additional tool to bolster our
collective determination and efforts aimed at renewing
and reinvigorating the United Nations in pursuit of its
aims and objectives, in particular in the maintenance of
international peace and security and the promotion of
international cooperation.
The Non-Aligned Movement has made serious
efforts and shown a high degree of flexibility so as to
ensure the adoption of this text by consensus. Several
open-ended informal consultations and “informal
informals” were convened by the Movement over the
past two months with our negotiating partners. These
have, indeed, enabled us to improve the substance of
the text. We are grateful for the contributions,
suggestions and views expressed by our negotiating
partners. Many of them have been incorporated into the
text of the draft resolution before us. Nonetheless, we
recognize that it would be almost impossible to reflect
and satisfy the concerns and interests of everyone. We
are satisfied that the text that is now before the
Assembly is a product of a very intensive negotiating
process and bears the fingerprints of both the NonAligned Movement and our negotiating partners. It is
our fervent hope that the draft resolution will receive
the broadest possible support from States Members of
the United Nations.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor to those representatives
who wish to speak in explanation of vote before the
voting, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Toro Jiménez (Venezuela) (spoke in
Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
carefully examined the draft resolution under
consideration, which we sponsored. We believe that it
reflects the principles and objectives underpinning and
guiding the development of the Non-Aligned
Movement, of which we are a member. From that
perspective, it has our full support. We would like,
however, to refer to one specific aspect of the content
of the draft resolution which requires particular
attention. Paragraph 4 refers to the changes we hope to
make within the United Nations system. In this legal
and political context, my delegation believes that we

4

cannot compromise our principles; no deals can be
made in that regard.
Furthermore, with regard to nuclear disarmament,
the document takes an unequivocal position on the
principles relating to the fostering by States Members
of the United Nations of general and complete
disarmament.
Where paragraph 4 refers to reform of the
Security Council, a form of wording is used that could
give rise to a number of different interpretations. For
that reason, we believe — and reaffirm here — that, in
order to be consistent with our principles, we must
ensure that such reform effects far-reaching and
structural change in the Security Council, including, of
necessity, the elimination of the right of veto. That is
our interpretation of the paragraph. In this respect, we
are merely reiterating what our President stated at the
Millennium Summit: the abolition of the right of veto
is a necessary condition for embarking on the process
of democratizing the Security Council.
Mr. Laurin (Canada): No country is more
committed than Canada to maintaining the vital role of
the United Nations in world affairs, and we welcome
initiatives that are aimed at strengthening the role and
capacity of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, despite its stated intent, the draft
resolution before us will not help us to achieve that
objective. The draft resolution goes beyond just
renewing our commitment to the ideals and purposes of
the United Nations: it is interpretive of those ideals and
purposes, and it disregards elements that, in Canada’s
view, are necessary to impart sufficient balance to the
text to attract consensus.
The process through which the draft resolution
evolved was perhaps in part responsible for the
production of a document that does not embody a fully
shared vision. It is unfortunate that the draft resolution
was circulated to the broader United Nations
membership only in mid-May and that there were not
the sort of negotiations needed to bring about a
consensus — which in our view is crucial to the
effectiveness of such a resolution.
On matters of substance, a number of changes
that my Government favoured were made, such as
welcoming the establishment of the High-Level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change and including
references to genocide and crimes against humanity.

A/58/PV.93

For those changes and others, we would like to thank
the sponsors of the draft resolution, in particular the
delegation of Malaysia, which has made genuine
efforts to bring the parties towards consensus.
Unfortunately, the views of Canada on some
important issues — particularly the lack of balance in
the text as a whole — were not taken on board
sufficiently to make it possible for us to vote in favour
of the draft resolution. For example, in the context of a
draft resolution on the role of the United Nations with
regard to international peace and security and
international cooperation, we cannot agree to explicitly
raising the principles of sovereignty and noninterference
without
clearly
identifying
the
responsibilities inherent in those principles. Member
States carry the primary responsibility to protect their
people from threats to their physical security. We
believe that, when they fail to do so, the United
Nations has a clear responsibility to act. That is one of
the most important lessons of the past decade, which
we believe needs to be articulated clearly in a draft
resolution such as the one before us.
In Canada’s view, this draft resolution is selective
with regard to our common obligations and, as a result
of taking out of context the language of documents
quoted, risks distorting their meaning. That in turn
could undermine, or at least complicate, the work of
the General Assembly on key issues linked to the new
realities of the international environment and could
contribute to the United Nations seeing the world
through outdated and blurred lenses. It is a risk we are
not prepared to take.
In conclusion, Canada acknowledges and
welcomes the repeated assurances by the sponsors of
this draft resolution that it is in no way intended to preempt and/or preclude options for the reform of our
multilateral architecture, such as those that may
emerge from the High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change or from the much-anticipated
special event in September 2005. We are grateful to the
sponsors for their assurances, as this is an extremely
important issue to my Government.
Regretfully, for those reasons, Canada has no choice
but to abstain in the voting on this draft resolution.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting.

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1, entitled “Reaffirming the
central role of the United Nations in the maintenance
of international peace and security and the promotion
of international cooperation”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Gambia, Ghana,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United
Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland,
Ireland,
Italy,
Japan,
Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Monaco, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia and
Montenegro, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

5

A/58/PV.93

Draft resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1 was adopted by 93
votes to 2, with 47 abstentions (resolution 58/317).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Bangladesh,
Botswana and Burkina Faso informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote
on the resolution just adopted. May I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Stoffer (United States of America): Let me
say a few words about the resolution that we have
considered today. The United States believes that this
resolution is premature, since it attempts to address a
matter that is currently being reviewed by the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change. The
General Assembly’s deliberations on the issues
addressed in this resolution could benefit from
consideration of the recommendations of the HighLevel Panel that are expected on 1 December of this year.
The resolution does not adequately address
several issues that are of particular concern to the
United States.
First, the resolution reaffirms some principles of
international law and not others, thus rendering the text
incomplete. Also, the partial inclusion of references
taken out of context gives them a meaning different
from the carefully balanced framework of the
declarations or resolutions from which they were
drawn.
Secondly, in its reference to the threats posed by
weapons of mass destruction, this resolution fails to
address appropriately the issue of proliferation, not
only of nuclear weapons, but also of chemical and
biological weapons and the means to deliver them. We
would have welcomed language in the resolution that
clearly acknowledged the approach to proliferation
matters that was established by the unanimous
adoption of Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), a
resolution that is binding on all United Nations
Member States.
Thirdly, the resolution mischaracterizes the role
of the United Nations in the management of the
international economic system. The United States has
long maintained that economic and social development
in any country is possible only if that country takes on
that primary responsibility.

6

The United States offered alternative language on
those matters of concern and sought engagement on
our proposals. We regret that the sponsors of this
resolution were unable to accommodate our proposals
and that we were compelled to vote against the
resolution.
Mr. Hamburger (Netherlands): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia, Romania
and Turkey, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro and
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and the
European Free Trade Association countries Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, I would like to reaffirm the EU’s
full commitment to an effective multilateral system
with a strong United Nations at its core. Effective
multilateralism is one of the two pillars on which the
Security Strategy of the European Union, adopted in
December 2003 by our heads of State or Government,
is founded. The fundamental framework for
international relations is the United Nations Charter.
Further strengthening the United Nations, equipping it
to fulfil its responsibilities and to act effectively, is a
European priority.
The central role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security and the
promotion of international cooperation is a concern of
us all. Strengthening that role is a mutual goal and a
common responsibility. Decisions in this area should
build, more than anything, on this communality of
interests and reflect a common approach. We therefore
regret all the more that we have had to abstain in the
vote on the resolution just adopted in the absence of
such an approach.
The reasons for our abstention are threefold and
concern timing, process and substance.
First, with regard to timing, as the European
Union has indicated from the very beginning, we
believe that the present resolution comes too soon. We
understand that the initiators wished first and foremost
to address concerns over recent political events and
their implications for the multilateral system. Those
concerns are shared by many. They indeed need to be
addressed. As the Secretary-General said in his
opening statement to the General Assembly at the

A/58/PV.93

beginning of this session (see A/58/PV.7), we will have to
ask ourselves whether the framework that was created in
1945 is still up to its tasks or whether radical changes are
needed. He added that in doing so, we should not shy
away from questions about the adequacy and
effectiveness of the rules and instruments at our disposal.
Debate about these very serious questions has
only just started. We expect important input from the
High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change,
which the Secretary-General has established precisely
to look into these and other questions. This is not to
say that we can sit back and wait for the Panel’s report
and the Secretary-General’s recommendations based on
it. On the contrary, it is our obligation to participate
and contribute to the best of our abilities. We will all
have to contribute to the discussions in the run-up to
the 2005 high-level meeting to review and decide on
the implementation of the Millennium Declaration, the
Millennium Development Goals and the outcomes of
the major United Nations conferences. Adopting a
resolution now without reflecting the outcome of that
debate is, in our view, premature.
Secondly,
with
respect
to
process,
notwithstanding our doubts with regard to the timing of
the resolution, the European Union engaged actively
and constructively in informal consultations. We would
like to thank the Mission of Malaysia, in particular
Ambassador Mohd Radzi Abdul Rahman, for the time
and effort invested in the informal meetings. We would
also like to express appreciation for the amendments
that were accepted, through which part of the text
became more balanced.
At the same time, we cannot but regret the fact
that there was no occasion for actual and textual
negotiations. In real negotiations, delegations may find
that, although their stated positions differ, the interests
behind those positions do not necessarily have to be
mutually exclusive and that, eventually, satisfactory
results can be achieved. This, in our view, has been a
missed opportunity.
Finally, with regard to substance, as I said, we
appreciate some of the changes that were made to the
text, such as the recognition of the work of the Panel
and the inclusion of a reference to preventing and
ending
genocide.
Nevertheless,
some
more
fundamental problems remained for the European
Union, which contributed to our decision to abstain.
Let me mention the four most prominent ones.

First, by reaffirming and underlining certain
principles without mentioning others, the text contains
an imbalance. For example, emphasis is put on the
principles of the sovereign equality, territorial integrity
and political independence of nations. The European
Union acknowledges and accepts those principles.
However, there is a flip side to that, and that is the
responsibility that States have vis-à-vis their own
populations. We feel that this notion could and should
have been adequately reflected in the text.
Secondly, on human rights, the European Union
is of the opinion that constructive dialogue is a means
of protecting and promoting human rights, but not the
exclusive means, as the text seems to imply.
Thirdly, on the use of force and other measures,
the Charter contains provisions allowing the use of
force and the exercise of pressure and coercion under
certain conditions. Those are listed in Chapter VII, in
particular in Article 51. Without a reference to those
provisions, the text, in our view, is not complete.
Fourthly and finally, the European Union is of the
opinion that the text as adopted remains unbalanced —
I am referring here to operative paragraph 12 — with
most of the emphasis on nuclear disarmament; nonproliferation is mentioned only in passing, without an
explicit reference to Security Council resolution 1540
(2004).
Again, the European Union feels regret and even
frustration that it had to abstain on a resolution on such
an important issue. Nonetheless, the European Union is
fully committed to continuing our joint efforts in
building a United Nations that can deal more
effectively with peace, security and development,
thereby indeed strengthening the central role of the
United Nations in matters of common and global
concern.
Mr. Ozawa (Japan): Let me take this opportunity
to pay tribute to the initiative of the Non-Aligned
Movement, which proposed the draft resolution
adopted as resolution 58/317, as well as to the
coordinating role of the Malaysian delegation.
Japan shares the view that in this increasingly
interdependent and globalized world, it is important for
us, the Member States, to continue our efforts to
strengthen multilateral frameworks for cooperation.
Japan is of the view that the United Nations, with its
universal membership and broad mandate, should

7

A/58/PV.93

continue to play its unique role, which no other
international organization can fulfil.

international norms relative to human rights, refugees
and international humanitarian law.

However, taking into account the nature of this
resolution and the goal that it is intended to achieve,
we strongly believe that further efforts should have
been made to adopt the resolution by consensus. Japan
abstained in the vote on this resolution because we do
not think that every effort was made to reach
consensus. We regret the fact that a vote was taken on
this matter, perhaps giving the impression to the
outside world that we, the Member States, are divided
in reaffirming the central role of the United Nations.

Mexico is confident that the resolution cannot in
any way be interpreted as prejudging the reforms that
are so sorely needed if our Organization is truly able to
tackle the old and new threats that are jeopardizing the
maintenance of international peace and security. One
such threat is the lack of a truly efficient system of
collective security. In this regard, Mexico looks forward
to the report of the High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change appointed by the SecretaryGeneral and reaffirms its commitment to the necessary
adoption of new approaches to deal with the new
realities facing the international community as a whole.

Mr. Gómez Robledo (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico supported the adoption of draft
resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1, introduced by Malaysia on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, because we
fully share its objective: to reaffirm the commitment of
Member States to the strengthening of multilateralism
and the central role of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security and in
the promotion of development.
Like other countries, the Mexican delegation
participated in the consultations on the draft resolution,
and we shall seek all means at our disposal to continue
cooperating with the Non-Aligned Movement on
matters of common interest such as the protection of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight
against terrorism. Obviously, we would have wished
that there had been more time for consultations and
further opportunity to achieve a draft resolution that
could be adopted by consensus.
In that regard, and in keeping with resolution
58/187, adopted on 22 December 2003, Mexico
reaffirms its unequivocal condemnation of all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism in all their forms
and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, regardless of their motivation, as criminal
and unjustifiable, and we extend our commitment to
international cooperation to prevent and combat that
scourge, with the understanding that all measures
States take to combat terrorism must conform to their
obligations under international law, in particular the
norms relative to human rights and refugees, and under
international humanitarian law.
Accordingly, it is Mexico’s interpretation that the
reference to international law contained in paragraph
11 of resolution 58/317 clearly includes all

8

Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour of
draft resolution A/58/L.67/Rev.1, introduced by
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We
believe it to be an important initiative towards further
strengthening the principle of multilateralism in
international affairs. However, we do not consider the
language in paragraph 12 relating to the issue of
nuclear disarmament to be entirely acceptable; nor do
we believe that it is properly balanced.
Russia’s position on this issue is well known and
has been repeatedly stated within the United Nations.
The process of disarmament, of which nuclear
disarmament is a part, must be comprehensive and
must be pursued on the basis of the relevant
international treaties and agreements and together with
the strengthening of security and stability worldwide.
Efforts to ensure the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems are
particularly important. However, the resolution’s clear
reaffirmation of the central role of the United Nations
in ensuring international peace and security and
developing cooperation among States is also important.
In accordance with the Charter, the Security Council
has the major responsibility for ensuring international
peace and security. For its part, the Russian Federation
will continue actively to foster the further
strengthening of the effectiveness of the activities of
the Security Council and of the United Nations as a
whole in that important area.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote on the resolution just adopted.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 59.

A/58/PV.93

Agenda item 61
Multilingualism
Letter from the Permanent Representative of
France to the President of the General
Assembly (A/58/862)
The President: Members will recall that at its
2nd plenary meeting held on 19 September 2003, the
General Assembly included this item on the agenda of
the fifty-eighth session. In connection with this item,
the Assembly now has before it a letter dated 13 July
2004 from the Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
General Assembly.
In the letter, the Permanent Representative of
France, on behalf of the States members of the
Intergovernmental Agency of la Francophonie,

informed me of their intention to request the inclusion
of this item as an additional item on the agenda of the
fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly, in
accordance with rule 14 of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly, with the understanding that the biennial
character of the item will not be called into question
and that any resolution adopted at the fifty-ninth
session of the Assembly on this item will refer
explicitly to the sixty-first session.
Bearing in mind the understanding stated in the
letter, may I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to defer consideration of this item and to include it in
the draft agenda of the fifty-ninth session?
It was so decided.
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 61.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

9
