I
In making such loans, which shall be repayable
within ~wo years, the Secretar)'.-General shall have
regard to the proposed financial resources of the
agency concerned, and shall obtain the prior
concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for any
cash issues which would increase the aggregate
balance outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) at any one
time to an amount in excess of $3,000,000, and
for any issue which would increase t~e balance
outstanding ( including amounts previously advanced and outstanding) in respect of any one
agency to an amount in excess of $1,000,000;
provided that an extension of one year shall be
granted to the Interim Commission of the International Trade Organization for the repayment
of the 1948 loans ;
(e) Such sums as, together with the sums previously advanced and outstanding for the same
purpose, do not exceed $500,000 to continue the
Staff Housing Fund in order to finance advance
rental payment, _guarantee deposits and working
capital requirements for housing the staff of the
Secretariat. Such advances shall be reimbursed
to the Working Capital Fund following the recovery of the rental advances, guarantee deposits
and working capital advances;
(f) Such sums, if any, as may be necessary
to reimburse staff members for national income
truces paid by them in respect of payments received from the United Nations during 1950, or
in respect of prior years for which reimbursement had not previously been made;
(g) In consultation with the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, such sums up to $5,000,000 for assistance
to Palestine refugees, in accordance with the
provisions of the resolution 22 adopted by the Generai Assembly at its 273rd plenary meeting on
8 December 1949.
276th plenary meetinr;.
10 December 10-19.

359 (IV). Tax equalization-Staff
Assessment Plan
The General Assemhly
Resolves that articles l to 7 of resolution 239
(III) A.23 be and hereby are cancelled and superseded by the following articles :
ARTICLE

l

That for each calendar year beginning after
31 December 1948. ali salaries, wages, overtime
and night differential payments, cost-of-living adjustments ( or differentials) and the allowance
for dependent children, to whomsoever paid by
the United Nations, shal: be subject to an assessment on the recipient at the rates and under
the terms specified in the following articles.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding paragraph, the Secretary-General may, where
in special circumstances he deems it necessary
and expedient, exempt from the assessment the
salaries and other emoluments of staff engaged
at locality rates, such as those serving missions
of the Un_ited Nations· or its smaller field offices.
22 See

ARTICLE l

That all amounts payable by the United Nations
in accordance with arrangements in force at 1
January 1949, other than those assessable under
article I, shall be exempt from this assessment.
ARTICLE 3

(a) That the assessment shall be calculated
according to the following rates :

On assessable payments not exceeding 4,000 dollars .
15 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments . .
20 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments .
25 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments . .
30 per cent
On the next 2,000 dollars of assessable payments
35 per cent
On the next 3,000 dollars of assessable payments
40 per cent
On all remaining assessable income. 50 per cent

( b) In the case of a person who is not employed
by the United Nations for the whole of a calendar
year or in cases where there is a change in the
annual rate of payments made to a staff member,
the rate of assessment shall be governed hy the
annual rate of each such payment made to him.
ARTICLE 4

(a) That the following credits shall be deductible from the assessment computed under
article 3 if claimed in writing and supported by
evidence satisfactory to the Secretary-General :
( i) Two hundred dolbrs for a wife or a dependent husband, or 200 dollars for the
dependent children of a staff member who
is not entitled to credit for a wiie or a
dependent husband;
( ii I One hundred dollars for dependent relatives,
i.e. a dependent parent, or brother or sister,
or a mentally or physically incapacitated
child over 16 years of age.
( b) The maximum ,::-edit under paragraph (a)
( i) shall be 200 dollars, and the maximum credit
under paragraph (a) (ii) shall be 100 dollars. A
credit shall not be granted under both paragraph
( a) (i) and paragraph (a) (ii).
( c) A separate claim for the above-mentioned
credits shall lie made for each year. In the year
in which the circumstances giving rise to the
claim first occur, the credit shall be limited to
the appropriate portion of that year.
( d) Where both husband and wife are on the
staff of the U nitecl 1\: ations, a credit under paragraph (a) ( ii J shall not be granted to both o!
them.
( e) The Secretary-General may rerluce the
credits provided by this article in sue!; cases
where salaries are paid at loc:alitv rates which
diverge widely from the Headquarters salan
sc2 les.
ARTICLE 5

That notwithstanc\ing article 1, relief sliall bt
given in respect of dependent children by way
of exemption from assessable income. The amount
of exemption to be granted shall be the amnunl
of the children's allowance actually paid and mclndecl under artir:le 1 as assessable income.

resolution 302 (IV), page 23.

21 See Official Records of

the third session of the Gen"o/ Assembly. Part I, Resolutions. page 100.

57

ARTICLE 6

That the asseument computed under the foreeoing articles shall be collected by the United
Nations by withholding it from payments. No
part of the assessment so collected shall be refunded because of cessation of employment during the calendar yeaf.
ARTICLE 7

That revenue derived from the assessment shall

be applied as an appropriation-in-aid of the budget.
276th plenary meeting,
10 December 1949.

360 (IV). Extension of the Palai, de,
Nation,, Geneva: arrangements to
be entered into between the United
Nations and the World Health Organu.ation
The General Assembly,
Taking cognisance of the arrangements proposed by the Secretary-General in document A/
C.5/361 2' in connexion with the extension of the

Palms des Nations in Geneva and the grantinc of
a lease to the World Health Organization,
Considering that no United Nations expenditures will be required in respect of the proposed
extension of the Palais des Nations,
Noting in this conq.exion that the Building
Committee of the , W <>'1d Health Organization
decided, on 26 Norember 1949, to accept a gift
of 3,000,000 Swiss francs from the Swiss Government as a contribution towards the achievement of the purposes set out in document A/
C.5/361 and that the World Health Organization
will have full responsibility for the additional
expenditures required to cover the total construction cost of the projected extension,
Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into
such arrangements with the World Health Organization and the Swiss Government as he may
see fit for the attainment of the purposes set out
in document A/C.5/361.
276th plenary meeting,
10 December 1949.
Mo See Official Records of the fourth session of the Get>eral Assembly, Annes to the Fifth Committee.

58
