Re11olution11 adopted on the reportll of the Fifth Committee

2616 (XXIV). United Nations accommodation
in Bangkok and Addis Ababa

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the reports of the SecretaryGeneral dealing with United Nations accommodation
in Bangkok46 and Addis Ababa47 and of the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions;48
2. Concurs in the observations and recommendations of the Advisory Committee, contained in paragraphs 29 to 35 of its report;
3. Authorizes the Secretary-General, bearing in
mind those observations and recommendations, to proceed in accordance with the proposals contained in
his reports. 49
1837th plenary meeting,
17 December 1969.
2617 (XXIV). Study of the nature of the increases in the level of expenditure in the
United Nations regular budget

The General Assembly,
Noting the concern expressed by some Member
States regarding the expansion in the level of the
United Nations budget,
Mindful of the need for intensified efforts to bring
about the most economic and efficient utilization of
the resources of the United Nations in the light of
the normal expansion in the activities of the Organization,
Convinced that it is inappropriate to control growth
in programmes through limitations on budgetary levels,
particularly at a time when new areas eminently suited
for international co-operation and action continue to
emerge,
Conscious of the need to have a clear and objective
picture of the various factors that have contributed to
the expansion of the United Nations budget in the
past,
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session an economic and financial analysis of the nature of the increase in the activities, staff and budget of the United
Nations, clearly distinguishing between the increase in
money terms and that in real terms, taking into
account, to the extent possible, inter alia, the following factors:
(a) The reduction in the purchasing power of the
amounts contributed by Member States to the regular
budget of the United Nations as a result of a general
rise in the cost of goods and services and the rise in
the cost of living at the locations of principal United
Nations offices;
( b) The correlation between:
(i) The rise in the contributions to the regular
budgets of the United Nations and the specialized agencies as well as to international programmes within the United Nations system
for promoting the economic development of
the developing countries, and
46 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 74, document A/C.5/1264.
47 Ibid., document A/C.5/1265.
48 Ibid., document A/7806.
49 Ibid., documents A/C.5/1264, para. 15, and A/C.5/1265,
para. 23.

93

(ii) The rise in the level of national budgets with
particular reference to the rate of expansion
of the national administrative establishments
and the level and growth of the gross national
product of States contributing more than 1 per
cent of the regular budget of the United
Nations;
( c) The growth in the traditional and the new fields
of activity of the United Nations in carrying out its
responsibilities in promoting international co-operation
in the areas of economic and social development;
(d) The extent of the increase in the United
Nations regular budget as a result of:
(i) The increase in the membership of the Organization;
(ii) The increase in the number of working languages;
(iii) The wider experience and higher qualifications
of personnel now required by the Organization, particularly for its development work,
because of the growing complexity and interdisciplinary character that the developmental
problems have come to acquire.
1837th plenary meeting,
17 December 1969.
2618 (XXIV). New construction and major alterations to existing premises at United
Nations Headquarters

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2487 (XXIII) of 21 December 1968 entitled "Proposed new construction and
major alterations to existing premises at United Nations
Headquarters", in which it authorized the SecretaryGeneral to proceed, at an estimated cost to the United
Nations of $250,000 in 1969, with the preparation
of detailed plans and specifications on which reliable
cost estimates could be based,
Noting the subsequent report of the SecretaryGeneraP0 and the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 51 on proposed new construction and major alteration to existing
premises at United Nations Headquarters,
Recognizing that there is currently an acute space
shortage at Headquarters, as well as at many other
major United Nations locations, and that the existing
circumstances preclude any immediate relief except
through new construction,
Convinced that the assistance of the host country is
urgently needed to help resolve the considerable difficulties which exist for delegations and staff in New
York in acquiring and retaining suitable and moderately priced office and residential accommodation in
convenient locations,
A ware that many factors must be considered in
determining the optimum locations at which additional
construction should be undertaken, including the interrelationships between the organizational units of the
United Nations, inflationary pressures, including costof-living factors, and the like,
Convinced also that all the possibilities of relocating
units of the United Nations now or in the near future
in the context of the existing need to build at all
tm Ibid., documents A/C.5/1246 and Add.I.
51 /bid., document A/7835.
