84

General Assembly--Thirtieth Seeeion

tions of racial discrimination still in evidence in some
areas in the world, some of which are imposed by certain Governments by means of legislative, administrative or other measures",
Recalling also that, in its resolution 31151 G
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973, the General Assembly condemned, inter alia, the unholy alliance between
South African racism and zionism,
Taking note of the Declaration of Mexico on the
Equality of Women and Their Contribution to Development and Peace, 1975,4 proclaimed by the World Conference of the International Women's Year, held at
Mexico City from 19 June to 2 July 1975, which
promulgated the principle that "international co-operation and peace require the achievement of national
liberation and independence, the elimination of colonialism and neo-colonialism, fore~gn occupation, zionism,
apartheid and racial discrimination in all its forms, as
well as the recognition of the dignity of peoples and
their right to self-determination",
Taking note also of resolution 77 (XII) adopted
by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government
of the Organization of African Unity at its twelfth
ordinary session,11 held at Kampala from 28 July to
1 August 1975, which considered "that the racist regime in occupied Palestine and the racist regimes in
Zimbabwe and South Africa have a common imperialist
origin, forming a whole and having the same racist
structure and being organically linked in their policy
aimed at repression of the dignity and integrity of the
human being",
Taking note also of the Political Declaration and
Strategy to Strengthen International Peace and Security
and to Intensify Solidarity and Mutual Assistance
among Non-Aligned Countries, 6 adopted at the Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs of NonAligned Countries held at Lima from 25 to 30 August
1975, which most severely condemned zionism as a
threat to world peace and security and called upon all
countries to oppose this racist and imperialist ideology,
Determines that zionism is a form of racism and
racial discrimination.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3380 (XXX). Status of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3068 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, by which it adopted and opened for signature and ratification the International Convention
on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime
against humanity,
Convinced that ratification of or acces~vn to the
International Convention on the Suppre:-:sion and Pun" Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. I.
II See A/ 10297, annex II.
e A/10217 and Corr.I, anne:r, p. 3.

ishment of ,the Crime of Apartheid on a universal basis
and implementation of its provisions are necessary for
the achievement of the goals of the Decade for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination,
1. Appeals to the Governments of all States to sign,
ratify and implement without delay the International
Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the
Crime of Apartheid;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly annual reports on the status of the
International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid;
3. Decides to consider this question at its thirty-first
session under the item entitled "Elimination of all forms
of racial discrimination".
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3381 (XXX). Status of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3-057 (XXVIII) of 2 November 1973, 3134 (XXVIII) and 3135 (XXVIII) of
14 December 1973 and 3225 (XXIX) of 6 November
1974,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General7
on the status of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;8
2. Expresses its satisfaction with the increase in the
number of States which have ratified the Convention;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that ratification of or
accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination on a
universal basis and implementation of its provisions
are necessary for the realization of the objectives of the
Decade for Action to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
4. Appeals to States which have not yet become
parties to the Convention to accede thereto;
5. Appeals to States parties to the Convention to
study the possibility of malcing the declaration provided
for in article 14 of the Convention;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
subn_iit to the General _Assembly annual reports concemmg the state of ratifications of the Convention in
accordance with Assembly resolution 2106 A (XX) of
21 December 1965.
2400th plenary meeting
10 November 1975
3382 (XXX). Importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries ::ind peoples
for the effective guarantee and observance
of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3070 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973
and 3246 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974,
7 A/10197.

8 Resolution 2106 A

(XX), annex.

85

Reeolutlons adopted on the reports of the Third ColJllllittee

Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination, to
national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperatives for the enjoyment of human
rights,
Welcoming whole-heartedly the independence of Mozambique, Sao Tome and Principe, Cape Verde and
Papua New Guinea,
·'
Concerned about the current conflict in Angola,
Equally concerned a'.,out the maintenance of the
independence and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Confident in the hope that the nationalist movements will co-operate with the Fact-Finding Commission of Inquiry and Conciliation of the Organization
of African Unity,
Indignant at the continued violations of the human
rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and the persistence
of the racist minority regimes in Zimbabwe and South
Africa,
1. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the peoples' struggle
for independence, territorial integrity and liberation
from colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation by all available means, including armed
struggle;
2. Welcomes the efforts by the Fact-Finding Commission of Inquiry and Conciliation of the Organization of African Unity to resolve amicably the current
conflict in Angola;
3. Rejects any foreign interference in the internal
affairs of Angola and of the Comoros;
4. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and those countries
whose military, economic, sporting or political relations with the racist regimes of southern Africa and
elsewhere encourage these regimes to persist in their
suppression of the aspirations of peoples for self-determination and independence;
5. Strongly condemns all Governments which do not
recognize the right to self-determination and independence of peoples under colonial and. foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably the peoples of Africa
and the Palestinian people;
6. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result of
their struggle for self-determination and independence,
and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights under which no one shall
be subje.cted to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and their immediate release;
7 ._ Keenly awaits the conclusion of the following
studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:
(a) Adverse consequences for the enjoyment of
human rights of political, military, economic and other
forms of assistance given to colonial and racist regimes
in southern Africa;
( b) Historical and current development of the right

to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United Nations organs, with particular reference to the

promotion and protection of human· rights and fundamental freedoms;
(c) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and alien
domination to self-determination;
8. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and
alien regimes continue to receive from Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and calls for a maximization of this assistance;

9. Decides to remain seized of this item at its thirtyfirst session on the basis of reports that Governments,
United Nations agencies and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations are requested to submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to colonial Territories and peoples under alien domination
and foreign subjugation.

2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3383 (XXX). Adverse consequences for the enjoyment of human rights of political, military, economic and other forms of assistance
given to colonial and racist regimes in southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Adverse conseq~~nces for the e_njoyment of human rights of political,
mihtary, economic and other forms of assistance given
to colonial and racist regimes in southern Africa",
Mindful of its responsibility to offer the oppressed
peoples under the colonial and racist regimes in southern Af?ca. every assistance i~ their struggle for selfdetermmation and for the enJoyment of their fundamental human rights,
Aware that, in pursuance of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1864 (LVI) of 17 May 1974 the
Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination' and
Protection of Minorities appointed a Special Rapporteur
to evaluate urgently the importance and the sources of
political,_ military, economic_ and other assistance given
by certam St.ates to the racist and colonial regimes of
southern Afnca, as well as the direct or indirect effects
of such assistance on the perpetuation of colonialism
racial discrimination and apartheid,
'
1. Considers that organizations and States which
give assistan~e to the racist _and colonial regimes in
southern Afn~a . are accomp~1~es of those regimes in
r~spect of their inhuman pohc1es of racial discriminat10n, apartheid and colonialism;
. 2. Requests the Secretary-General to give the Spec~al Ra~porteur, Mr. Ahmed M. Khalifa, every possible ass1s~an~ he may nee_d for the completion of his
report, which 1s to be submitted to the Sub-Commission
on_ Pr~yenti~n of Disc~mination and Protection of
Mmonties at its twenty-mnth session;
3: Decides to consi~er th~s _item at its thirty-first
session as a matter of high pnonty and, in this regard,
requests the Secretary-General to submit the final report of. the Special Rapporteur, along with the recommendations of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
