S/PV.7475

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7475th meeting

Monday, 29 June 2015, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ibrahim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Malaysia)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Schwalger
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (S/2015/378)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-20057 (E)
*1520057*

S/PV.7475

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (S/2015/378)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/482, the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland. I also wish to draw the attention of
Council members to document S/2015/378, the report
of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2228 (2015).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
the adoption of resolution 2228 (2015) on the extension
of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), based on the
important stabilizing role of that hybrid mission in
Darfur. For us, it is also of principal importance that

2/6

29/06/2015

the resolution reaffirms the role of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur of 2011 as a sound basis for a
settlement in Darfur. That is no coincidence. After
all, the Doha Document is not only being successfully
implemented in practice, but it has also become an
integral component of the Constitution of the Sudan.
It is with satisfaction that we know that the Security
Council again clearly spoke in favour of the mediation
role of the head of UNAMID between the Government
of the Sudan and the Darfur rebels on the basis of that
document.
At the same time, the Security Council has
spoken out against attempts to devalue the Doha peace
process and to replace it with a type of comprehensive
settlement formula for the conflict in the Sudan based
on a position, which is supported abroad, that assumes
a regime change in Khartoum. The parties with an
influence on the Darfur insurgents should urge them
to become rapidly involved in the Doha peace process,
just as, for example, groups in Mali were urged to
join the peace and reconciliation agreement. The
time is now right to think about the Doha Document’s
implementation by the irreconcilable insurgents,
otherwise Council sanctions should be targeted at
them. We note with satisfaction that the Council has
stressed the key role of the Joint Working Group and
the representatives of the Sudan, the United Nations
and the African Union in elaborating a strategy for
winding down the mission in Darfur. That would be
in keeping with the basic principles of peacekeeping,
which includes the agreement and consent of the host
country, as well as the deployment and operation of
peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council and the United Nations
Secretariat must very carefully consider the Working
Group’s recommendations for the future. Those
recommendations will, inter alia, determine the
relationship between the Government of the Sudan and
UNAMID.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2228
(2015). The adoption has taken place at a particularly
crucial moment in Darfur, where, despite the huge
progress that has been achieved in the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, the region
continues to confront a huge number of security and
humanitarian challenges, to the detriment of innocent
civilians.

15-20057

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

My delegation hopes that the resolution just
adopted will serve as a starting point for the fostering
of exemplary cooperation and mutual trust between the
Government of the Sudan and African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Such
trust and cooperation are indispensable if we are to help
the Sudanese parties achieve future peace and stability
in the region. My delegation also welcomes the fact that
the Security Council, together with the African Union,
has reiterated its support for the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur as being the only feasible framework
for the promotion of peace and reconciliation in
Darfur. In that regard, we call upon the Council to do
everything possible to encourage the armed movements
that are non-signatories to sign the Document without
preconditions.
We reiterate our full support to the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Mbeki, for its work aimed at promoting
a resumption of talks and bringing about an end to
hostilities between the Government of the Sudan and
armed groups.
We also take note of the national dialogue initiative,
which was again highlighted by President Omer
Al-Bashir at his inauguration in April 2015 and which
includes a promise of amnesty for the rebel groups that
decide to participate in it. Chad invites all Sudanese
stakeholders to take advantage of that opportunity to
make progress on peace. There is no military solution
to the Darfur crisis.
Finally, Chad welcomes the fact that the resolution
just adopted underlines the major role played by the
joint working group between the United Nations, the
African Union and the Sudanese Government on the
disengagement of UNAMID and hopes that the mission
will present to the Council, when appropriate, relevant
recommendations through the Secretary-General.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of resolution 2228 (2015), which was
just adopted.
China has followed the issue of Darfur with great
attention and appreciates the efforts made by the
Sudanese Government to stabilize the situation in
Darfur and promote the political process and economic
and social development in Darfur. The international
community should urge the parties concerned,
especially the rebel forces in Darfur, to adhere to a
path leading to a political solution, to participate in and

S/PV.7475

implement the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and
to achieve an early and comprehensive solution to the
question, so as to lay a foundation for the development
and reconstruction of the region.
China appreciates the work done by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) in helping to stabilize the situation,
promote peace talks and protect civilians. China has
always maintained that a United Nations peacekeeping
operation should fully respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country concerned, fully heed
the views of the country concerned and, in keeping with
changes in the local situation and actual needs, adjust
its mandate and scale.
The Security Council should attach importance to
the position of the Sudanese Government on the need
for an exit strategy to be formulated for UNAMID. We
welcome and support the setting up of a joint working
group on this issue between the United Nations
Secretariat, the Sudanese Government and the African
Union. We hope that the parties concerned will step up
their consultations so as to achieve a reasonable plan
that is acceptable to all for the phased withdrawal of
UNAMID.
Ms. Power (United States of America): Today, as
a Council, we have recognized and recommitted to
Darfur. We have done so as we face intensifying levels
of conflict and a continuing and brutal campaign waged
by the Government of the Sudan and its associated
militia. We have done so against a backdrop of massive
displacements and reports of horrific crimes such as
mass rapes. Those living in Darfur continue to be
subject to having their homes and communities burned
to the ground and their livelihoods systematically
disrupted.
We have seen more violent displacement of people
in Darfur this past year than in the 10 previous years.
Ten years ago, however, Darfur enjoyed a perch at the
top of the international peace and security agenda.
Today, the suffering of the people of Darfur has become
less visible. Our attention has been diverted. The more
than 2.5 million internally displaced people and the
4.4 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
today demand an urgent refocusing and recommitment
to protecting the civilians threatened in Darfur and, as
others have noted, to advancing peace.
Today, we have unanimously renewed the
peacekeeping mission sent to protect the people of

15-200573/6

S/PV.7475

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Darfur from those who would do them harm. As we
have reaffirmed in resolution 2228 (2015) adopted
this morning, the Security Council has an enduring
responsibility to evaluate our peacekeeping operations’
performance. That includes considering when and
how a mission should end. It is, of course, prudent
for the Council to know what it means for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) — or any peacekeeping mission — to have
completed its mission.
Sadly, given the very high level of violence and the
very large numbers of displaced persons, UNAMID’s
presence is needed now more than ever, and resolution
2228 (2015) makes it clear that any refinement of the
mission will be based on conditions on the ground
and progress towards achieving the clearly identified
benchmarks, now laid out in the annex to the mandate
in the resolution.
We call upon the Government of the Sudan and
all armed groups to cooperate fully with UNAMID as
it seeks to carry out the difficult and critical work of
protecting civilians in Darfur against the backdrop of
a serious deterioration in the security situation on the
ground.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2228 (2015) renewing the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The need for that mission is greater
than ever. As Council members heard so powerfully
in the Arria Formula meeting earlier this month, the
region saw, this past year, the worst suffering for a
decade. Darfur now has more than 2.5 million long-term
displaced people. The Sudan has the greatest number
of internally displaced persons in Africa. Millions go
hungry, and humanitarian access is too often limited by
parties to the conflict. We remain deeply concerned at
the growing reports of abuses and violations of human
rights, including those that emerged from Tabit last
year.
Let us now set aside our differences and give our
full support to UNAMID, so that it can continue its vital
mission. UNAMID should now focus on improving its
protection of civilians, conflict mediation and support
for a peace process. We welcome that it will continue its
important human rights role. Serious and unanswered
allegations of abuses and violations of human rights
have dogged the Sudan for over a decade. We encourage

4/6

29/06/2015

UNAMID to monitor, verify and draw the attention of
the authorities to those reports as a matter of priority.
UNAMID cannot continue forever. Through the
resolution just adopted, we have set out that UNAMID’s
long-term planning should be based on progress
towards a set of agreed benchmarks. A political solution
to the conflict, starting with a cessation of hostilities,
is fundamental to achieving those targets. We call on
all parties to the conflict to work together towards that
goal.
As the African Union Peace and Security Council
set out in its communiqué, we hope that the Government
of the Sudan will play a more constructive role with
UNAMID. We all share the objective of a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Sudan. Ultimately, a wellfunctioning mission that is able to fulfil its mandate
will be in a position to leave safely much sooner, in the
best interests of all parties.
However, until the Government of the Sudan and
the United Nations are working together to resolve
the terrible situation in Darfur, we cannot consider an
imminent exit for the mission. We simply cannot afford
to lose focus. In renewing UNAMID’s mandate for
another year, we have taken the right step to prevent
that from happening.
Mr. Méndez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela voted in favour of
resolution 2228 (2015), as we believe that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), in coordination with the Government of
the Sudan, plays an important role in the strategy aimed
at achieving peace and stability in Darfur, including the
protection of civilians, in accordance with the mandate
of that mission.
We welcome the role of UNAMID in promoting
peace and stability in Darfur within the framework of
the search for sustainable and peaceful solutions to the
conflict, with the full participation of the parties and
the support of regional and subregional partners. In that
vein, we express our full support for the implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, which
provides a framework that could serve as a basis for
negotiations between the parties to the conflict.
Lastly, we hope that the joint working group will
soon resume its discussions on a road map for the gradual
transfer of the tasks of UNAMID to the Government in

15-20057

29/06/2015

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Khartoum and the United Nations country team in the
Sudan, for presentation to the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by reiterating our warm congratulations,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month, during which consultations
were held on the Secretary-General’s report on the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2015/378). Those consultations
coincided with the discussions on the resolution on the
extension of the mandate of UNAMID (resolution 2228
(2015). I would like to take this opportunity to thank
those States that made every effort at the consultations
to produce a balanced text that takes into account the
positive developments in Darfur by sending a clear
message to the remaining rebel groups to listen to
reason and to engage resolutely and unconditionally
in the political peace process on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, which includes the
Government’s guarantees that those groups’ leaders
will be able to participate inclusively and transparently
in the national dialogue.
While we welcome the positive paragraphs
contained in the resolution, we would affirm the
importance of the regular review of peacekeeping
operations, which requires the Secretary-General to
present recommendations on the future of UNAMID
and the mission’s exit strategy, in response to paragraph
7 of resolution 2173 (2014), through which the mission’s
mandate was renewed last year, and in consultation with
the Government of the Sudan and the African Union.
Other paragraphs affirm the importance of the efforts
of the Joint United Nations-African Union Special
Representative for Darfur to ensure that those groups
that have so far rejected peace sign the Doha Document,
in order to give the process a global character. We also
welcome the Council’s condemnation of any actions
by any armed group aimed at the forcible overthrow of
the Government of the Sudan, and the paragraphs that
affirm the Council’s support for the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. We reiterate our gratitude to those
fraternal States that played a leading role in ensuring
that such paragraphs were included in the resolution.
At the same time, we have reservations regarding the
fact that certain paragraphs of the resolution, alleging a

S/PV.7475

deterioration in the humanitarian and security situation,
were simply copied from the previous resolution
(resolution 2223 (2015), giving the impression that
all five provinces of Darfur are currently a theatre of
open war with the armed groups. Such an impression
is incorrect. While we admit, of course, that such tribal
clashes as the latest incidents involving the Ma’aliya
and Rezeigat groups in East Darfur have occurred in
certain regions, resulting in the flight and displacement
of citizens, they must be viewed in their true context,
and we cannot therefore speak of a deterioration in the
humanitarian situation owing to such clashes.
In the same way, we strenuously object to the seventh
preambular paragraph of the resolution, expressing the
Council’s concern about the assertion in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that UNAMID has collected evidence
of two cluster bombs near Kirigiyati, North Darfur.
The Secretary-General emphasizes in his report that
an inquiry into the incident is being conducted, and it
is therefore unacceptable for the resolution to contain
a preambular paragraph on the matter. The same goes
for the paragraphs mentioning obstacles to the work
of UNAMID. As I highlighted when I last addressed
the Security Council on the subject (see S/PV.7460),
the Secretary-General states in his report that 595
UNAMID-related visas were granted during the
reporting period. We would remind delegations that
UNAMID has 17,428 staff members, excluding its
civilian component, and that the occasional delay in
the granting of visas to a few dozen individuals, or in
the granting of internal movement permits, should not
lead us to ignore the positive developments or to speak
of obstacles to the freedom of movement of UNAMID
staff.
In accordance with paragraphs 26 and 27 of the
resolution, relating to the UNAMID exit strategy, the
joint working group on the matter must immediately
resume its activities in line with the agreement we
reached during the last round of talks, to the effect
that West Darfur and four regions of Central Darfur
are stable, and the first stage of the UNAMID exit
strategy should therefore be implemented there. We
would remind the Council that the UNAMID military
and police presence in those areas is now irrelevant
and should be replaced by United Nations agencies
and programmes responsible for development and
reconstruction. We reiterate the complete commitment
of the Government of the Sudan to full cooperation and
coordination with UNAMID, particularly because the

15-200575/6

S/PV.7475

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

next stage is extremely important. We repeat our call
for the Security Council to play its role in relation to
those parties that refuse to join the Doha peace process

6/6

29/06/2015

and would remind the Council that it needs to send the
right messages to end the violence.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

15-20057
