V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

a Committee for the United Nations Population Award, to be composed
of:

(a) Ten representatives of States Members of the United Nations
elected by the Economic and Social Council for a period of three years,
with due regard to the principle of equitable geographical representation
and the need to include those Member States that have made contributions
for the Award;
(b) The Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities. to serve as ex officio members;
(c) Five eminent individuals who have made significant contributions
to population-related activities, to be selected by the aforementioned members of the Committee, to serve as honorary members in an advisory
capacity for a renewable term of three years.
2. The Executive Director of the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities shall act as Secretary of the Committee.
3. The rules of procedure of the Committee shall be established by
the Economic and Social Council.

Article 5
NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

I. Written nominations for the Award may be received from the
following:
Governments of Member States;
Intergovernmental organizations engaged in population-related
activities;
(c) Population-related non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the United Nations;
(d) University professors of population or population-related studies
and heads of population-related institutions;
(e) Laureates of the Award.
(a)
(b)

2. Nominations shall reach the Secretary-General not later than 31
December of the year prior to the year for which nominations are to be
considered.
3. The Committee for the United Nations Population Award shall be
convened during the month of February to select the laureate or laureates
of the year.

36/202.

Target for World Food Programme pledges for
the period 1983-1984

The General Assembly,
Recalling the provision of paragraph 1 of its resolution
2095 (XX) of 20 December 1965 to the effect that the World
Food Programme is to be reviewed before each pledging
conference,
Recalling also the provision of paragraph 4 of its resolution 34/ 108 of 14 December 1979 specifying that, subject
to the review of the Programme provided for in resolution
2095 (XX), the next pledging conference should be convened at the latest early in 1982, at which time Governments
should be invited to pledge contributions for 1983 and 1984,
with a view to reaching such a target as may then be recommended by the General Assembly and the Conference
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations,
Recalling further the recommendation contained in paragraph 90 of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade 168 that the resources of the World Food Programme should be augmented
and that every effort should be made to reach the target
agreed upon for each biennium during the Decade for the
regular resources of the Programme,
Noting that the review of the Programme was undertaken
by the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes
at its eleventh session and by the Economic and Social
Council at its second regular session of 1981 .

Having considered Economic and Social Council resolution 1981/85 of 2 November 1981 and the recommendations of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and
Programmes contained in its sixth annual report, 169
Recognizing the value of multilateral food aid as furnished
by the World Food Programme since its inception and the
necessity for continuing its action both as a form of capital
investment in economic and social development projects
and as a means of meeting emergency food needs,
1. Establishes for the two years 1983 and 1984 a target
for voluntary contributions to the World Food Programme
of $1.2 billion, of which not less than one third should be
in cash and/or services in the aggregate;
2. Urges States Members of the United Nations and
members and associate members of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to make every
effort t0 ensure the full attainment of the target;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation with
the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, to convene a pledging conference for this purpose at United Nations Headquarters
early in 1982;
4. Decides that, subject to the review provided for in
its resolution 2095 (XX), the subsequent pledging conference, at which Governments should be invited to pledge
contributions for the biennium 1985-1986 with a view to
reaching such a target as may then be recommended by the
General Assembly and the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, should be
convened at the latest early in 1984.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/203.

Resolution 35/56, annex.

Implementation of the medium-term and longterm recovery and rehabilitation programme
in the Sudano-Sahelian region

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December
1971, 2959 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972, 3054 (XXVIII)
of 17 October 1973, 3253 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974,
3512 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, 31/180 of 21 December
1976, 32/159 of 19 December 1977, 33/133 of 19 December
1978, 34/16 of9 November 1979 and 35/86 of 5 December
1980, as well as its resolution 35/69 of 5 December 1980,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolutions
1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975. 2103 (LXIII) of 3 August
1977, 1978/37of21 July 1978, 1979/51 of2August 1979,
1980/51 of 23 July 1980 and 1981/55 of 22 July 1981,
Taking note of decision 81 /5 of 19 June 1981 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme170 concerning the implementation of the mediumterm and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme
in the Sudano-Sahelian region,
Noting with satisfaction the decisive role played by the
United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office in helping to combat
the effects of the drought and to implement the mediumterm and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme
adopted by the States members of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe!, and in mobilizing the necessary resources to finance priority projects,
Considering that the nature and magnitude of the needs
of the countries of the Sudano-Sahelian region, which are

'

168

135

0

"

E/1981/84.

'"' See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /98/,
Supplem,·ntNo. /1 (E/1981101/Rev.l). annex I.

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

136

among the least developed countries, urgently call for the
continuation and further strengthening of actions of solidarity by the international community in support of the
recovery efforts and the economic development of those
countries,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on
the implementation of the medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian
region, 171
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the medium-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region;
2. Expresses its gratitude to the Governments, agencies
of the United Nations system, intergovernmental organizations, private organizations and individuals that have
contributed to the implementation of the medium-term and
long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region;
3. Strongly urges all Governments to make special efforts to increase the resources of the United Nations SudanoSahelian Office, including voluntary contributions through
the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities, as well as other bilateral channels so as to enable
it to respond more fully to the priority requ'irements of the
Governments of the States members of the Permanent InterState Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe);
4. Requests all organs, agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to continue and increase their assistance through joint undertakings with the United Nations
Sudano-Sahelian Office, in response to requests from the
Governments of the Sudano-Sahelian countries, for the implementation of their recovery, rehabilitation and development programmes;
5. Invites the Secretary-General to pursue further the
consultations envisaged in paragraph 5 of Economic and
Social ~ouncil resolution 1980/51, with a view to working
out specific arrangements for joint undertakings between the
United Nation~ Sudano-Sahelian Office and the appropriate
organs, agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system;
6. Commends the Administrator of the United Nations
Development ~ogramme for the results achieved through
the Umted Nat10ns Sudano-Sahelian Office in assisting the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Dro~ght Control in the Sahe! in the implementation of their
medmm-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation
programme;
7. Reaffirms the role of the United Nations SudanoSahel~an Office as th~ c~ntral point and principal body responsible for co-ordmatmg the efforts of United Nations
agencies to help the countries of the Sahe! to implement
their recovery and rehabilitation programme;
8. Notes with appreciation the effective manner in
which the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office is discharging its responsibilities in responding to the priority
requests of the States members of the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sahe! within the
framework of their programme;
9. Invites the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office
to continue to strengthen its close co-operation with the
States members of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahe) and with the Committee with
a view to hastening the implementation of the medium'-term
and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the
Sudano-Sahelian region;
171

N36/208 and Add. I.

10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report
to the General Assembly, through the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme and the
Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of the
medium-term and long-term recovery and rehabilitation programme in the Sudano-Sahelian region.
103rd plenary meeting
17 December 1981

36/204.

Assistance for the reconstruction, rehabilitation and development of Equatorial Guinea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/105 of 5 December 1980, in
which, inter alia. it recognized the need for the adoption
of special measures of assistance to enable Equatorial
Guinea to rebuild its economy and to restore to normal the
social and public services of the country. and drew the
attention of the international community to the critical social
and economic situation confronting Equatorial Guinea and
to the list of urgent short-term and long-term projects required by the Government to carry out its programme of
rehabilitation and reconstruction,
Taking note of the address delivered by the First VicePresident of the Supreme Military Council and Commissioner for External Affairs of Equatorial Guinea to the General Assembly on 28 September 1981, 172 in which he
described the grave social and economic problems of his
country and expressed the hope that the international community would contribute generously towards satisfying the
needs of Equatorial Guinea at the conference of donors to
be held at the beginning of 1982.
Noting further that there are no official national income
statistics available for Equatorial Guinea and that, since
ther~ has been no_ official census since 1964. official population figures will be forthcoming only after the census
proposed for the second quarter of 1982,
Noting from the report of the Secretary-General, to which
is anne~ed th~ report of the review mission dispatched to
Equatonal Gmnea, 173 that the economic and financial situ_atio1;1 in that country remains grave, that the tight budgetary
situation and the large external trade deficit constitute a
constraint on the Government's ability to embark on a programme of reconstruction and rehabilitation and that external financial assistance is essential if the Government is to
provide the population with health, education and other
essential social and public services,
I. Urgently reiterates its appeal to all Member States
to contribute generously, through bilateral or multilateral
c_hannels, towards satisfying the reconstruction, rehabilitatton and development needs of Equatorial Guinea;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite
the Committee for Development Planning, in the light of
the new data and information provided by the Government
of_ Eq_uatorial ~~i~e_a, to consider, on the basis of existing
c_ntena, the ehgibihty of that country for inclusion in the
hst of the least developed countries;
3. Requests the appropriate organizations and programmes of the United Nations system-in particular the
United Nations Development Programme, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural Development, the World
Bank, the World Food Programme, the World Health Organization. the United Nations Children's Fund and the
172
Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirt,·-sixth Session, Plenary Meetings, 15th meeting. paras. 134-163:
m A/36/283.
