S/2020/123

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 February 2020
Original: English

United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2476
(2019), by which the Council established the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(BINUH) beginning on 16 October 2019 for an initial period of 12 months, and
requested me to report on the implementation of the resolution, including any
instances of mandate implementation failures and measures taken in response to them,
every 120 days from 16 October. The document covers significant developments since
the issuance of my previous report on Haiti (S/2019/805), provides an update on the
operationalization of BINUH and describes progress in integrating the activities of
BINUH and the United Nations country team.
2.
The establishment of BINUH marked the end of 15 consecutive years of
peacekeeping in Haiti and opened a new chapter in the collaboration between the
United Nations and Haiti, based on the full integration of the activities of BINUH and
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. This new configuration draws on
the comparative advantage of BINUH conducting strategic advisory, advocacy and
good offices efforts in support of inclusive political and governance processe s and of
the United Nations country team delivering programmatic and technical support.

II. Political and good governance (benchmark 1)
3.
The political crisis in Haiti continued unabated during the reporting period,
notwithstanding efforts to forge consensus to overcome the impasse, epitomized by
the wave of civil unrest that gripped the country between September and November
2019 – the longest period of continued protests since the President, Jovenel Moïse,
assumed office. The country remained without a Government confirmed by
Parliament owing to the ongoing discord between the executive and legislative
branches. The situation was compounded by the emergence of a constitutional crisis
on 13 January 2020, when the mandates of all members of the Lower Chamber of
Parliament, at least one third of Senators and all elected municipal officials expired.
Since then, the President has relied on the authority granted under the Constitution to
ensure the regular functioning of institutions and the continuity of the State.
4.
In the final quarter of 2019, forces across the political spectrum sought to firm
up internal consensus on their proposals to overcome the crisis. Those proposals

20-01584 (E)

170220

*2001584*

S/2020/123

highlighted convergence on the formation of a consensus Government, the need fo r a
constitutional review and the launch of a national dialogue on structural reforms, but
reflected important differences regarding the role of President Moïse during a
potential transition period. The “Entente politique de transition” (“Marriott Accord”),
signed by key opposition groups on 10 November, included proposals for the
appointment of a supreme court judge as provisional President to facilitate a national
conference on structural reforms and elections. On 5 December, the ruling coalition,
led by the Parti Haïtien Tèt Kale, announced its own proposal, the “Consensus pour
une transformation pacifique de la nation haïtienne” (“Kinam Accord”), which
foresees a transition led by a consensus Prime Minister appointed by presidential
order after consultations with political and civil society stakeholders. The proposal
also contains plans for parliamentary elections to be held before the end of 2020 and
presidential elections in 2021.
5.
Those internal consultations were held within the context of intensified regional
and international efforts to encourage the parties to engage in direct talks to devise a
solution to the crisis. On 14 October, the Caribbean Community issued a press release
in which it offered its good offices. On 8 November, the European Union issued a
declaration in which it called for an open and inclusive political dialogue. Several
senior diplomats from the United States of America also travelled to Port-au-Prince,
including the country’s Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Kelly Craft,
on 20 November, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, David Hale, on
6 December and the United States Agency for International Development
Administrator, Mark Green, from 12 to 14 December. Each senior diplomat met
President Moïse and key Haitian politicians to urge them to engage in an inclusive
dialogue. The Secretary-General of the Organization of American States (OAS), Luis
Almagro, also expressed his organization’s commitment to dialogue during a visit on
7 January 2020. Nationally, the Haitian Conference of Catholic Bishops issued a
Christmas message on 30 November in which it urged the President and opposition
figures to agree to “costly concessions” for the collective good of the nation.
6.
Since the establishment of BINUH on 16 October, my Special Representative
for Haiti and Head of BINUH and her team have used her good offices and the United
Nations convening power to encourage a genuine and inclusive dialogue and
coordinate a coherent engagement by international actors, notably the Core Group on
Haiti, to help to resolve the crisis. In the context of deepening political polarization,
she and her team also engaged key sectors of Haitian society, including political
forces, civil society, economic actors and faith-based organizations, to de-escalate
tensions and create an environment conducive to building consensus on the need for
a political agreement to overcome the paralysis. In addition, BINUH convened two
exploratory meetings with representatives from the presidency, the ruling coalition,
non-aligned actors and the opposition to achieve convergence on views on the
objectives and parameters of a political dialogue. Those initiatives were followed by
the holding of informal talks between representatives of the President and key
political and social constituencies on 17 and 18 December at the representation of the
Holy See in Haiti, which were facilitated by the United Nations in collaboration with
the Apostolic Nuncio and the Special Representative of the OAS Secretary-General.
While those talks constituted important preliminary steps to create political space and
build momentum for further dialogue, some representatives of the opposition, most
of whom were represented in earlier meetings, did not attend, while others attende d
only the first day of proceedings.
7.
President Moïse also intensified outreach to obtain buy-in for direct talks in
order to reach a political agreement to address the institutional vacuum after
13 January. Following the circulation of the proposals of the opposition and the ruling
coalition to end the crisis, the President held separate meetings on 16 December 2019
2/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

with the coordinator of the “Comité de suivi de l’Accord du Marriott” and the
president of the “Comité de suivi de l’Accord du Kinam” to discuss a peaceful and
responsible solution to end the political stalemate. These were followed by meetings
on 26 December between the President and several non-aligned opposition
representatives who had participated in the talks of 17 and 18 December and a
delegation of the “Comité de suivi de l’Accord du Kinam”. The discussions reportedly
focused on reform priorities rather than transitional governance arrangements.
However, signatories to the Marriott Accord consistently refused to engage with the
President. They rejected two invitations for meetings slated for 20 and 27 December,
as well as several other informal consultations held throughout January,
preconditioning their participation in a dialogue on his resignation.
8.
Nevertheless, following three weeks of intense preparatory work facilitated by
the United Nations, OAS and the Apostolic Nuncio, a “Conférence politique pour une
sortie de crise” was convened from 29 to 31 January at the representation of the Holy
See in Haiti. Representatives of the presidency, signatories to both the “Marriot” and
“Kinam” accords and members of non-aligned political parties, as well as
personalities from civil society and the private sector, participated in constructive
negotiations centred on the four central elements of an eventual agreement: defining
the criteria for the formation of a new Government, developing a road map for reform,
devising a process through which to revise the Constitution and determining an
electoral calendar. While the views of conference delegates converged on the
development of a road map for reform and a constitutional revision process, further
talks will be needed with respect to the criteria for the formation of a Government
and the electoral calendar. President Moïse, as well as most of the participants,
indicated interest in resuming negotiations to finalize an agreement.
9.
Those developments have significantly increased uncertainty over the electoral
process. The parliamentary and municipal elections originally slated for 27 October
2019 have been postponed indefinitely. The draft electoral law introduced in
Parliament on 14 November 2018 is pending adoption, while the members of the
Provisional Electoral Council appointed on 29 March 2016 remain in office in the
absence of consensus on the nomination of the members of the Permanent Electoral
Council. Progress towards a new voter registry is also generating concern as
registrations for the new biometric national identity cards, which will be used to build
the voter registry for future elections, proceeded at a slow pace, owing in part to the
political situation. As at 16 December, of a projected 7 million eligible voters, only
1 million had registered with the Office for National Identification and 500,000 cards
had been distributed. In this context, the Provisional Electoral Council focused on
strengthening institutional and staff capacity. With support from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the International Foundation for Electoral
Systems, the Provisional Electoral Council is implementing an eight-module training
entitled “Building resources in democracy, governance and elections”. Since
September, 69 electoral staff have been trained in strategic and financial planning,
political financing, and gender and accessibility in electoral processes. The United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
and UNDP also continued support to the National Federation of Women Mayors and
Local Elected Officials in increasing women’s political participation. While the
Constitution of Haiti mandates a minimum quota of 30 per cent of women in
Government, the ratio of women parliamentarians in the former Legislature (1 woman
senator and 3 deputies among 149 representatives) ranked among the lowest in the
world.
10. Political polarization also continued to affect governance. On 18 October, the
Office of Monetization of Development Aid Programmes ordered private electricity
provider Sogener to reimburse $223 million to the Haitian State, including
20-01584

3/23

S/2020/123

$194 million allegedly embezzled from the PetroCaribe funding scheme between
June 2012 and March 2019. On 23 October, the Council of Ministers issued two
resolutions by which it suspended payments on State contracts with three private
electricity providers, namely, Sogener, E-Power and Haytrac, and eliminated all
relevant customs exemptions. The Government subsequently filed a complaint against
Sogener for criminal acts supporting private enrichment at the expense of the State,
corruption and fraud. It also seized the company’s power generating facility in Cité
Soleil (West Department) and froze the bank accounts of several of its directors.
Those developments prompted widespread criticism by segments of the opposition
and the Association des industries d’Haïti, the Chambre de commerce et d’industrie
and the Chambre franco-haïtienne de commerce et d’industrie, which denounced the
“instrumentalization of the judiciary for political purposes”.

III. Community violence reduction (benchmark 2)
11. Haiti continues to face high and rising levels of violence, including common
criminality, kidnappings, hijackings, robberies and violent attacks by heavily armed
gang members. The number of reported intentional homicides increased by 42 per
cent in 2019, compared with the previous year, with 910 recorded cases involving
1,081 victims (including 61 women), a ratio of 9.34 per 100,000 citizens, up from
6.67 for 2018 and 7.91 for 2017. Two thirds of those of those homicides were recorded
in West Department, where criminality is traditionally more prevalent. In addition,
42 police officers were killed in 2019, a 147 per cent increase, compared with 17 in
2018, and the highest number since the inception of the Haitian National Police in
1995. Moreover, 31 of 348 police stations were vandalized countrywide (including
8 facilities set ablaze), compared with 7 recorded incidents in 2018. In most cases,
the damage was caused by angry mobs in retaliation for alleged police wrongdoing.
During the reporting period, 16 criminal incidents affected United Nations personnel,
resulting in no casualties. In addition, one BINUH independent contractor was shot
and killed on 1 December while leaving a bank in Port-au-Prince.
12. Sexual and gender-based violence remains prevalent but underreported. In 2019,
227 cases were reported to the police, compared with 418 in 2018. This 45 per cent
decrease is attributable to severe underreporting due to heightened stigma and risk of
retaliation against victims, in particular in the current security and political co ntext.
To raise awareness of the situation, the United Nations supported activities organized
by national counterparts in the context of the 16 Days of Activism against Genderbased Violence campaign launched in November. In addition, the national police s ex
crimes unit is developing a database of sexual assault complaints that would improve
case processing and provide easier access to countrywide statistics.
13. The political crisis added another layer of complexity to the security situation.
Between 1 September and 30 November 2019, the United Nations documented at least
1,341 demonstrations, roadblocks and barricades. At the height of the mobilization in
late September, protests turned violent and the presence of heavily armed individuals
was observed in the streets, especially in the urban centres of West, Artibonite, South
and North Departments. Those developments led to significant restrictions on
movement for the United Nations, hampering operations throughout the country.
Attesting to the challenges of maintaining public order, the national police reported,
during a press conference held on 19 December, having carried out 2,536
interventions to clear roads between 1 September and 30 November.
14. The prolonged political standoff, aggravated by the ensuing economic
downturn, has created an enabling environment for gang-related violence. The most
recent wave of public protests in Port-au-Prince and other major cities, which endured

4/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

throughout the fall, lasted longer and appeared to be better organized and more violent
than the 2018 demonstrations against corruption and rising fuel prices. Reports
suggested increasing gang involvement in the protests, mobilizing protesters and
contributing to violent escalation, amid recurrent allegations of collusion betw een
specific gangs and political representatives. Throughout October and November
2019, sightings of armed individuals manning roadblocks and barricades, including
known gang members, were reported. As protests lost momentum in late November,
crime levels remained high, while inter-gang violence resumed and intensified. The
commune of Cité Soleil (West Department) was particularly affected, as the killing
of a prominent gang leader on 28 November prompted clashes for territorial control
between rival gangs and ended an informal truce that appeared to have prevailed since
September, during the height of the protests.
15. In response to the rising climate of insecurity, the Superior Council of the
Haitian National Police held four extraordinary meetings during the reporting period,
including one on 26 October 2019 chaired by President Moïse, to identify measures
to address criminality and street violence. As a result, intelligence-led anti-crime
police operations were conducted in several gang-controlled areas throughout the
country, after joint public works and specialized police units had removed roadblocks
and burning tires from the main roads in order to reopen them. The Haitian National
Police also intensified patrols countrywide in December, including in strategic
hotspots such as National Road 1, to the north, and National Road 2, to the south.
16. The Director General ad interim of the Haitian National Police reassigned
middle- and upper-level managers to improve police operations. Under his leadership,
the national security plan for the 2019 holiday season yielded positive results, as the
national police carried out 20 anti-gang operations resulting in the arrest of
62 suspected gang members and prominent leaders. Several of those operations took
place in West Department as part of enhanced security measures to combat the cross border smuggling of weapons and ammunition. The resolve of the national police to
manage public safety throughout the country, notwithstanding the challenging
context, attests to its increasing capabilities and professionalization. In recent months,
BINUH has focused on supporting national counterparts in addressing institutional,
policy and procedural challenges in law enforcement, including by providing advice
at the managerial level to improve deployment plans, compliance with procedures and
coordination between specialized units in anti-gang operations.
17. As a result of the reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in Haiti,
BINUH and the United Nations country team are progressively integrating their
advisory and programmatic activities on community violence reduction. In line with
its advisory role, BINUH is focusing on supporting the re-established National
Commission for Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration as the main
coordination body for planning and implementing community violence reduction
initiatives in Haiti. BINUH and UNDP facilitated a foundational workshop, held from
25 to 29 November 2019, on the new national strategy for disarmament,
dismantlement, reintegration and community violence reduction. BINUH shared the
preliminary lessons learned from the implementation of programmatic activities
under the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) to guide the development
and implementation of community violence reduction projects by the National
Commission and the United Nations country team. Subsequently, a draft outline of
the national strategy was circulated among national and international stakeholders for
consultation. Two other sessions, with civil society on 27 December and United
Nations partners on 7 January 2020, were held to integrate input early in the drafting
process and to raise the National Commission’s profile. The new strategy is expected
to be launched in the summer of 2020. BINUH is also engaging international partners
20-01584

5/23

S/2020/123

to map bilateral community violence reduction initiatives early in 2020 to support
coherence between stakeholders and strengthen the National Commission’s
coordination efforts.
18. The ongoing support of BINUH to the National Commission for Disarmament,
Dismantlement and Reintegration also included follow-up throughout the reporting
period on the recommendations of the joint technical assessment mission to Haiti on
weapons and ammunition management conducted by the Department of Peace
Operations and the Office for Disarmament Affairs from 26 August to 6 September.
The National Commission and BINUH agreed to coordinate efforts to amend the draft
arms control legislation to address identified technical shortcomings and clarify
institutional roles. A forthcoming Peacebuilding Fund project worth $1.07 million, to
be implemented by the International Organization for Migration and UNDP, will
support the revision process and the development of a national regulatory framework
for weapons and ammunition management, the strengthening of the ability of the
Haitian National Police to control and register illegal weapons in cooperation with
the National Commission and coordination among national institutions responsible
for controlling firearms and ammunition in border areas.
19. Between 16 October and 15 December, BINUH, along with the United Nations
Office for Project Services, UNDP and national non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), concluded six residual MINUJUSTH projects. Five projects consisted of
cash-for-work initiatives involving more than 2,389 beneficiaries, including
612 women, working on the rehabilitation of canals, roads and public spaces in
Martissant, a populous neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince. The sixth project consisted
of a socioeconomic study on areas affected by community violence in Port-au-Prince
to inform evidence-based advisory activities.

IV. Security and the rule of law (benchmark 3)
20. The political crisis also adversely affected the functioning of the justice system,
in that it further hampered progress on judicial and legal reforms, given that no new
laws were enacted by Parliament, including on the Criminal Code and the Code of
Criminal Procedure. A six-week suspension, from the end of October to the second
week of December, of hearings before courts of first instance and courts of appeal
due to insecurity further limited access to justice, especially for vulnerable groups.
Between 17 and 29 October, protesters ransacked courts in Aquin (South
Department), Léogâne and Petit-Goâve (West Department), Miragoâne (Nippes
Department), Port-de-Paix (North-West Department) and Verrettes (Artibonite
Department). A mob also attacked the office of the Aquin public prosecutor. On
26 October, the Haitian National Association of Magistrates called upon its members
to cease hearing cases as long as authorities were unable to secure tribunals.
Following advocacy from BINUH, security was strengthened at the courthouse in
Port-au-Prince to mitigate the impact of street violence on its functioning. Those
dynamics contributed to further increasing (from 73 to 75 per cent between
4 September and 1 December) the already alarmingly high number of detainees in
pretrial detention.
21. The disruption of supplies caused by the recent unrest further exacerbated
already precarious conditions in prisons in Haiti, worsening chronic shortages of
food, medication, water and cooking gas. BINUH coordinated with United Nations
agencies, funds and programs, NGOs, international partners and national authorities
to ensure that Haitian prisons received temporary supplies of food and medications.
22. As at 22 January, the Haitian penitentiary system held 11,024 detainees,
including 369 women and 214 juveniles. With a 343 per cent occupancy rate due to
6/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

widespread prolonged pretrial detention, the country’s 18 prisons still fail to comply
with both international and national standards, resulting in an average living space of
0.56 m 2 per prisoner. Without proper funding from the Government, the prisons face
persistent challenges in responding to the growth of the prison population and
ensuring the regular provision of essential supplies to meet basic inmate needs owing
to funding shortfalls and low staffing levels.
23. In order to prevent the recurrence of incidents such as the riot in the Gonaïves
detention facility on 7 and 8 November (see para. 35 below), BINUH continues to
support efforts to meet international standards and reduce human rights violations.
With good offices and advisory support, BINUH is supporting the Directorate of
Prison Administration in implementing best practices and addressing shortcomings in
the penitentiary system. The impact of the sociopolitical crisis on the penitentiary
system, however, threatens to erode recent gains.
24. Following BINUH advocacy with national authorities on the importance of legal
compliance, as at 23 January, the Minister of Justice and Public Security was
finalizing the review of a proposed list of 94 convicts under the presidential pardon
procedure, 81 of whom had been approved for transmission to the presidency, as a
measure to reduce overcrowding in prisons. Likewise, through its good offices,
BINUH advocated with various justice institutions for the resumption of court
hearings and for measures to address the increase in pretrial detention. As a result,
court hearings resumed in December throughout the country and the Minister of
Justice and Public Security, in cooperation with justice institutions, launched an
operation to address the backlog of cases and overcrowding in prisons. To date, this
effort has led to the release of 508 individuals, including 44 women, in pretrial
detention in prisons and police stations, where no prisons are operational, across the
18 jurisdictions, according to information received from the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security and jurisdictional public prosecutors. In addition, judicial actors
agreed to continue to promote the application of the 1927 law on immediate
appearance to contain the flow of persons in pretrial detention, as stated in the actio n
plan on prolonged pretrial detention.
25. Amid a challenging context, BINUH and the United Nations country team
advisers on police, corrections and justice continued to coordinate their efforts and
work closely with national counterparts to advance the rule of law. Police and
corrections advisers who had served in MINUJUSTH and who were recruited for
BINUH enabled the quick start-up of co-location activities with the national police to
help to fill key operational capacity gaps and advise senior police l eadership.
26. In addition, gender-sensitive recruitment and training efforts continue to
increase the overall strength of the national police. The next class of approximately
650 police cadets (thirty-first graduating class), with at least 12 per cent female
representation, could begin basic training in the coming weeks, subject to securing
funding for the medical exams of the candidates and other additional costs (such as
new firearms) not included in the national budget. At the same time, the nationwide
enrolment process of the thirty-second class of recruits is ongoing, with 1,504
applicants, including 343 women.
27. Notwithstanding mounting operational pressures and rising costs, the Haitian
National Police budget has not increased since 2017, leaving the institution unable to
address serious financial and operational challenges. To fulfil its public safety
mandate throughout the national territory, including land and maritime borders, and
to effectively manage 18 prisons, the national police requires sufficient, timely
funding. While the Government has recently made efforts to address the acute
equipment needs of the national police, unless significant additional funding is
provided in the national police budget, the plan to grow the force to 18,000 off icers
20-01584

7/23

S/2020/123

by December 2021 – equating to 1.51 officers per 1,000 inhabitants (currently 1.33),
with 12 per cent female representation – is unlikely to be achieved.
28. Progress was made in the implementation of the 2018 legal aid law, thanks in
part to close cooperation with international partners. An acting director for the
National Legal Aid Council, the body tasked with overseeing the provision of State provided legal aid, took up her functions on 2 December. The Council, with
international partners that include UNDP and BINUH, developed a plan to implement
the law. An initial budget of 20 million Haitian gourdes (approximately $200,000)
was allocated by the Ministry of Justice and Public Security for the establishment of
legal aid offices in 7 jurisdictions, as announced by the Council on 26 November,
while the Justice Sector Strengthening Program of UNDP and the United State
Agency for International Development agreed to support the opening of offices in the
remaining 11 jurisdictions.
29. Building on progress achieved during the peacekeeping period, UNDP
organized a workshop from 26 to 28 November for 28 staff, including 8 women, from
the judicial inspection unit and other relevant teams of the Ministry of Justice and
Public Security. The workshop was intended to enhance the analytical and reporting
skills of staff and strengthen their ability to implement each step of the judicial
inspection process. Notwithstanding that progress, the Inspectorate of the Superior
Council of the Judiciary has been without a director for a year, owing in part to
inadvertent delays in the vetting of candidates. Moreover, the presidency has yet to
take a decision regarding the reappointment or replacement of 32 judges, including
4 women, whose mandates have ended. Lastly, the anti-corruption unit underwent
three changes in director during the reporting period, an instability in leadership that
has, in the past, hindered its operational effectiveness.

V. Human rights (benchmark 4)
30. BINUH has verified numerous human rights violations and abuses that took
place during the unrest between 15 September and 20 November 2019, 63 percent of
which were committed in West and Artibonite Departments. Overall, at least
55 individuals were killed and 123 injured by gunshots, while 3 protesters reported
ill treatment. Almost all victims, including 8 women, 9 minors and 10 journalists,
were killed or wounded by firearms either during the protests, as they were heading
home immediately afterwards or during barricade-removal operations. Néhémie
Joseph, a journalist reportedly close to opposition circles, was killed on 10 October
by unidentified gunmen in Mirebalais (Centre Department).
31. The number of verified cases of human rights violations and abuses attributable
to law enforcement authorities is roughly equal to those attributable to armed
civilians. While the police used non-lethal weapons, such as tear gas and rubber
bullets for crowd control, there were instances in which firearms with live
ammunition were also used by the national police during the protests and barricade removal operations.
32. To date, the General Inspectorate of the national police has received 25 reports
of alleged human rights violations linked to the demonstrations. These reports
represent almost half of the 52 allegations of human rights violations that it received
between July and November 2019. Of the 20 reports related to the unrest,
3 investigations were closed. The General Inspectorate recommended the dismissal
of two officers, who were transferred for judicial prosecution, and one concluded with
the suspension of a third officer for three months without pay. Investigations continue
in the other cases. BINUH supported efforts by the General Inspectorate to familiarize
relevant staff with the newly developed database to enhance the tracking and analysis
8/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

of cases, including through training given from 9 to 13 December on how the database
could enhance accountability.
33. Amid the protracted unrest, local authorities are alleged, in some instances, to
have sought support from criminal gangs to lift the barricades, while pro-opposition
officials are thought to have attempted to secure similar support to maintain them. In
one documented case, members of the “Aji Vit” gang, reportedly ordered by a regional
delegate, attacked pro-opposition supporters during a protest in Cap-Haïtien (North
Department) on 27 September, resulting in at least seven individuals injured by
gunshot. Subsequently, criminal gangs attacked the Port-au-Prince neighbourhood of
Bel Air from 4 to 6 November after residents had refused to remove barricades. The
gangs were led by the “Delmas 6” gang leader and former national police officer,
Jimmy “Barbecue” Cherizier, who is the subject of an outstanding warrant for his
previous involvement in violent attacks in La Saline (see S/2019/198). The initial
attack led to clashes with off-duty national police officers residing there and resulted
in the death of three individuals, including one gang leader; five injured, including
one female minor; and approximately 30 residences and 11 cars destroyed. The
incidents are another example of the multipronged impact of the political crisis and
highlight its systemic relations with political and gang-related violence, as well as
protection concerns. A judicial investigation has been opened in the case, as well as
investigations by the General Inspectorate of the Haitian National Police into the lack
of intervention from law enforcement during the attacks, the alleged involvement of
three serving police officers alongside the Delmas 6 gang and the murder of
Cherizier’s cousin by off-duty police officers in retaliation. Throughout November,
gangs sporadically launched attacks in Bel Air while residents lived in fear.
34. Political tensions during the unrest were likely exacerbated by polarizing
messages, including incitement to violence, broadcast nationally over radio
programmes by both opposition and government supporters. At least seven
programmes on Radio Zenith in November transmitted explicit calls to violence,
including exposing journalists to threats, intimidation and violence and inciting the
population to burn State buildings. At least two incidents of incitement to violence
were also recorded: one by a Government official and the second, by a Parti haïtien
Tèt Kale militant, including calls to vandalize premises associated with opposition
representatives.
35. Deteriorating detention conditions triggered a mutiny in the Gonaïves detention
facility on 7 and 8 December, which left one inmate dead, three injured and some
prison records destroyed. Ten female detainees, from 15 to 63 years of age, were
gang-raped by male inmates during the incident. Seven of the 10 women had been in
pretrial detention, including one for 12 years. Security forces intervened and regained
control of the facility only on 8 December. Investigations have been opened into the
incident, including on the delayed response from law enforcement.
36. Since my last report, judicial proceedings on emblematic cases such as the La
Saline and Grand Ravine killings have made little progress. With regard to La Saline,
11 accused remain in detention pending trial, but the arrest warrant against Jimmy
Cherizier, who has since been involved in the November attacks in the Bel Air
neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince, has not been executed. This lack of judicial action
fosters an enabling environment for additional human rights violations to occur, as
illustrated recently by the violence in Bel Air.
37. In a significant development, the national action plan for human rights was
validated on 13 December by partners, including representatives of civil society and
the national human rights institution. The action plan for the period 2019–2021, which
is now set for endorsement by the executive, is intended to implement
recommendations issued during the 2016 universal periodic review of Haiti. To help
20-01584

9/23

S/2020/123

to implement the action plan, the national human rights institution has developed a
strategy for 2019–2024 and other new tools, including a monitoring and reporting
system through a new database, with support from BINUH.
38. Civil society remained vocal throughout the reporting period, notwithstanding
the ongoing political polarization. BINUH supported the celebration of International
Human Rights Defenders Day to honour civil society achievements and to call for a
protection framework for human rights defenders and journalists. After two years of
consultations, on 26 November, civil society adopted its strategic plan on transitional
justice and past crimes. The plan focuses on identifying entry points to advance
transitional justice in Haiti, including truth-seeking mechanisms, recognition and
guarantees of non-repetition.

VI. Unemployment, youth and other vulnerable groups
(benchmark 5)
39. The protracted political crisis took a severe toll on the economy of Haiti, with
gross domestic product contracting by 0.9 per cent during the 2018/19 fiscal year.
This negative rate is attributable to the poor performance of the agricultural and
service sectors. Moreover, the gourde depreciated by 22 per cent against the United
States dollar in 2019, and inflation reached 20 per cent by the end of the fiscal year.
The purchasing power of households, especially the poorest, was significantly
affected. Furthermore, fiscal revenue remained weak, with total revenue collection
down 4.3 per cent from 2017/18. As a result, the outlook for the Haitian economy is
bleak, with the World Bank forecasting that it will further contract in the coming two
years, by 1.4 per cent in 2020 and 0.5 per cent in 2021. In this context, the creation
of decent employment, to lift people out of poverty and provide meaningful
alternatives for young people and other vulnerable groups, remains a critical
challenge.
40. Recent political unrest further undermined living and working conditions in
Haiti, especially for the most vulnerable, restricting social and livelihood activities in
Port-au-Prince and other urban centres and leading to the closure of many businesses
in urban area between September and November 2019 and thus to the loss of jobs and
incomes for many. Overall, the private sector was affected by the insecurity and
falling demand, and many businesses were the victim of vandalism and looting. In
addition, throughout the country, some 3 million children were unable to go to school
for three months, compounding the problem of some 500,000 children of school a ge
who are out of school, making them vulnerable to gang recruitment and violence.
Unemployment and underemployment, including of women and young people, is
thought to have risen, at a time when opportunities for education, training and
entrepreneurship for young people and members of other vulnerable groups have not
expanded.
41. Building on its work to date, the United Nations country team will scale up its
efforts in these critical areas. To expand the number of manufacturing jobs in Haiti,
the International Labour Organization (ILO) is training and providing technical
support to national and international textile companies and promoting national
investment in textile infrastructure, in addition to conducting inspections of
companies to verify decent working conditions to ensure that they maintain eligibility
to gain access to preferential markets. UNDP is also working with women -headed
businesses in Port-au-Prince to ensure that women gain access to the resources and
opportunities necessary to support their transition into the formal market.

10/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

VII. Basic social service delivery and resilience (benchmark 6)
42. Key social indicators in Haiti remained a cause for alarm, as the population,
especially women and girls, grew increasingly vulnerable. Roadblocks and violence
created serious difficulties for people to gain access to food, drinking water, medicine
and medical services, and fuel, in particular outside the capital and in the poorest
communities. An already weak health sector, as reflected in stagnant child mortality
rates and the highest maternal mortality rate in the Latin America and Caribbean
region, was hit particularly hard, with shortages of electricity, fuel and supplies and
obstructions for medical personnel to reach their workplace. Against this backdrop,
in January, the Government of Haiti, with support from the World Food Programme
(WFP), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and ILO, finalized its new
national social protection and promotion policy, which is intended to reduce povert y
and inequality by stimulating demand for basic services and increasing community
resilience to shocks through social protection mechanisms.
43. Food insecurity was further exacerbated in 2019 by increased commodity prices
and the gourde’s depreciation, while the effects of the 2018–2019 drought led to a
12 per cent decline in agricultural production. According to the Integrated Food
Security Phase Classification report of October 2019, 3.7 million Haitians were food
insecure (over 1 million more people than previously projected), including 1 million
in a situation classified as an emergency, while a recent national nutrition survey
identified that 2.1 per cent of children were affected by severe, acute malnutrition.
Owing to challenges with access to the regions during the crisis, humanitarian
agencies and NGOs relied on alternate means of transport to reach populations in
need. WFP established a United Nations Humanitarian Air Service temporary
operation in November 2019, with $1 million from the Central Emergency Response
Fund.
44. The capacity of Haitian households to cope with recurrent shocks is very
limited, and humanitarian assistance remains a lifeline for many. The funding
requirements for the 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan doubled, compared with the
2019 one. They now stand at $253 million. Some 4.6 million Haitians, or
approximately 40 per cent of the population, require urgent humanitarian assistance.
A total of 2,000 metric tons of emergency food stocks prepositioned in Haiti for
distribution through WFP were released in November 2019, and 2,200 additional
metric tons of food from the regional WFP emergency stock were released the
following month. Those contributions came in addition to the current $20 million in
emergency food assistance provided by the agency and distributed to the most foodinsecure by humanitarian actors on the ground. Urgent action is required to respond
to these humanitarian needs, and work should be undertaken concurrently to address
structural vulnerabilities and development deficit.
45. The last confirmed case of cholera was recorded in early in February 2019, more
than one year ago. Since then, all 681 suspected cases tested were negative. As
suspected cases decrease, the number of rapid response teams, which have helped to
eliminate transmission, continues to be reduced. Nevertheless, the United Nations
continued to prioritize surveillance, response, prevention and coordination. Given this
progress, the United Nations is reviewing its support for the national elimination plan
to strengthen the surveillance system and laboratory capacity; support coordination;
raise awareness in communities; and encourage prevention, including through water,
sanitation and hygiene efforts.
46. Ten years after the earthquake of 12 January 2010, which killed well over
200,000 people, including 102 United Nations staff members, and left 1.5 million
people homeless, Haiti remains extremely vulnerable to natural disasters and climate-

20-01584

11/23

S/2020/123

related threats. The United Nations continued efforts to strengthen the country’s
resilience in that regard. With combined support from UNEP, UNDP, FAO and
UNESCO, the Ministries of Environment and of Agriculture began work at the
national and regional levels on climate-resilient strategies and disaster-risk reduction
plans. A joint programme by UNDP, UN-Women and UNESCO on human security
and disaster risk management supported the Directorate of Civil Protection to help
30,000 families to develop family emergency plans for several cities at high risk of
natural disasters, including Les Cayes (South Department), Jérémie (Grand -Anse
Department), Cap-Haïtien (North Department), Fort-Liberté and Ouanaminthe
(North-East Department). In addition, FAO provided training and technical support
to 10 civil protection committees in Grand-Anse Department to prepare risk and
disaster management plans related to the agricultural sector, while UNICEF carried
out training and simulations with Haitian water authority and civil protection bodies
in Grand-Anse and South Departments to enhance disaster risk reduction and
emergency preparedness, and prepositioned emergency stocks in the capital and six
other locations, to ensure rapid response for some 50,000 people. Furthermore, in
January 2020, the Government of Haiti, with support from WFP, UNICEF and ILO,
finalized its new national social protection and promotion policy, which is intended
to reduce poverty and inequality by stimulating demand for basic services and
increasing community resilience to shocks through social protection mechanisms.

VIII. Transition
47. The second phase of the BINUH start-up process concluded successfully on
15 October 2019. During the third phase, which ran from the establishment of BINUH
through 31 December, BINUH assumed responsibility for planning and operations
and established full operational readiness. By 22 January 2020, BINUH had managed
to onboard 83 per cent of staff, with a gender ratio of 56 per cent men and 44 per cent
women, including four of seven senior leadership positions filled by women. Efforts
to reach overall gender parity continue in the recruitment for the remaining positions.
48. As mandated by the Security Council in its resolution 2476 (2019), BINUH and
the United Nations country team jointly initiated work on an integrated strategic
framework to identify the United Nations key areas of intervention in Haiti, with a
focus on stability. A draft framework that incorporates the new benchmarks for Haiti
(see S/2019/805) was prepared in late January 2020. The document is expected to be
finalized in February.
49. The United Nations country team and BINUH had planned a midterm review of
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 2017–2021, which would
have incorporated the key elements of the new integrated strategic framework.
However, in order to ensure a fully integrated approach, the framework will be
adapted to provide a single, integrated planning document that reflects the most
critical objectives and strategies of the United Nations for stability and sustainable
development in Haiti. This plan will provide an integrated planning bridge until a new
United Nations Development Assistance Framework – now termed the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework – is developed and approved, by
January 2022 at the latest.
50. During the reporting period, BINUH and the United Nations country team
worked closely to refine the indicators for the six Haiti benchmarks and to identify,
develop and measure targets and baselines for them, taking into account available
data-collection capacities in the country. The benchmarks and resulting set of
indicators, targets and baselines, presented in the annex to the present report, may be
further refined in connection with the emergence of a political consensus on the

12/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

formation of a new Government and on a road map for national reforms. In addition,
the scope of the benchmarks may be further revised to provide more clarity on those
that will be used to evaluate the Mission’s progress and those that would apply to a
broader country context. Such a process would entail the development of a theory of
change to link the two sets of benchmarks.
51. Other initiatives are under way to ensure full integration of the activities of
BINUH and the United Nations country team. The Deputy Special Representative of
BINUH will continue to carry out the roles of Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian
Coordinator, ensuring that the United Nations peace and security, development and
humanitarian pillars in-country remain aligned.
52. In addition, a service-level agreement was signed with UNDP for shared office
premises to accommodate the co-location of the joint judicial reform team.
Preliminary co-location arrangements were also in place for the joint electoral and
joint disarmament, dismantlement and reintegration and community violence
reduction teams, with final arrangements expected in the first quarter of 2020.
53. Lastly, by significantly reducing the distance and travel time between offices,
the relocation of BINUH headquarters will also facilitate integration and coordination
with the country team and other key partners. To this end, the selection of suitable
office premises in Pétion-Ville is in the final stages of procurement and, security
conditions permitting, the relocation of BINUH substantive staff to the new
headquarters should begin in March 2020. The move will also enable BINUH to
operate within the approved 2020 budget allocation by leveraging more cost-effective
outsourced service contracts for service delivery, while reducing its footprint.
54. To ensure the sustainability of the previous missions’ activities in the areas of
justice, disarmament, dismantlement and reintegration and community violence
reduction, and electoral assistance, as well as their orderly transfer to the country
team, Haiti was granted eligibility to the Peacebuilding Fund. During the reporting
period, a total envelope of approximately $8.8 million was made available for
programmatic interventions related to access to justice, management of weapons and
ammunition, electoral security for women, and community violence reduction over
the coming two years. Building on work undertaken by MINUSTAH and
MINUJUSTH, the first project focuses on strengthening access to justice and
operationalizing the 2018 legal aid law, with a view to reducing pretrial detention
numbers. The second project is intended to strengthen national capacity for arms and
ammunition control, with a focus on establishing national laws and policies while
supporting operational interventions at the border with the Dominican Republic. The
project also builds on previous border policing work and is intended to strengthen the
capacities of the Haitian National Police and the National Commission for
Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration. Two additional projects are being
finalized: the first one focuses on building mechanisms to prevent electoral and
political violence against women in Haiti, while the other one is intended to mitigate
community violence in two neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince by addressing
immediate livelihood needs and building social cohesion.

IX. Conduct and discipline
55. Efforts to conceptualize a mission-wide approach to conduct and discipline, in
particular the zero-tolerance policy with respect to sexual exploitation and abuse, and
to establish appropriate coordination structures began at an early stage during the
reporting period. The senior victims’ rights officer of BINUH, established pursuant
to Security Council resolution 2476 (2019), has a system-wide mandate to support
victims. In collaboration with the country team, including UNDP, she has spearheaded
20-01584

13/23

S/2020/123

the provision of educational support to children born of sexual exploitation and abuse
and of multifaceted assistance to victims of acts of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving former United Nations personnel. Supported by the Office of the Vi ctims’
Rights Advocate at United Nations Headquarters, the senior victims’ rights officer is
implementing a strategy to support victims in pursuing paternity and child support
claims in the appropriate jurisdiction.
56. BINUH, as had been done previously by MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH, has
made extensive public outreach to encourage victims of sexual exploitation and abuse
to come forward for assistance and for perpetrators to be held accountable. As at
15 January 2020, no new allegation of sexual exploitation and abuse had been
reported to BINUH.

X. Observations
57. The transition to BINUH occurred at a particularly challenging time for Haiti.
Since July 2018, the political impasse in which the country is mired impeded progress
in the implementation of critical reforms and prevented the adoption of a national
budget and a new electoral law. The resulting crisis has had an impact on the
effectiveness of State institutions and contributed to the Haitian citizenry’s increased
disaffection with its political class. Moreover, the indefinite postponement of
parliamentary and municipal elections, originally slated for October 2019, has not
only created an institutional vacuum, but also exacerbated the polarized and fraught
nature of Haitian politics, while reducing opportunities to expand the participation of
women in public affairs.
58. In addition, the contraction of the economy and the rise in food insecurity have
considerably affected the livelihoods of the Haitian population. They threaten to undo
progress made towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. For months, roadblocks, barricades and the constant threat of violence
disrupted economic activity and forced most schools to remain closed, while hospitals
struggled with a lack of doctors, medicine and electricity. That the most recent wave
of protests also saw increased levels of political violence and gang-related criminality
is an additional cause for concern.
59. In this challenging context, the Haitian National Police once more demonstrated
its increased capacity to maintain public order and respond to the concomitant surge
in violent criminality. During the last months of 2019, it proactively planned and
conducted a significant number of anti-gang operations, without the logistical and
tactical support previously provided by peacekeeping police personnel.
Notwithstanding, the national police continues to lack the resources, personnel and
equipment to effectively interdict the action of gangs. In addition, several incidents
in recent months have underscored the need to further strengthen its oversight and
accountability structures. Sustained and concerted efforts from the United Nations
and other international partners will thus remain critical to expand on and consolidate
the achievements of the past decade. In addition, political will and strong, sustained
international support will be essential to ensure that the forthcoming national strategy
for disarmament, dismantlement, reintegration and community violence reduction
effectively addresses the root causes of gang violence.
60. The scant progress made in pursuing accountability for recent human rights
violations and corruption scandals starkly reveals the magnitude of the work that
remains to be done to effectively combat impunity in Haiti. A year after the events of
La Saline, the documentation of similar human rights abuses committed in Bel Air
raises serious concerns about the capacity of judicial authorities to ensure
accountability.
14/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

61. I welcome the work of the General Inspectorate of the Haitian National Police
in conducting administrative investigations into alleged human rights violations. In
order to achieve accountability, it is imperative that its recommendations be
implemented and followed through with prompt judicial action, as warranted. Efforts
to reform the justice system and to further enhance the independence and
effectiveness of the judiciary, especially regarding the efforts to combat corruption
and impunity, have to be redoubled.
62. The suspension of judicial hearings at the height of protests has led to a further
increase in the number of individuals in pretrial detention and exacerbated the already
deplorable conditions in Haitian prisons. Decisive action to strengthen the integrity
and efficiency of judicial proceedings in a systemic, sustainable manner is acutely
needed. I call upon the Haitian authorities to address the dire detention conditions and
fulfil their management of these institutions. BINUH and partners will continue to
work with national authorities to pursue strategies that will significantly reduce the
prison population and the time spent in pretrial detention.
63. While the current context threatens the stability and security gains achieved in
the past 15 years, it also provides an opportunity to address long-standing issues
plaguing Haitian governance and economic development. The current political
framework and the lack of an inclusive economy in Haiti lie at the heart of its
recurring instability, which in turn stunts its progress towards sustainable
development. This reality informed the recent establishment of BINUH and led the
United Nations to develop a holistic vision and an integrated strategy to effectively
support authorities in tackling the lingering peace and security issues and
development challenges. Success will depend on the country’s ability to maintain an
environment in which plans turn into action, and action into development.
64. The extensive consultations organized by political coalitions with various civil
society and private sector constituencies to identify ways out of the crisis are an
encouraging indication of the ability of various parts of Haitian society to engage in
dialogue to shape the future of the country. The two concrete proposals articula ting
possible ways forward from the end of 2019 reinforce the notion of a widespread
consensus that Haiti needs constitutional and structural reforms to deliver economic
opportunities and services to its population and improve the legitimacy of its State
institutions.
65. It is now time for all parties to sit together and reach agreement on arrangements
that can build societal consensus on the revision of the Constitution, the
implementation of reforms and a realistic electoral framework to allow preparatio ns
for credible elections. The need for a political agreement is made ever more pressing
by the end of the mandate of the fiftieth legislature without new legislative elections
having been held. The lack of comprehensive and constructive dialogue also
entrenches the population’s rejection of its elites. In a poll conducted by the United
Nations in November 2019, 9 in 10 Haitians expressed support for dialogue and
approximately 4 in 5 conveyed dismay with how the political class had handled the
crisis to date.
66. I therefore urge all political actors to set aside their differences and work
towards concrete measures to address the root causes of political instability and renew
the social contract that links the Haitian State to its citizens. My Special
Representative and the United Nations family stand ready to jointly assist Haitian
actors and institutions in engaging in a candid and inclusive national dialogue and to
support the reform agenda resulting from such a process. I also call upon international
partners to remain actively engaged in support of the Haitian people and their
institutions.

20-01584

15/23

S/2020/123

67. In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my Special
Representative, Helen La Meagher Lime, and all United Nations personnel for their
tireless work and dedication, and I reiterate the commitment of the United Nations to
contributing to the stabilization and prosperity of Haiti.

16/23

20-01584

S/2020/123

Annex
Benchmark indicators, targets and baselines
Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

Benchmark

Indicator

Target

Target timeline

1. National political
and socioeconomic
actors, including civil
society, are engaged in
inclusive cooperation
and consensusbuilding, resulting in
improved functioning
of State institutions and
good governance

1.1 Extent or level
of engagement of the
main political,
economic and social
actors in dialogue and
cooperation to support
structural, electoral,
judicial and
governance reforms to
underpin long-term
stability and
development

1.1 Political
dialogue leads to
consensus regarding
required reforms and
next steps, including
adequate female
representation

December 2020 Political actors currently
converge over the need for
structural reforms but lack
consensus on transitional
arrangements; no
comprehensive dialogue
process is taking place

1.2 The executive
and legislative
branches operate in
accordance with
normative
requirements

1.2.1 Established
N/A
transitional
arrangements and road
map

The Government remains
in an acting capacity; the
mandate of the Lower
House and part of the
Senate expired on
13 January, while
parliamentary elections
slated for October 2019
have been postponed

1.2.2 Adoption of a
new Constitution for
Haiti

N/A

The 1987 Constitution
remains in effect. Political
conditions to start
constitutional reform are
absent

1.3 Laws and
regulations adopted to
govern the electoral
process and electoral
council, and
establishment of
corresponding
mechanisms to ensure
free, fair and
transparent elections

1.3.1 Adoption of a
new electoral legal
framework that
preserves existing
provisions relating to
women’s
representation

December 2020 The draft electoral law of
November 2018 is pending
in Parliament, amid plans
for a new draft to be
developed

1.4 Government
budget execution
improves

1.4.1 Government
investment as a
percentage of total
expenditure increases
by 5 per cent, to 3.91
per cent for 2019/20,
adjusted for inflation

October 2020

20-01584

Government investment
was 3.72 per cent of total
expenses in 2018/19

17/23

S/2020/123

Benchmark

Indicator

Target

Target timeline

Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

2. State institutions,
local authorities,
community-based civil
society, youth and
women’s organizations
are engaged in
consultation,
cooperation decisionmaking processes and
programmes that
reduce community
violence, in particular
associated with gangs
and sexual and genderbased crimes

2.1 Finalization and
implementation of a
comprehensive and
multisectoral national
strategy to address
violence, in particular
in relation to gang and
community-based
violence

2.1.1 Adoption and
implementation of the
national disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration strategy.
(Levels: (1) national
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration strategy
is drafted; (2) national
strategy is adopted;
(3) national strategy is
implemented)

Strategy
drafted and
adopted by
December
2020, and
implementation
commences in
January 2021

A national strategy is
currently being drafted by
the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission,
with support from the
United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti

2.2 Develop and
implement
socioeconomic
programmes and
community violence
reduction programmes
to better support
communities affected
by violence

2.2.1 Number of
community violence
reduction and
disarmament,
demobilization and
reintegration
community-based
projects and
interventions
coordinated through
the National
Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration
Commission

December 2020 None

2.3 Weapons and
ammunition
management is
strengthened,
including the adoption
and implementation of
a new regulatory
framework and the
development of a
weapons and
ammunition
management
programme

2.3.1 Adopt and
December 2020
implement relevant
laws and
implementing
frameworks on
weapons and
ammunition
management. (Levels:
(1) redrafting of law
on ammunition and
weapons management;
(2) establishment of a
national baseline on
small arms and light
weapons; (3) adoption
of law on ammunition
and weapons
management)

2.4 Capacities of
State institutions
strengthened for
comprehensive care

2.4.1 A percentage of
the State budget is
allocated for
comprehensive care

18/23

A draft weapons and
ammunition management
law passed the Senate but
requires further revision
before it can be adopted

December 2021 No specific budget has
been allocated to the
implementation of the

20-01584

S/2020/123

Benchmark

3. The national police,
corrections services,
justice and
anti-corruption
institutions operate
under improved legal

20-01584

Target timeline

Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

Indicator

Target

and protection of
victims of violence

and protection of
victims of violence
through genderresponsive budgeting

gender-based violence
national action plan

2.4.2 Proposed new
December 2021
legal framework for
gender-based violence
is adopted and
implemented,
including the
provision for ensuring
State funding for
prevention and
response to genderbased violence

Senate adopted several
articles of the proposed
new legal framework on
violence against women
and girls

2.4.3 Spotlight
programme is
launched and
implemented

June 2020

Spotlight programme was
approved on 17 December
2019

2.5 Number of
violent incidents
occurring in gang
strongholds

2.5.1 A 5 per cent
reduction in areabased crime in zones
with decreased
presence of State
authorities and
identified hotspots,
including Cité Soleil,
Martissant, La Saline,
Croix des Bouquets
and Bel Air, as pilot
areas.
Target: Cité Soleil,
8.55 incidents per
month;
Martissant, 9.5
incidents per month;
La Saline, 2.85
incidents per month;
Croix des Bouquets,
22.8 incidents per
month;
Bel Air, 3.8 incidents
per month

December 2020 December 2019
Cite Soleil: 9 incidents
Martissant: 10 incidents
La Saline: 3 incidents
Croix des Bouquets:
24 incidents
Bel Air: 4 incidents

3.1 Increase in
government
investment to sustain
and further develop
Haitian National
Police capacities

3.1.1 At least 7 per
cent of the national
budget is allocated to
the national police
each fiscal year

December 2020 6.6 per cent of the national
budget is allocated to the
national police, which has
been the same since 2017

19/23

S/2020/123

Benchmark

Indicator

Target

and management
frameworks, as well as
oversight mechanisms

3.2 Strengthened
oversight and
accountability
mechanisms for
police, justice and
corrections
institutions

3.2.1 A functional
December 2020
departmental office of
the General
Inspectorate of the
Haitian National
Police is established
in Cap Haitien.

3.3 Improved access
to security and justice
services, with a focus
on vulnerable women
and children and
at-risk groups

Target timeline

Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

The departmental office of
the General Inspectorate of
the Haitian National Police
is not yet functioning

3.2.2 Adoption of a
new national
anti-corruption
strategy

December 2021 2009–2019 national
anti-corruption strategy
came to an end; no new
national anti-corruption
strategy has been
developed

3.3.1 Increase the
ratio of the police to
the population to 1.40
per 1,000 habitants

December 2021 1.33 per 1,000 habitants

3.3.2 Increase the
percentage of women
police officers to 11
percent

December 2021 10.5 percent of Haitian
National Police officers are
women

3.3.3 Legal aid offices December 2021 No legal aid offices have
established and
yet been established under
functioning in 13
the new legal aid law
jurisdictions

4. State institutions, in
collaboration with an
independent national
human rights institution
(Office of the National
Human Rights
Ombudsman) and civil
society organizations,
protect, promote and

20/23

3.4 Number of
prisons certified in
accordance with
international standards

3.4.1 6 prisons
December 2021 4 prisons were certified as
certified in accordance
of July 2019
with international
standards

3.5 Unsentenced
detainees as a
proportion of the
overall prison
population

3.5.1 By 2020, 70 per
cent or less of
detainees in pretrial
detention
(disaggregated by
gender and age)

December 2020 1 January to 31 December
2019: 75 per cent of
detainees in pretrial
detention

4.1 National
authorities improve
compliance with
international human
rights obligations
through increased
implementation of
United Nations human
rights

4.1.1 National plan of
action for the
implementation of
recommendations
accepted by the
Government, in
particular those of the
Human Rights
Council universal

December 2021 The 2019–2021 action
plan, which is intended to
implement
recommendations issued in
the 2016 universal periodic
review of Haiti, awaits
endorsement by the
executive

20-01584

S/2020/123

Benchmark

Indicator

Target

ensure respect for
human rights and
fundamental freedoms,
women’s rights and
gender equality, and
uphold accountability
for human rights
violations

recommendations and
fulfil their reporting
obligations to United
Nations human rights
mechanisms

periodic review,
adopted and 50 per
cent of
recommendations
progressively
implemented by the
Government,
including on gender
issues

4.2 The national
human rights
institution functions
independently,
promotes human
rights and protects the
rights of citizens in
accordance with the
Paris Principles

4.2.1 The national
December 2021 No action taken yet to
strategy 2019–2024 of
implement the strategy
the Office of the
National Human
Rights Ombudsman is
progressively
implemented,
including by
integrating gendersensitive perspectives

4.3 Government and
State institutions
promote
accountability for
serious human rights
violations and abuses
through internal
oversight,
investigations, and
judicial proceedings,
including for serious
misconduct committed
by police and prison
officials

4.3.1 Number of cases December 2021
of serious human
rights violations or
abuses tried

4.4 Civil society
organizations engage
with the Haitian
authorities to advocate
the promotion and
protection of human
rights and submit
reports to
international human
rights mechanisms

4.4.1 10 reports
published by Haitian
civil society
organizations
monitoring human
rights, including on
gender issues

December 2021 During the 2-year mandate
of MINUJUSTH, 47
reports were published by
civil society organizations

5.1 Employment in
the textile industry
expands

5.1.1 The textile
industry employs
63,000 people

December 2021 The textile industry
currently employs 54,000
people

5.2 Existence and
implementation of

5.2.1 At least 2
measures are adopted

December 2021 0 measures

5. State institutions,
local authorities and the
private sector provide
access to youth, women
and vulnerable groups

20-01584

Target timeline

Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

Under the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), an
estimated 77 per cent of
cases were investigated and
12 per cent were
prosecuted. Of the 12 per
cent of cases being
prosecuted, all cases are
still at trial, so no judicial
decision has been taken yet

21/23

S/2020/123

Benchmark

Indicator

Target

to decent employment
opportunities, including
jobs, education and
training, contributing to
reduce socioeconomic
grievances and address
drivers of instability
and inequality

policies that support
creation of genderresponsive
employment
opportunities,
entrepreneurship and
the growth of small
and medium-sized
enterprises

by national and local
authorities to
encourage integration
of women into high
value chains in
sustainable agriculture

5.3 Existence and
implementation of
fiscal policies for
inclusive growth,
including pro-poor
and gender-responsive
budgeting, progressive
taxation and effective
measures against tax
evasion

5.3.1 Haitian
authorities conceive
and implement a
programme of
economic and fiscal
reforms, in
collaboration with
relevant international
financial institutions

6.1 Capabilities of
State institutions for
evidence-based
policymaking are
strengthened,
including through the
increased capacity of
the national statistical
system for the
collection and analysis
of data on the
Sustainable
Development Goals

6.1.1 Conduct of
December 2021
Haiti’s fifth
Population and
Housing Census,
including a second
phase dedicated to
promoting the culture
of use of statistical
data and strengthening
of the national
statistical system

6.2 Proportion of
population using basic
drinking water and
sanitation services

6.2.1 Increase the
proportion of the
population using an
improved water
source to 79 per cent

December 2020 73.4 per cent of the
population currently uses
an improved water source

6.2.2 15 per cent of
population in rural
area and 2 per cent of
population in urban
area practise open
defecation

July 2023a

6.3.1 30 per cent of
the population facing
severe acute food

December 2020 35 per cent of the
population currently facing
severe acute food

6. State institutions are
reinforced to
effectively implement
policies and
programmes that ensure
the delivery of quality
basic services in the
most underserved
communities and
increase their resilience
to climate-related
threats, including
through disaster
management and risk
mitigation

6.3 Percentage of
the population facing
severe acute food
insecurity based on
the Integrated Food
22/23

Target timeline

Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

December 2021 The lack of a Government
ratified by Parliament
means that Haiti is
currently unable to commit
to economic reforms

All preparatory activities
prior to the main census
enumeration, including
mapping, pilot census and
procurement of equipment,
have been completed

Rural: 36 per cent
Urban: 10 per cent

20-01584

S/2020/123

Benchmark

a

Target timeline

Baseline
(as of December 2019 if not
specified)

Indicator

Target

Security Phase
Classification (IPC
Phase 3+/Acute)

insecurity (IPC Phase
3+/acute)

6.4 Percentage of
maternal and under 5
mortality rates per
100,000 living births

6.4.1 397 maternal
deaths per 100,000
living births

July 2023a

529 per 100,000 living
births, as stated in the 2017
Demographic and Health
Survey

6.4.2 Under 5
mortality rate is less
than 81 per 1,000
living births

July 2023a

81 per 1,000 living births,
as stated in the 2017
Demographic and Health
Survey

6.5 Number of
operational emergency
centres at the national
and departmental
levels with improved
capacity to coordinate
disaster response

6.5.1 11 operational
emergency centres
(1 national and 10
departmental)

December 2021 11 centres established, but
0 centres possess an
improved capacity to
coordinate disaster
response (defined as
having received
management training and
implemented key
equipment and tools,
including a standard
contingency plan and
consolidated operating
manual)

6.6 Full and
sustainable
elimination of cholera:
0 cases for 3 years

6.6.1 Track 1:
Incidence rate of
suspected cholera
cases less than 0.01
per 1,000 inhabitants
(target of national
elimination plan for
2022)

December 2022 0.06 per 1,000 inhabitants

6.6.2 Track 2: 20
community projects
implemented in
cholera-affected
areas

December 2020 5 projects were completed
in 2019 under a pilot
initiative. Of the 20
community projects
planned as part of a project
expansion, 18 communities
have completed
consultations to identify
projects, while 2
communities have not yet
started the consultative
process

insecurity (IPC Phase
3+/acute)

Note that this target is based on the national mortality, morbidity and service utilization survey statistical tool, which is
released every five years. Intermediate updates will be provided based on other sources.

20-01584

23/23
