S/2022/300

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 April 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 7 April 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
The Security Council has repeatedly discussed the situation of the Safer oil
tanker, the ageing floating storage and offloading vessel that has been moored off the
west coast of Yemen since 2015.
It is assessed that an oil spill from the Safer oil tanker, which is in an advanced
state of deterioration, would spark an ecological, environmental and humanitarian
catastrophe in the Red Sea and beyond. It would devastate the coast of Yemen, destroy
livelihoods, deplete fisheries and potentially force the tempor ary closure of the ports
of Hudaydah and Salif, which are essential to enabling the importation of commercial
and humanitarian supplies that millions of people rely on to survive.
Depending on the season, the environmental impact would risk affecting
Djibouti, Eritrea, Saudi Arabia and Somalia, and would be expected to disrupt vital
maritime traffic through the Bab al-Mandab strait and the Red Sea, jeopardizing
access to the Suez Canal.
The Security Council has repeatedly sought to facilitate efforts by t he United
Nations to assist in addressing this grave threat. I am taking this opportunity to update
you on the steps taken by the United Nations in this respect.
Given the urgency of the matter, in September 2021, I requested the United
Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen to reorient the approach
and take the lead on the Safer oil tanker operation, with the support of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the entire United Nations system, as
necessary.
In line with this request, the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Yemen established a coordination committee to oversee the required
operational assessment and planning, as well as the development of an immediate
commercial solution. The resulting plan was subsequently presented to United
Nations principals and endorsed in December 2021, including the recommendation
for SMIT Salvage to be the implementing partner, after extensive due diligence that
allowed the company to be identified as uniquely qualified for the role and acceptable
to the Yemeni parties.
In accordance with the memorandum of understanding signed with the de facto
authorities in Sana’a on 5 March 2022, the plan envisages the provision of a
replacement export capacity equivalent to the Safer oil tanker within 18 months of
the necessary funds being mobilized and secured and the procurement contract being
signed. However, as such capacity is not immediately available and the situation is

22-05272 (E)

120422

*2205272*

S/2022/300

urgent, it has been agreed that the cargo of crude oil will initially be transferred to a
temporary vessel, which will remain near the Safer oil tanker. The transfer, and the
accompanying cleaning of Safer’s tanks, will take place over approximately 80 days,
once the required resources have been mobilized and secured and upon the completion
of the procurement process.
While the final cost of the operation will be contingent upon several factors, it
is estimated that implementation could require a budget of at least $80 million. It is
therefore essential that the necessary resources be rapidly mobilized to enable the
immediate commencement of the operation, including the contracting of relevant
partners.
Against this backdrop, the United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Yemen, with the support of UNDP, has initiated discussions with
Member States and potential donors with respect to the possibility of convening a
dedicated donor conference to immediately mobilize sufficient resources for the full
implementation of the Safer oil tanker operation. I would like to thank those Member
States that have already expressed their interest in supporting such an initiative.
Complementary to these efforts, UNDP is also assisting in the development of
contingency plans to respond to any catastrophic leak fro m the Safer oil tanker prior
to the planned operation being launched. The contingency plan is being undertaken
with additional expertise drawn from within the United Nations system, including
from the United Nations Environment Programme and the Internatio nal Maritime
Organization, as well as from the Regional Organization for the Conservation of the
Environment of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden.
I wish to reiterate to the members of the Security Council the urgent need to
address this potential regional disaster before it strikes and my endorsement of the
operation plan to address the Safer oil tanker in the manner envisaged.
The attention and unity of the Security Council, speaking with one voice on this
issue, constitutes the best chance for success, and I trust that I can count on your
continued support as we undertake this critical operation. The Council will be kept
abreast of ongoing developments regarding the implementation of the operational
plan, as appropriate.
I would be grateful if the present letter could be circulated to the members of
the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

22-05272
