S/PRST/2012/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 October 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6850th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 October 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern regarding the
deteriorating security and humanitarian crisis in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo (DRC) due to ongoing military and other destabilizing activities
of the 23 March Movement (M23) as well as other armed groups.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the M23 and all its attacks on
the civilian population, United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian actors,
as well as its abuses of human rights, including summary executions, sexual
and gender based violence and large scale recruitment and use of child
soldiers. The Security Council also condemns the attempts by the M23 to
establish a parallel administration and to undermine State authority. The
Security Council demands that the M23 and other armed groups, including the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR), cease immediately
all forms of violence and other destabilizing activities.
“The Security Council calls for perpetrators, including individuals
responsible for violence against children and acts of sexual violence, to be
apprehended, brought to justice and held accountable for violations of applicable
international law. The Security Council expresses its intention to apply targeted
sanctions against the leadership of the M23 and those acting in violation of the
sanctions regime and the arms embargo and calls on all Member States to
submit, as a matter of urgency, listing proposals to the 1533 Committee.
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern with the increasing
number of displaced persons and refugees, with 320,000 people displaced from
their homes in North Kivu province since the M23 mutiny started in April
2012. It calls on all parties, in particular the M23, to allow safe, timely and
unhindered humanitarian access to the areas under the control of M23 and in
the wider region in accordance with international law, including applicable
international humanitarian law and the guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance. It expresses concern about the shortfall in funding for humanitarian
assistance and reiterates its call on the international community to provide
appropriate humanitarian support. It also expresses concern at the possible
negative impact of the prevailing situation in North Kivu on the security and
humanitarian situation in South Kivu.
12-56007 (E) 191012

*1256007*

S/PRST/2012/22

“The Security Council reaffirms its strong commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the DRC and
emphasizes the need to respect fully the principles of non-interference, goodneighbourliness and regional cooperation. It reiterates its strong condemnation
of any and all external support to the M23. In this regard, the Security Council
expresses deep concern at reports indicating that such support continues to be
provided to the M23 by neighbouring countries. The Security Council
demands that any and all outside support to the M23 as well as other armed
groups cease immediately.
“The Security Council calls upon all countries in the region to condemn
the M23 as well as other armed groups and to cooperate actively with the
Congolese authorities in disarming and demobilizing the M23 as well as other
armed groups and dismantling the M23 parallel administration.
“The Security Council emphasizes the primary responsibility of the
Government of the DRC to reinforce State authority and governance in eastern
DRC, including through effective security sector reform to allow army and
police reform, and to end impunity for abuses of human rights and violations
of international humanitarian law, and urges the Government of the DRC to
address issues of illegal exploitation and smuggling of natural resources.
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the United Nations
Secretary-General as well as of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region (ICGLR), the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) and the African Union, to restore peace and security in Eastern DRC.
It also stresses the urgency of constructive engagement and dialogue between
the DRC and its neighbours, especially Rwanda, and the need to address the
underlying causes of the conflict in eastern DRC. It calls on the United
Nations Secretary-General to continue his good offices and to explore, when
appropriate, further high-level diplomatic mechanisms to facilitate enhanced
dialogue between relevant parties, including on the underlying causes of the
conflict.
“The Security Council welcomes the establishment of the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism (EJVM), which was launched by the ICGLR on
14 September as an important starting point for rebuilding confidence between
the DRC and Rwanda. It further welcomes the support provided by the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the DRC (MONUSCO) to the
EJVM and encourages, in coordination with ICGLR members, the
participation of MONUSCO, as appropriate and within the limits of its
capacities and mandate, in the activities of the EJVM and the reporting on any
flow of arms and related materiel across borders of Eastern DRC.
“The Security Council takes note of the decisions by the ICGLR and the
AU regarding the deployment of a ‘Neutral International Force’ in eastern
DRC and takes note of the ongoing coordination efforts between these
organizations and the United Nations to clarify the objectives, modalities and
means of the proposed Force in relation to MONUSCO.
“The Security Council expresses its full support to the United Nations
Group of Experts of the 1533 Committee and calls for enhanced cooperation
between all States, particularly those in the region, and the Group of Experts,

2

12-56007

S/PRST/2012/22

encourages further that all parties and all States ensure cooperation with the
Group of Experts by individuals and entities within their jurisdiction or under
their control and reiterates its demand that all parties and all States ensure the
safety of its members, and unhindered and immediate access, in particular to
persons, documents and sites the Group of Experts deems relevant to the
execution of its mandate.
“The Security Council expresses its full support to MONUSCO and
commends the active measures it has taken to implement its mandate in eastern
DRC, especially protecting civilians, and encourages the continuation of these
efforts. The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to present to the
Security Council a special report on possible options, and their implications,
for reinforcing the ability of MONUSCO to implement its mandate, including
to protect civilians and report on flows of arms and related materiel across
borders of Eastern DRC, focusing in particular on force multipliers. It calls on
all parties to cooperate fully with the Mission and reiterates its condemnation
of any attacks on its peacekeepers. The Security Council recalls that the
Congolese Government bears the primary responsibility for ensuring security
in its territory and protecting its civilians. The Security Council recalls the
importance of close consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries.”

12-56007

3
