S/2014/550

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Office in Burundi
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2137
(2014), in which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Office in
Burundi (BNUB) until 31 December 2014, and requested me to inform it of progress
on the benchmarks, the implementation of the mandate of BNUB and the resolution,
and the conditions that affect such implementation, as well as on the transition of
BNUB to the United Nations country team. The report provides an update since my
report of 20 January 2014 (S/2014/36), and is structured around the benchmarks.

II. Progress in peace consolidation
A.

Democratic process
2.
Since the last report, the political situation in Burundi has remained tense amid
sharp divergences over key sociopolitical issues affecting the country. Yet, dialogue
between the Government and opposition political parties, though fragile, also led to
some progress in establishing a legal and political framework for the conduct of the
2015 general elections.
3.
In early 2014, the political situation in Burundi sharply deteriorated followin g
a growing rift within the governing coalition between the Conseil national pour la
défense de la démocratie-Forces pour la défense de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD) and
the Union pour le Progrès national (UPRONA). Tensions between UPRONA and
CNDD-FDD intensified amid the resistance of UPRONA to support constitutional
amendments proposed by the latter which would have altered the country’s ethnic
power-sharing balance and allowed President Nkurunziza to run for another term.
On 29 January, the Minister of the Interior removed Charles Nditije from the
presidency of UPRONA. The action by the Minister came after a Supreme Court
decision on 27 January on the outcome of UPRONA party congress in 2012 made it
possible for the Minister to enforce an earlier Supreme Court ruling of that year that
invalidated the election of Mr. Nditije at the congress. On 31 January, Bernard
Busokoza, First Vice-President and a member of the UPRONA party, annulled the
decision of the Minister of the Interior arguing that it interfered in t he internal
affairs of a political party and violated the Constitution and the Law on Political

14-58089 (E)

010814

*1458089*

S/2014/550

Parties. A day later, President Nkurunziza dismissed Mr. Busokoza as First
Vice-President of the Republic, declaring that he had failed to distinguish between
his party and State responsibilities, and had undermined the Government by calling
for a withdrawal of the CNDD-FDD-sponsored draft constitution from the National
Assembly. Subsequently, three UPRONA ministers resigned from Government on
4 and 5 February, following a call by Mr. Nditije on them to step down in solidarity
with the party.
4.
These developments exacerbated long-running divisions within UPRONA,
pitting those in the leadership willing to continue the Government coalition against
those who opposed CNDD-FDD views on the constitutional review and who
claimed to be the legitimate representatives of the party. On 11 February, the
Ministry of the Interior recognized Concilie Nibigira as the new President of
UPRONA. In her new capacity as President of UPRONA, Ms. Nibigira nominated
Prosper Bazombanza, whom President Nkurunziza had appointed as the new First
Vice-President on 14 February. The move was followed by the appointment on
18 February of three ministers of the UPRONA wing recognized by the Minist ry of
the Interior, which further exacerbated divisions within UPRONA and between the
former UPRONA leadership and CNDD-FDD. On 30 June, Ms. Nibigira addressed a
letter to the Minister of the Interior, indicating that Mr. Nditije had been expelled
from UPRONA. Outlawed, the former UPRONA leadership is now prevented from
holding meetings and other activities.
5.
On 8 March, police used tear gas to disperse members of the opposition
Mouvement pour la solidarité et le développement (MSD) who were planning to
hold a rally in Bujumbura. Some demonstrators fled and found refuge at the MSD
headquarters. The demonstrators detained and disarmed two police officers who had
entered the premises without a judicial warrant in pursuit of the demonstrators. After
negotiations between MSD and the police to secure the release of the police officers
failed, the latter stormed the MSD headquarters, using tear gas and live ammunition.
A total of 13 people were injured and over 80 were arrested. On 21 March, the
Bujumbura Mairie High Court sentenced 21 MSD members to life in prison.
Another 27 members, including three minors, were given prison terms between
3 and 10 years, while 22 were acquitted. BNUB noted several violations of the right
to due process during the trial, including violations of the right to have counsel, the
presumption of innocence and the right to have sufficient time to prepare one ’s
defence. Meanwhile, on 12 March, the Public Prosecutor issued an arrest warrant
against MSD President Alexis Sinduhije for insurrection and rebellion. He went into
hiding and has since been living in Europe.
6.
On 21 March, the National Assembly failed to adopt by one vote the draft law
amending the Constitution. While CNDD-FDD presented the constitutional revision
as an attempt to delete provisions that it considered to have become obsolete,
opposition parties noted that the draft would have removed provisions that may
constitute an obstacle to a candidacy of President Nkurunziza in the 2015
presidential elections. It would have also removed all references to the 2000 Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi. In keeping with the legislative
procedures, the Speaker of the National Assembly indicated that the draft law would
be sent back to the Government, which could resubmit a new text in one year. That
left the Government the option of organizing a popular referendum on the
constitutional amendments if it wished to amend the Constitution in advance of the
elections in 2015. On 8 April, the deputy spokesperson of Preside nt Nkurunziza

2/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

announced that there would be no referendum on the proposed constitutional
amendments and that the 2005 Constitution would remain the basis of the 2015
elections.
7.
Allegations that arms and training had been provided to the youth wing of
CNDD-FDD, which came to light through the publication on the Internet on
10 April of a leaked confidential BNUB code cable, stirred public debate in
Burundi. A CNDD-FDD statement issued on 10 April called the allegations rumours
and lies. The Government, the National Assembly, the Senate, the Office of the
Ombudsman and all political parties close to CNDD-FDD rejected the allegations.
At the same time, calls by opposition parties, civil society organizations, the
National Commission on Human Rights and many members of the Security Council
to establish an independent commission of inquiry were dismissed by the
Government. I personally raised my concerns about these allegations with President
Nkurunziza, regional leaders and members of the international communi ty.
8.
The leak of the BNUB cable also led to a deterioration of relations between
BNUB and the Government. On 17 April, the Government declared the BNUB
Security Adviser who was mentioned in the cable persona non grata for attempting
to “destabilize” Burundi. About seven weeks later, another BNUB staff member, a
close protection officer, had to leave the country when the Government requested
BNUB to expel him. The staff member had inadvertently left ammunition in his
luggage on 25 May, while preparing to board a plane at Bujumbura International
Airport and handed over the ammunition to the civil aviation authorities. BNUB
protested in both cases, as the actions taken by the Government were in violation of
the status-of-mission agreement between the United Nations and the Government.
9.
Following the allegations of weapons distribution to the youth wing of CNDD FDD, the Security Council met on 8 April and expressed its concern about political
tensions in Burundi, including reported acts of intimidation, haras sment and
violence committed by youth groups in the country. It further stressed the urgent
need for the Government of Burundi to address impunity and for all political parties
to publicly condemn all political violence and acts of incitement to hatred or
violence, in line with the Constitution of Burundi and the Arusha peace agreement.
10. On 25 and 27 April, the National Assembly and the Senate, respectively,
unanimously adopted the new Electoral Code that will govern the organization of
the 2015 elections. Most of the recommendations made during the workshop on the
Electoral Code, held from 22 to 24 May 2013 in Kayanza, were incorporated into
the Code. The controversial requirement for presidential candidates to have a
university degree was removed from the Code, which was promulgated on 3 June by
President Nkurunziza. In a related positive development, on 20 May, BNUB and the
Government jointly organized a second evaluation workshop of the electoral road
map adopted by consensus by political parties and actors in March 2013. All
political parties and actors, including those not recognized by the Government,
members of the Independent National Electoral Commission, former Heads of State,
civil society organizations and the media participated. The main outco me of the
workshop was the adoption of a set of general principles that would serve as the
code of conduct for political parties, actors and independent candidates before,
during and after the 2015 elections. The General Principles for the conduct of the
2015 elections were signed by the Government, the Independent National Electoral
Commission, political parties and actors and the United Nations on 9 June.

14-58089

3/15

S/2014/550

11. Key opposition leaders continue to face criminal charges and their movements
remain restricted. The current Vice-President of Sahwanya-Front pour la démocratie
du Burundi (Sahwanya-FRODEBU), Frédéric Bamvuginyumvira, was detained on
corruption charges on 6 November before being released on bail on 20 March, while
the movements of Agathon Rwasa, the former leader of the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL), are reportedly closely monitored. The Alliance démocratique pour
le changement-Ikbari (ADC-Ikibiri) and Sahwanya-FRODEBU President, Léonce
Ngendakumana, was summoned three times before the Assistant Public Prosecutor
on 17, 22 and 25 April for interrogation, following a letter he addressed to me on
behalf of the coalition, in which he noted the likelihood of a humanitarian
catastrophe in Burundi and called on the international community to prevent
“political genocide” in the country.
12. In an attempt to reduce violence by politically active youth, the Ombudsman
convened a United Nations-sponsored workshop on 27 and 28 May for
representatives of youth leagues affiliated with political parties to disc uss their role
in peace consolidation and tolerance in political diversity. More than 200 youth
participated in the forum, leading to the adoption of a series of recommendations on
the promotion of a spirit of tolerance, mutual respect for political divers ity and
avoiding violence as a means of resolving conflict. However, youth affiliated with
ADC-Ikibiri rejected the recommendations on the grounds that they did not reflect
the discussions during the forum.
13. On 18 July, the President of the Independent National Electoral Commission
announced the electoral calendar as follows: elections of the communal councillors
and members of the National Assembly on 26 May 2015; presidential elections on
26 June 2015, with, if necessary, a second round on 27 July; se natorial elections on
17 July; and elections of councillors at the Colline and Quartier level on 24 August
2015. Presidential aspirants will be able to submit their candidacies between
30 April and 9 May 2015, while the electoral campaign will take place f rom 10 to
23 June 2015.

B.

Security and stability
14. The security situation across the country remained stable. Since January,
11 armed clashes have occurred in Cibitoke and Bubanza provinces and in the
Rukoko forest on the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, mainly
between the armed forces of Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
one side, and a faction of FNL led by Aloys Nzabampema, on the other hand. A total
of five Force de défense nationale (FDN) soldiers and six FN L combatants were
reportedly killed, while six FDN soldiers and three FNL combatants and two
civilians were injured during the clashes.
15. Following the leak of the BNUB cable on the alleged distribution of arms to
the Imbonerakure in April, several media and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), including the Association burundaise pour la protection des droits humains
et des personnes détenues (APRODH), alleged that members of the Imbonerakure,
the youth wing of the ruling CNDD-FDD party, were being trained near OndesKiliba in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Government rejected the
allegations, and investigations conducted by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) found

4/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

no evidence of the presence of the Imbonerakure or of any paramilitary training by
Burundian elements in the area.
16. On 24 April, the National Assembly adopted the revised organic law on the
Burundian National Police to eliminate an overlap of roles and resp onsibilities
between the Ministry of Public Security and the Directorate General of the Police.
The new law also replaces the regional police officers with provincial and municipal
police offices to ease the overall administrative burden of the police.
17. The weapons collection programme of the second disarmament campaign was
completed in February, with the support of the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP). A total of 52 rifles, 504 grenades and 825 cartridges were
collected during the campaign, which began on 11 November 2013. Yet, the impact
of the campaign in reducing armed violence and curbing the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons in Burundi was limited. For instance, 62 hand grenade
attacks were reported during the reporting period throughout Burundi, according to
the Commission nationale permanente de lute contre la prolifération des armes
légères et de petits calibres.
18. BNUB continued to provide technical support to the permanent secretariat of
the National Security Council in the implementation of the national security
strategy, which was adopted in 2013. As part of the strategy, BNUB funded a
sensitization workshop on 6 May 2014 for senior government officials from the
Ministries of Defence, Public Security and the Interior an d advisers to governors in
the 17 provinces. The workshop focused on the roles of the participants in the
national security strategy framework, especially in the recently established mixed
security committees, which bring together local members of State, s ecurity and
justice institutions with civil society, religious organizations and the media to help
address the 114 political, economic, social and environmental threats identified in
the national security strategy. In addition, BNUB also contributed to the National
Review of Security Sector Reform in Burundi, which was conducted by the
International Security Sector Advisory Team and led to a report recommending
improvements to Burundi’s national security architecture.
19. BNUB continued to advocate for increased respect for human rights in and by
the defence and security forces. In this regard, it organized a human rights
sensitization conference for army officers on 27 March with the Ministry of
Defence, followed from 3 to 5 June by a training of trainers course for 50 human
rights officers from the defence and security forces, which was organized with the
National Human Rights Commission.

C.

Transitional justice
20. On 15 May, President Nkurunziza promulgated the law on the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, which was adopted by the National Assembly on
17 April. UPRONA and FRODEBU-Nyakuri boycotted the vote on the grounds that
the mode of selection of the members and bureau of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission was not likely to guarantee its independence. They also raised concerns
about the absence of a reference to a judicial mechanism in the law. The President of
the opposition coalition ADC-Ikibiri expressed regret over the adoption of the law
and called for the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission after
the 2015 elections. The Commission will cover the period from Burundi ’s

14-58089

5/15

S/2014/550

independence in 1962 until 2008, when the last armed group joined the peace
process. It will be composed of only Burundian Commissioners serving four -year
terms, renewable once. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR) advised the Government that the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission law includes provisions that are not in line with international standards
and noted the lack of inclusiveness of the process that led to the adoption of the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission law.
21. Several civil society organizations, including some of those active in the
Reflection Group on Transitional Justice, regretted that Pres ident Nkurunziza did
not request the National Assembly to resubmit a draft bill that includes all of the
recommendations of the 2009 national consultations and recommendations from
civil society organizations. On 23 June 2014, civil society members of the Group
released a memorandum urging the Speaker of the National Assembly to ensure
inclusivity of the transitional justice process and the transparent selection of
members of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.

D.

Governance and institution-building
22. There was renewed tension over the handling of contested lands by the
National Land Commission, notably in Bururi and Makamba provinces. Arrest
warrants were issued on 21 March against seven residents in Bururi province who
were accused of rebellion for obstructing the work of the Commission. Two
residents were arrested by the police, while the other five went into hiding.
Meanwhile, the law establishing the special court for land and other properties was
adopted by the National Assembly and Senate on 17 and 28 April, respectively. The
UPRONA and FRODEBU-Nyakuri parliamentarians boycotted the session and
decried the law as unconstitutional. A number of civil society organizations, notably
the Observatoire de l’Action Gouvernementale, expressed concern that the
establishment of the court may serve electoral purposes and could further divide
Burundian society along ethnic lines.
23. The pace of implementation of the national strategy on good governance and
the fight against corruption has remained slow and efforts to revise the legal
framework to fight corruption have stalled. Civil society organizations regularly
lament existing levels of corruption and accuse the Government of being unwilling
to fight the scourge. Several civil society organizations, i ncluding the Observatoire
de la lutte contre la corruption et les malversations econimiques called upon the
Government to take the necessary measures to speed up the process of the
anti-corruption legal framework.
24. BNUB continued to support the strengthening of oversight institutions, notably
the Anti-corruption Brigade and NGOs active in the fight against corruption. From
January to May, the Anti-corruption Brigade received 250 complaints, of which 103
were submitted to the Parquet général of the Anti-corruption Court for appropriate
action. In carrying out its mandate, the Court recovered 242 million Burundian
francs during the period under review. In April and May, 45 officers of the
Anti-corruption Brigade were trained in financial investigations and on the legal
framework of the fight against corruption.

6/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

E.

Rule of law
25. In a sign of improved transparency in judicial recruitments, the first
competitive examination for the selection of aspiring magistrates took place in June
with the support of bilateral partners. Selected candidates will start a two -year initial
training period before being appointed as magistrates. It is the first time that
magistrates will be selected according to a transparent process based on objective
criteria.
26. In another sign of progress, a sectoral review meeting was held from 17 to
19 March in Gitega to assess the implementation of the strategic plan of the
Ministry of Justice for the period 2011-2015. The meeting brought together
84 representatives of the Ministries of Justice and Public Security, judicial and
correction institutions, civil society organizations and development partners.
Participants recommended adopting new indicators for the strategic plan on
reforming the status of magistrates and the High Counc il of Magistrates in line with
international standards. The document of the sectoral review was approved by the
Justice and Rule of Law Sectoral Group, which is composed of representatives of
judicial institutions, development partners and civil society organizations, and will
be transmitted to the Minister of Justice before its circulation. The commission in
charge of drafting the bill reforming the status o f magistrates met from 26 to
28 May to finalize the text.
27. Meanwhile, the follow-up committee to the National Conference on Justice,
established by the Minister of Justice to evaluate the general state of the justice
system in Burundi, did not meet, and it does not include representatives of civil
society organizations, bar associations and magistrates’ trade unions, as required by
its terms of reference. The Minister of Justice has yet to engage in a dialogue with
the syndicate of magistrates (SYMABU), after the former refused to recognize the
validity of the election of the new executive committee last February.
28. Several cases during the reporting period reignited public concerns over the
independence of the judiciary, as indicated in paragraph 4 above. On 16 May, the
President of APRODH was arrested and later placed on pretrial detention for havi ng
declared on radio that some young Burundians were being trained in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and presented a forged photo to back up the assertions. He is
accused of endangering internal and external State security and may face a sentence
of up to eight years of imprisonment, if convicted.
29. During the period under review, BNUB and UNDP continued to support the
Ministry of Justice in the areas of integrity, judicial independence and
accountability. BNUB supported the Ministry of Justice in d rawing up its strategic
plan on strengthening accountability and integrity in the justice sector. BNUB also
played an active role in the anti-corruption committee that was established by the
Minister of Justice and that developed a draft plan aimed at prev enting and fighting
corruption in the justice sector. The plan was submitted to representatives of the
Ministries of Justice and Good Governance, judicial institutions, development
partners, an independent human rights commission, the Office of the Ombudsman
and civil society organizations in May 2014. Finally, BNUB, in collaboration with
UNDP, developed and distributed 1,000 copies of user guides for court litigants to
representatives of the Ministry of Justice, courts, prosecutor ’s offices, bar
associations and civil society organizations. Aimed at improving transparency in the

14-58089

7/15

S/2014/550

justice sector and in the fight against corruption, the guide provides information on
judicial services and on relevant formalities and requirements to access these
services.
30. In an effort to strengthen the concept of justice de proximité in Burundi, UNDP
helped the Government of Burundi launch a project on legal aid services for
vulnerable people, and installed 12 legal aid offices run by four civil society
organizations in four northern pilot provinces (Ngozi, Muyinga, Kirundo and
Kayanza). UNDP and development partners supported the Ministry of Justice in
identifying and preparing the establishment of a national legal aid system.

F.

Human rights
31. A major area of concern regarding human rights in Burundi is the steadily
increasing number of violations and incidents affecting the exercise of public
freedoms, notably the rights of peaceful assembly and association, opinion and
expression. In this regard, as at 24 June, BNUB had documented and informed
relevant government officials of 49 politically motivated incidents involving the
Imbonerakure, compared to 18 incidents during the same period last year. These
incidents included: (1) the prohibition or disruption of meetings planned by
opposition parties; (2) physical assault of members of opposition parties; (3) the
destruction of flags and other symbols of opposition parties; (4) threats and
intimidation against people accused of refusing to join the ruling party or against
known members of the youth wings of opposition parties; and (5) the extortion and
ill-treatment of peaceful citizens, typically during night patrols of Imbonerakure
members.
32. Since the beginning of the year, freedom of expression and freedom of the
press have faced growing restrictions, including pressures and threats against media
and journalists from the Burundian authorities and the Imbonerakure. On 15 March
2014, Burundi’s National Security Council issued a statement threatening closure of
the private radio station Radio Publique Africaine (RPA), following its coverage of
the 8 March clash between MSD and the police, and calling on the National
Communication Council to take appropriate measures against media responsible for
broadcasting messages capable of inciting the population to revolt. Following the
leaked BNUB cable, several journalists have been questioned by judicial authorities
in connection with reports they have made about the alleged distribution of weapons
in different parts of the country. On 8 May 2014, a member of the Rwasa-wing of
FNL was arrested in Gihanga commune, Bubanza province, and was reportedly
beaten by several police officers for having stated on a local radio station that young
people affiliated with the ruling party were receiving military training in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. On 9 May, two journalists from Radio France
International (RFI) and RPA were detained for over four hours in Marangara, Ngozi
province, by a local CNDD-FDD official, accompanied by a group of Imbonerakure,
while reporting on the political situation in the province. The Burundian Journalists
Union and the Eastern African Journalists Association denounced growing pressure
placed on journalists to reveal their sources and the overall efforts made by the
authorities to curtail freedom of the press in Burundi.
33. One notable case of a restriction of the freedom of assembly and movement
occurred on 16 March, when the mayor of Bujumbura, in the aftermath of the

8/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

clashes between MSD and the police on 8 March, declared illegal any sporting
activities involving more than one person on roads, limiting such activities to nine
authorized venues. Any sporting organization intending to conduct activities in
Bujumbura must seek permission from the local administration. However, the law
was not always strictly applied.
34. The number of extrajudicial killings documented by BNUB during the
reporting period drastically decreased to three cases, compared to 19 cases during
the same period in 2013. However, while none of the killings last year were
politically motivated, two of the cases in 2014 had political connections.
35. Impunity continued to be a source of concern as the Burundian authorities are
yet to take significant steps to ensure that all those respons ible for human rights
violations are brought to justice through the use of credible, impartial and
transparent investigations and regardless of their political affiliation. In most cases
involving members of the Imbonerakure, the intervention of an adminis trative
official put an end to judicial follow-up. Since January 2013, BNUB has
documented only two cases in which the Imbonerakure were tried in a court of law
and convicted. In addition, 27 of the 39 cases of extrajudicial killings that BNUB
documented in 2013 were investigated by the judicial authorities, with only five
resulting in convictions. However, investigations into the three killings this year led
to arrests and one conviction to date. Finally, only 5 of the 35 cases of torture and
ill-treatment documented in the first semester of 2014 are currently under
investigation.
36. BNUB continued to support the development of a legal framework for the
protection of human rights defenders. Following the establishment of a platform of
human rights defenders and States’ representatives by the Independent National
Human Rights Commission in November 2013, a draft law on the protection of
human rights defenders was consolidated in March 2014 and is due to be presented
to national stakeholders later this year.

G.

Social and economic development
37. Burundi’s economy is improving after a series of negative shocks over the last
few years that adversely affected socioeconomic activities. Economic growth
reached 4.5 per cent in 2013 and is projected to reach close to 4.8 per cent for 2014,
driven by the agriculture and construction sectors and the implementation of major
infrastructure projects, including fibre optics, hydropower and roads. However,
revenue shortfalls and the decline in budget support from 5 per cent of GDP in 2010
to a projected 2 per cent of GDP in 2014, which in part reflects austerity conditions
in traditional donor countries and more stringent governance -based conditionality,
limited the ability of the Government to maintain public spendi ng levels. To address
this situation, UNDP and development partners encouraged authorities to preserve
pro-poor spending, expedite structural reforms and strengthen the country’s fiscal
position.
38. As at 31 May, 2,104 new asylum seekers had arrived in Burundi from eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) continued to assist about 50,000 Congolese
refugees, most of whom reside in four camps in Ruyigi, Cankuzo, Muyinga and

14-58089

9/15

S/2014/550

Ngozi provinces and in Bujumbura. Some 130 Congolese refugees were resettled in
other countries as part of a burden-sharing arrangement.
39. Some 79,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) currently live in Burundi.
During the reporting period, UNHCR continued to sup port the Ministry of National
Solidarity to register IDPs at 19 sites across seven provinces in the country, with a
view to resolving long-term displacement, and increasing national capacity for
sustainable reintegration of IDPs.
40. Since January 2014, IOM has registered 5,160 Burundian irregular migrants
who were expelled from the United Republic of Tanzania. Burundi received the
largest number of expelled migrants and has been the least prepared for the influx.
About 496 of the 1,582 persons who were identified as having no reference in
Burundi remained in transit centres for over seven months.

III. Cross-cutting issues
A.

Gender
41. As elections approach, the need to increase women’s political participation in
decision-making positions became more prominent. Following a training on gender
mainstreaming in November 2013, 20 political parties designed gender-sensitive
action plans to include women’s concerns in the agendas of decision-making bodies
and of their parties, and to improve women’s participation in both entities. The
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women) continued to support political parties in the implementation of the
action plans. Moreover, provisions on women’s participation were included in the
new Electoral Code following recommendations submitted by women ’s
organizations during the Electoral Code workshop held in Kayanza in May 2013.
42. Sexual and gender-based violence remained one of the prevailing human rights
violations jeopardizing the safety and dignity of women in Burundi. Women and
girls are daily victims of rape, sexual violence, forced prostitution and domestic
violence, with most victims not reporting abuses to the police or the courts. In
March 2014, UN-Women, UNDP, the United Nations Population Fund and OHCHR
signed a joint programme to strengthen the efficiency and the performance of
institutions and communities in preventing and ending impunity for violence against
women and girls and providing assistance to survivors.

B.

Child protection
43. To support the process of setting up a solid juvenile justice system, the
Ministry of Justice, through the Professional Training Centre for the Judiciary,
trained 60 magistrates of the Minors, Child Rights and Juvenile Justice Se ction in
May 2014, based on the training tools developed in cooperation with the
International Bureau on Child Rights.
44. Since January, 2,400 children expelled from the United Republic of Tanzania
have returned to Burundi. To support their sustainable re integration, efforts have
been made to strengthen community child protection mechanisms in the areas of
major return, namely, Karuzi, Rutana, Ruyigi and Makamba. As a result, an

10/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

additional 337 child protection committees have been set up and more than 2,40 0
people at the community level have been empowered to identify local solutions to
violence, abuse and exploitation of children, and to strengthen the socioeconomic
situation of vulnerable families.

C.

Activities related to the Peacebuilding Commission
45. On 19 February, the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding approved a
third peacebuilding priority plan for Burundi, providing $11.65 million to fund
projects in four areas: national dialogue and social cohesion; youth participation;
human rights; and land disputes. The Government, civil society organizations and
international partners identified these areas of intervention as in need of additional
support to further consolidate peace in Burundi. The Joint Steering Committee,
which manages and oversees the implementation of the peacebuilding priority plan
and is co-chaired by the Government and the United Nations Resident Coordinator
in Burundi, held its first meeting on 27 May.
46. The Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding C ommission,
Ambassador Paul Seger of Switzerland, continued to work with my Special
Representative on engaging the Government and key partners to strengthen support
for peacebuilding and to consolidate peace in Burundi ahead of the 2015 elections.
In New York, the Chair organized several meetings of the Burundi configuration,
including a luncheon on 23 April, which was attended by the Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Antonio de Aguiar Patriota of Brazil, and
which discussed the concerns of the international community about shrinking
political space ahead of the 2015 elections.
47. As part of his engagement, the Chair of the Burundi configuration also visited
Burundi from 13 to 17 January 2014 to assess developments in the country. During a
trip to Paris, Brussels, Bujumbura, Kigali and Arusha from 21 to 31 May, the Chair
proposed the organization of a round-table discussion as a follow-up to the 2012
Geneva Partners Conference, with the aim of assessing progress against mutual
commitments and reinvigorating the relationship between Burundi and its
international partners.

IV. Transition of the United Nations Office in Burundi
48. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2137 (2014), a Joint
Transition Plan was developed under the strategic leadership of the Transition
Steering Group, which is co-chaired by BNUB and the Government of Burundi, and
was submitted to the Security Council on 14 May. The Transition Steering Group is
composed of the Governments of Burundi, Belgium, China, France, Kenya,
Netherlands, Nigeria, Russian Federation, Rwanda, South Africa, Switzerland,
Uganda, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, representatives of BNUB, the African Union,
the European Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and
the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations Resident Coordinator.
49. The Joint Transition Plan is organized around priority areas covered by the
benchmarks, maps the support of the international community to Burundi and

14-58089

11/15

S/2014/550

identifies possible gaps resulting from the closing of BNUB. It seeks to enable
BNUB to gradually scale down its activities, and the United Nations country team
and other partners to increase their capacities in priority areas, while BNUB
continues to implement its mandate as requested by the Security Council and work
with its partners in Burundi to ensure continued progress towards the benchmarks.
50. The largest capacity gap resulting from the departure of BNUB is likely to
emerge in the area of democratic process, governance and institution -building,
especially regarding the facilitation of political dialogue and high -level advocacy.
While support to governance and institution-building will continue to be provided
by UNDP and other members of the United Nations country team, political dialogue
and high-level political facilitation will most likely be facilitated through a
combination of actors, including relevant United Nations regional political offices
and, to a lesser extent the United Nations country team, through the project
“National dialogue and social cohesion” of the third peacebuilding priority plan.
These efforts will be made in close coordination with relevant partners and regional
actors such as the African Union, the European Union, the East African Community
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
51. In the area of human rights and transitional justice, relevant ac tivities are
expected to continue after the departure of BNUB, subject to continued financial
support for the work of United Nations agencies, funds and programmes. OHCHR is
exploring the possibility of continuing its efforts to promote and protect human
rights, increase the capacities of human rights institutions and provide advice,
administrative and logistic support and training to transitional justice mechanisms
after the departure of BNUB as agreed in the Joint Transition Plan. Partners have
already expressed strong interest in funding a stand-alone OHCHR presence.
52. While the United Nations country team is actively engaged in the rule -of-law
sector and implements activities in close cooperation with BNUB, it does not
currently have all the necessary resources to be able to compensate for the loss of
BNUB contribution to this area. UNDP intends to increase its capacities to absorb
some of the tasks currently being performed by BNUB in this area into its existing
programming, and is recruiting a rule-of-law adviser and three international United
Nations Volunteers to strengthen its rule-of-law component. In addition, a team of
the Global Focal Point on Police, Justice and Corrections, comprised of
representatives of UNDP, UN-Women, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and OHCHR, was deployed to Burundi from 27 April to 6 May 2014 to
support the development of a United Nations rule-of-law strategy for Burundi.
53. While the current level of involvement of the international community in
Burundi’s security sector should ensure continuity, the departure of BNUB could
produce capacity gaps in advocacy efforts at the political level, including with
regard to the issue of small arms and light weapons. Relevant United Nations
regional political offices could provide support in this regard. In addition, the
African Union Commission intends to increase its capacity and expand its
involvement in this area to help close possible gaps.
54. The end of the mandate of BNUB is unlikely to have a significant impact i n
the socioeconomic development area, as related activities are already well covered
by the United Nations country team. It is therefore not expected that the transition
process will lead to other resource requirements in this area, provided that United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes receive the remaining funding for their

12/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

respective programmes as part of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework.
55. According to the Joint Transition Plan, the smooth transition of BNUB
depends on a number of key assumptions. Among these are a stable security
situation and an enabling environment that will allow BNUB to continue to
implement its mandate until 31 December 2014, and the United Nations country
team and its partners to continue their work witho ut restrictions on their operations
or the diversion of resources to address emergency needs. The Joint Transition Plan
also assumes that all stakeholders will actively support and contribute to the process
and that international partners will provide active and timely financial support to the
country team and increase their own capacity in critical areas. Finally, the Plan
assumes that there will be strong national ownership by the Government of Burundi
at all levels of the transition and the creation of conducive political conditions on
the ground that is characterized by political dialogue, and the strengthening of
democratic institutions and good governance, all of which are indispensable
elements for a successful and peaceful transition process.

V. United Nations electoral observer mission
56. As requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2137 (2014), the
Department of Political Affairs has been making preparations for the establishment
of an electoral observer mission to follow and report on the electoral process in
Burundi immediately following the end of the mandate of BNUB. The mission will
be fully operational on 1 January 2015 and will follow and report on the various
stages of the presidential, parliamentary and local elections, as well as the overall
context under which the elections will take place. It will be based in Bujumbura and
will have a small field presence. It is envisioned that it will comprise slightly over
30 substantive staff and some support staff. An advance team will be deployed in the
last quarter of 2014 to commence preparations.
57. In carrying out its mandate, the electoral observer mission will interact and
engage with a broad range of stakeholders, with a view to gathering information and
contributing to the creation of an environment conducive to the holding of peaceful
and credible elections. It will also work closely with other partners, including the
African Union.

VI. Observations
58. Political tension remains high in Burundi, despite attempts by national actors
to address key issues through dialogue and consensus. With the consensual adoption
of a new Electoral Code and the signing of a code of conduct for the 2015 elections,
Burundi has laid the foundations for a peaceful and participatory electoral process.
In this regard, I welcome the announcement of the electoral calendar. However, the
continuing mistrust that has shaped relations between the ruling party and other
actors risks undermining these achievements. Now more than ever, Burundi must
protect and promote the spirit of dialogue and consensus that has driven the peace
consolidation process since the 2000 Arusha peace agreement. It is incumbent on
both the Government and the opposition to play their part in ensuring a continuing
consensual approach to peace consolidation and to abide by the commitments they

14-58089

13/15

S/2014/550

have made within the framework of the Electoral Code, the code of conduct and the
electoral road map. I urge the Government to promote dialogue between all national
actors, including civil society, undertake confidence -building measures and
guarantee space for all political parties, including those from the extra parliamentary opposition, to exercise their political freedoms. Likewise, I enc ourage
opposition parties to fully participate in the political life of the country and play
their role in providing the alternatives and choices that are vital to any democratic
system.
59. The 2015 elections will be a critical milestone for the long-term stability of
Burundi. If the elections are peaceful and inclusive and if they are conducted in a
credible manner, they offer an opportunity to consolidate Burundi ’s democratic
transition. Less than a year from the elections, I am concerned by the steady
increase in acts of violence and human rights violations compared with the
corresponding period in 2013. Credible elections also presume a level playing field
that allows for fair competition between candidates before electoral events, and for
citizens to be able to make a choice without fear of violence or intimidation.
Unfortunately, this is not the case now. While I commend the efforts of the
Independent National Commission for Human Rights to strengthen respect for
human rights in Burundi, I urge the Government of Burundi to take all necessary
measures to ensure the exercise of public freedoms, notably the rights to freedom of
peaceful assembly and association, opinion and expression, and to assure the
protection of all human rights defenders.
60. While I note that the number of extrajudicial killings has markedly declined,
Burundian authorities must make a greater effort to ensure that all human rights
violations are seriously investigated and that perpetrators are held accountable. In
this regard, I am particularly concerned by acts of violence and human rights
violations reportedly perpetrated by members of youth wings of political parties, in
particular of the majority party. The apparent impunity enjoyed by this group is
particularly troubling. I call on those who have influence over the group to ensure
that such actions cease, and that those responsible are brought to justice. I also
reiterate my call on the Government and political parties to take all necessary steps
to ensure that the country’s youth are neither politically manipulated nor commit
violent acts. In this regard, I welcome the initiative of the Ombudsman to bring
together youth from different political parties to discuss their role in consolidating
peace and fostering tolerance in a challenging environment. I encourage the
Burundian authorities to continue undertaking such commendable initiatives.
61. I welcome the steps taken to further professionalize the justice system.
However, I remain concerned by the limited progress in increasing its independence
and its accountability. I am concerned that limited follow-up of serious cases of
human rights violations contributes to entrenching a culture of impunity. I am also
concerned that the prosecution of certain highly visible cases and other uses of the
judicial system give the impression that justice is being instrumentalized. Continued
efforts will be necessary to ensure that all accused receive a fair trial, and that
respect for the independence of the judiciary is further enhanced.
62. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission is a critical mechanism to further
peace consolidation, reconciliation and development. Experience has shown that
transitional justice mechanisms need to be fully owned by the population, their
representatives and civil society at large. This can be done only through a

14/15

14-58089

S/2014/550

participatory and inclusive process. While I regret that a large consensus was not
reached during the elaboration and adoption of the law establishing the
Commission, there is still a vital need to guarantee the independence, and through it,
the credibility of the Commission. This is the only way to protect its role in
establishing the truth on past human rights violations, address the pressing needs of
victims, establish responsibilities and promote natio nal reconciliation. I urge all
concerned actors to ensure that the Commission accomplishes its mandate in an
independent manner, and addresses all issues at the heart of the conflicts that have
marked Burundi’s recent past.
63. I take note of the law establishing a special court on land issues. I appeal to the
Government to protect the Court from political interference, and continue to ensure
that land tenure is addressed in the broader context of socioeconomic development,
bearing in mind the need to foster reconciliation and national cohesion, especially in
the run-up to the 2015 elections.
64. Socioeconomic development remains a key ingredient in the consolidation of
peace in Burundi. I therefore welcome the idea of a round -table meeting, as a
follow-up to the Geneva partners conference of 2012, to assess progress and
remaining challenges, renew mutual commitments and develop a blueprint for
Burundi’s development beyond 2015. Such a blueprint, coupled with credible
elections in 2015, would help create a conducive environment for greater external
investment and donor support.
65. I welcome the development of the Joint Transition Plan for Burundi, which
will guide the transfer of responsibilities from BNUB to the United Nations country
team, the Government, and national and international partners. I am encouraged that
the Plan was developed in a spirit of partnership and cooperation and that it received
the full support of all stakeholders involved in the process. While BNUB prepares to
draw down, it will continue to implement its mandate to ensure continued progress
towards the agreed transition benchmarks. To effect a smooth transition, I call on the
international community to increase its political and financial engagement in order
to address critical gaps. This should include equipping the United Nations country
team to assume greater responsibility after the departure of BNUB and supporting a
stand-alone OHCHR office to ensure continuity in addressing human rights
challenges in the country. I encourage regional organizations to further increase
their engagement with Burundi and urge the Government to preserve a political
environment conducive to the peaceful, smooth and sustainable transfer of tasks.
66. I wish to take this opportunity to thank President Nkurunziza and his
Government for their continued cooperation with the United Nations. I would also
like to express my appreciation to Burundi’s development partners for their
continued engagement and support of the consolidation of peace and sustainable
development in Burundi. Lastly, I sincerely thank all United Nations personnel who,
under the able leadership of my Special Representative, Parfait Onanga -Anyanga,
have continued to show commitment and dedication in supporting the consolidation
of peace in Burundi.

14-58089

15/15
