A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/145
8 March 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 110 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/625/Add.2)]
53/145. Situation of human rights in Cambodia
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights1 and the International Covenants on Human Rights,2
Recalling the Agreement on a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the Cambodia Conflict, signed in
Paris on 23 October 1991,3 including part III thereof, relating to human rights,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1998/60 of 17 April 1998,4 and recalling
General Assembly resolution 52/135 of 12 December 1997 and previous relevant resolutions, including
Commission on Human Rights resolution 1993/6 of 19 February 1993,5 in which the Commission

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3

A/46/608–S/23177, annex; see Official Records of the Security Council, Forty-sixth Year, Supplement for
October, November and December 1991, document S/23177.
4

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1998, Supplement No. 3 (E/1998/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5

Ibid., 1993, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/1993/23 and Corr.2, 4 and 5), chap. II, sect. A.

99-77095

/...

A/RES/53/145
Page 2

recommended the appointment of a special representative in Cambodia, and the subsequent appointment by
the Secretary-General of a special representative,
Recognizing that the tragic history of Cambodia requires special measures to assure the promotion and
protection of the human rights of all people in Cambodia and the non-return to the policies and practices of
the past, as stipulated in the Agreement signed in Paris on 23 October 1991,
Desiring that the United Nations respond positively to assist efforts to investigate the tragic history of
Cambodia, including responsibility for past international crimes, such as acts of genocide and crimes against
humanity,
Welcoming the continuing role of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the
promotion and protection of human rights in Cambodia and her visit to Cambodia in January 1998,
Welcoming also the agreement by the Government of Cambodia to extend the mandate of the office in
Phnom Penh of the High Commissioner until March 2000, enabling the office to continue its operations and
to maintain its technical cooperation programmes,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative for human rights in Cambodia,
in collaboration with the office in Cambodia of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, to
assist the Government of Cambodia in ensuring the protection of the human rights of all people in Cambodia
and to ensure adequate resources for the continued functioning in Cambodia of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and to enable the Special Representative to continue to fulfil
his tasks expeditiously;
2. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on the situation of human rights in Cambodia,6 in
particular the section concerning the role of the Office of the High Commissioner in assisting the Government
and the people of Cambodia in the promotion and protection of human rights, and encourages the
Government of Cambodia to continue to cooperate with the Office;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Representative on the situation of human
rights in Cambodia,7 and notes in particular his concerns about political violence, the problem of impunity,
the independence of the judiciary and the establishment of the rule of law, the use of torture, the
administration of prisons and the ill-treatment of prisoners, child labour, child prostitution and trafficking,
workers’ rights and the freedom to form independent trade unions, media freedom and the situation of
women, including violence against women, and minorities;
4. Welcomes the holding of national elections by the Government of Cambodia on 26 July 1998 and
its efforts to ensure the safety of national and international observers of the elections;
5. Notes that the elections demonstrated the clear desire of the Cambodian people for democracy,
stresses the need for the constructive engagement of all parties in order to fulfil the objective of the elections,
the formation of an elected, constitutional government, and, in this context, welcomes the agreement reached
between political parties to convene the National Assembly and to establish a coalition government;

6

A/53/400.

7

E/CN.4/1998/95.
/...

A/RES/53/145
Page 3

6. Welcomes the role of the United Nations in monitoring the return of and full resumption of political
activities by political leaders in the period leading up to, during and immediately after the elections;
7. Also welcomes the role of national non-governmental organizations in educating voters and
providing observers at polling stations and of international observers during the recent elections, and takes
note of the statements of the joint international observer group regarding the polling and counting processes
of the elections;
8. Encourages the Government of Cambodia to continue to work with non-governmental
organizations in efforts to strengthen and uphold human rights in Cambodia, in recognition of the vital and
valuable role played by non-governmental organizations in the development of civil society in Cambodia;
9. Notes the formation of a provisional Cambodian human rights committee, and encourages the
Government of Cambodia, in setting up a new Cambodian human rights commission, to take into account
international standards, notably those on independence, and to request the Office of the High Commissioner
to provide advice and technical assistance to this end;
10. Expresses grave concern about numerous instances of violations of human rights, including
extrajudicial executions, torture, illegal arrests and detention, and violence in relation to political activities, as
detailed in the reports of the Special Representative, including those that occurred in March and July 1997
and during the recent election campaign and its immediate aftermath, and calls upon the Government of
Cambodia to investigate urgently and prosecute, in accordance with due process of the law and international
standards relating to human rights, all those who have perpetrated human rights violations;
11. Also expresses grave concern at the situation of impunity in Cambodia, and stresses that
addressing the continuing problem of impunity, as detailed by the Special Representative, including the repeal
of article 51 of the 1994 Law on Civil Servants and bringing to justice those responsible for human rights
violations, together with ensuring the security of persons and the rights of association, assembly and
expression, remains a matter of critical and urgent priority;
12. Welcomes the convening for the first time of the Supreme Council of the Magistracy in December
1997, as well as the adoption of the Law on the Constitutional Council in March 1998, and looks forward to
the active implementation of their constitutional mandates;
13. Condemns the use of racist rhetoric and acts of violence against ethnic minorities, especially
Cambodians of Vietnamese ethnicity, as detailed in the report of the Special Representative, and urges all
political parties in Cambodia to abstain from statements or activities that could be interpreted as incitement
against ethnic minorities;
14. Notes with serious concern the comments of the Special Representative about the judicial system
and the prison administration, strongly urges the Government of Cambodia to continue its efforts to create a
functioning and impartial system of justice and to implement the Prison Regulations signed in March 1998,
and welcomes the cooperation of the Government of Cambodia with international efforts to improve the
judicial system;
15. Stresses the need for the Government of Cambodia to improve the implementation of the freedoms
laid down in the Cambodian Constitution with regard to the operation of a free electronic and print media and
the security of persons and the rights of association, assembly and expression, in accordance with the

/...

A/RES/53/145
Page 4

provisions of the Constitution and in view of the critical role they play in the effective functioning of a multiparty democracy;
16. Endorses the comments of the Special Representative that the most serious human rights violations
in Cambodia in recent history have been committed by the Khmer Rouge, and notes with concern that no
Khmer Rouge leaders have been brought to account for their crimes;
17. Welcomes the appointment by the Secretary-General, in response to the request by the Cambodian
authorities for assistance in responding to past serious violations of Cambodian and international law by the
Khmer Rouge, of a group of experts to evaluate the existing evidence and propose further measures as a
means of bringing about national reconciliation, strengthening democracy and addressing the issue of
individual accountability;
18. Commends the efforts of the Government of Cambodia, together with non-governmental
organizations and United Nations bodies, including the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Population Fund and the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, to improve the quality of and access to education;
19. Notes with serious concern the prevalence of child labour in Cambodia, and calls upon the
Government of Cambodia to ensure adequate health and safety conditions and access to education for
working children and to outlaw the worst forms of child labour;
20. Welcomes the development by the Government of Cambodia, working with the office in Cambodia
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Children’s Fund and nongovernmental organizations, of an action plan to combat child prostitution and trafficking, encourages the
National Assembly to approve the plan as a matter of priority, and urges the Government of Cambodia to
take concrete action to ensure its speedy and effective implementation;
21. Urges the Government of Cambodia to take all appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination
against women, including in the political and public life of the country, to combat violence against women in
all its forms and to take all steps to meet its obligations as a party to the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women,8 including by seeking technical assistance;
22. Notes with appreciation the use by the Secretary-General of the United Nations Trust Fund for a
Human Rights Education Programme in Cambodia to finance the programme of activities of the office in
Cambodia of the High Commissioner, as defined in resolutions of the General Assembly and the Commission
on Human Rights, and invites Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
foundations and individuals to consider contributing funds to the Trust Fund;
23. Expresses grave concern at the devastating consequences and destabilizing effects of the use of
anti-personnel landmines on Cambodian society, encourages the Government of Cambodia to continue its
support and efforts for the removal of these mines, including the work of the Cambodian Mine Action Centre,
commends donor countries for their contributions and assistance to the Centre, and urges the Government of
Cambodia to give priority to banning all anti-personnel landmines;

8

Resolution 34/180, annex.
/...

A/RES/53/145
Page 5

24. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the
role of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in assisting the Government
and the people of Cambodia in the promotion and protection of human rights and on the recommendations
made by the Special Representative on matters within his mandate;
25. Decides to continue its consideration of the situation of human rights in Cambodia at its fiftyfourth session.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
