S/PV.7896

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7896th meeting

Friday, 10 March 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2017/189)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-06381 (E)
*1706381*

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of the victims of terrorism
in Afghanistan
The President: We begin this meeting on
Afghanistan with a tragic reminder of the ultimate
price that too many have paid to help build the future
of their country. I would like to ask that the Council
observe a minute of silence in memory of all recent
victims of terrorism in Afghanistan, including the
victims of the attack on Kabul military hospital on
Wednesday, which claimed more than 50 lives and left
many more wounded.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2017/189)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Germany, India, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Netherlands, Pakistan, Spain and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; and Ms. Sima Samar, Chair
of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/189, which contains the report of the
2/35

10/03/2017

Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Mr. Yamamoto.
Mr. Yamamoto: The National Unity Government is
almost halfway through its five-year term. We have seen
some of the fruits of its efforts, and yet much remains
to be done. Fortunately, the ground is being prepared
to make Afghanistan a success. Internationally,
Warsaw and Brussels set the stage for steady progress.
Domestically, the National Unity Government has
introduced programmes to improve social services and
promote growth and development. Now is the time for
action to deliver concrete outcomes that will improve
Afghan lives today and for the future.
A major challenge is at hand. The Government has
to pursue both an inclusive peace process and economic
growth against the backdrop of an intensifying
insurgency and worsening security. As the Afghan
Government redoubles its efforts to tackle these
challenges, strong international backing — political and
financial — is required for the work ahead. Allow me
to highlight three areas where the Afghan Government
has made visible steps forward. These areas include
anti-corruption, the electoral process and women’s
economic empowerment.
First, the Government is making a break with the
past by taking new steps to address corruption. The
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre is now prosecuting
cases. In parallel, the Government has taken steps to
address corruption through a range of institutional
reforms, such as efforts to restore integrity to the
management of public services. We need, however, to
acknowledge that much remains to be done, including
addressing corruption in the security institutions.
That will require political leadership and strong
determination. I have the pleasure to inform the
Council that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will launch its first
anti-corruption report, entitled “Afghanistan’s other
battlefield: The fight against corruption”, very soon.
The report highlights the Government’s achievements
in addressing corruption and recommends options for
further progress.
Secondly, the Government has committed at the
highest levels to hold parliamentary elections that are
seen as fair, inclusive and transparent by the Afghan
people. The commissioners of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Commission are appointed. It is encouraging to see
them making preparations for elections and pushing the
electoral reform agenda forward. However, rebuilding
trust in the electoral process will be challenging. I am
hopeful that all stakeholders will invest in an inclusive
process and build the broad political support necessary
for improved elections.
Thirdly, just two days ago, on International
Women’s Day, the Government launched the Women’s
Economic Empowerment National Priority Programme.
The plan recognizes women as key economic actors
whose contributions to Afghanistan’s future are
essential. While this is an important step forward,
Afghanistan remains one of the most difficult places
in the world to be a woman. For many women, the
story is one of discrimination, poverty and oppression.
If that story is to change, women must be allowed
full participation and leadership and be respected as
decision-makers at all levels. This will require the
strong support of the Afghan Government, civil society
and international partners.
Let me elaborate on the issues of development
and economic growth. It is imperative that growth
strategies start to deliver concrete results. In part
due to the worsening security situation over the past
two years, service delivery has become increasingly
difficult. We have witnessed some downward trends
in key indicators, such as access to health clinics and
education facilities. Nine million people, or close to
one-third of the population, live below the poverty line,
and given population growth, per capita gross domestic
product is expected to go down. We need to act now to
reverse this course.
The commitments made in Brussels, as well
as the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework and the Citizen’s Charter provide an
essential opportunity for progress in that regard. This
is, however, neither an easy nor a simple process. The
efforts of the Afghan Government will require the
continuing, well-coordinated support of international
partners. More focused action on governance, social
services and private sector development to promote
equitable growth will be necessary. We must work hand
in hand to make a discernible change in the lives of all
Afghans so that they feel the upwards lift of economic
and social progress.
Developing a nation while fighting an insurgency is
an uphill struggle. Improving the security environment

S/PV.7896

is essential to realizing economic growth and delivering
on the ambitious plans which that country’s citizens
deserve. The deteriorating security situation remains
of great concern. Armed clashes continued unabated
in early 2017, despite the cold winter months. I am
gravely concerned about reports pointing to an intense
spring fighting season. Everything should be done to
improve security. We must also remain vigilant about
the presence of foreign fighters, including Da’esh.
Last year, UNAMA recorded the worst number
of civilian casualties since we began keeping records
nearly a decade ago. The horrific attack two days ago
is testimony to the heavy price Afghans pay. This
trend must be reversed. While parties to the conflict
have expressed commitments to protecting civilians,
concrete efforts must be made to ensure that such
statements translate into real protection for Afghan
civilians and reduce casualties. I look forward to the
formal adoption and implementation of the national
policy on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation by
the Government of Afghanistan. Civilian casualties are
preventable. I also encourage the Government to follow
through on steps taken to break the culture of impunity
and to make it clear that nobody is above the law.
Deteriorating security also led to the highestever level of internal displacement in 2016. More than
650,000 Afghans were displaced; returns from Pakistan
exceeded 620,000 people. Displacements and returns
for 2017 are likely to remain at these levels. These trends
demand a major humanitarian response in the short
term. The Government has shown strong leadership in
developing plans for the long-term integration of the
displaced and returnees, but sustained international
assistance is essential.
There clearly can be no military solution in
Afghanistan. It must be acknowledged that a prolonged
conflict will lead only to further misery for the
Afghan people and undermine the very foundations for
economic growth and development.
Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7844), I have
travelled the region extensively to discuss how
neighbouring countries can support or play a proactive
role in peace efforts. I have been encouraged. I sense
that countries in the neighbourhood are more ready
to work towards bringing peace to Afghanistan.
They recognize the importance of establishing an
environment conducive to peace and regional stability.
For these reasons, I urge the countries concerned,

17-063813/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

particularly in the neighbourhood, to support the
Afghan Government’s interest in an intensified regional
peace effort. UNAMA is working closely with the
Afghan Government for that purpose. In that regard, I
am deeply troubled by the heightened tensions between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and call for the reduction of
tensions through dialogue.
The future of Afghanistan has to be built through
an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led process for all
Afghans. The path of peace must be pursued through
negotiations and not through violence. The Taliban
should enter peace talks without preconditions. I call
on all relevant actors to exercise their influence to that
end. The Government, neighbouring countries and
other key Powers should reinforce the message that the
Taliban can be a part of Afghanistan’s future and its
political and social fabric.
Afghanistan’s future must be placed above all
considerations. An endless conflict and violence are
simply not acceptable. We all need to make peace our
new and absolute imperative. In close consultation with
the Afghan Government, UNAMA stands ready to move
the process forward and to help generate momentum
for peace. Afghanistan’s most important battle ahead
is that for a lasting peace. UNAMA looks forward to
the adoption of the renewed mandate by the Council.
We wish to reassure you, Sir, of our commitment to the
ever-more effective discharge of our mandate for the
benefit of the people of Afghanistan.
The President: I thank Mr. Yamamoto for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Samar.
Ms. Samar: I am very much delighted to brief
the Security Council on Afghanistan. I would like to
thank you, Sir, and Security Council members for their
support to my country, Afghanistan, and the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I hope that the mandate of UNAMA will be
extended and expanded by the Council, and should also
like to stress that the full and strengthened presence
of the United Nations and the international community
is vital for peace, stability, security and the protection
of human rights in Afghanistan. I would like to thank
UNAMA for its presence and its work in support of our
people, institutions, security and peace.
I am pleased to say that Afghanistan has
transformed in many ways. The achievements and
progress of the country have been immense and beyond
4/35

10/03/2017

my capacity to describe in this meeting in the allotted
time. Nonetheless, we should celebrate our progress and
transformation and acknowledge the bravery, shared
responsibility and sacrifices we have made through the
course of our progress.
One of the areas that I want to highlight is that of
my responsibility as Chair of the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, human rights and women’s
rights in Afghanistan. We all remember — colleagues
who have been supporting Afghanistan remember — that
16 years ago the Taliban ruled Afghanistan. They
ruled the country with violence, extrajudicial killings,
threats and intimidation and barbaric execution of
people. They ruled by denying the Afghan people’s
rights, freedom and dignity, and they were proud of
violating women’s rights — lashing women in public
and closing schools and offices to women. Women
were not even allowed to go shopping without male
members of their family. The Taliban still do the same
to the people who live under their rule and influence.
But in most of the country we have transformed that
situation, where freedom, human rights and equality
for women and men are constitutionally guaranteed.
Afghanistan’s Constitution established an Independent
Human Rights Commission to monitor, promote and
protect human rights, and obligated the State to observe
human rights and international treaties Afghanistan
has signed and become a party to. The country acceded
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and signed onto
the International Criminal Court (ICC), in addition to
five other main international human rights instruments.
With a strong and modern Constitution, we have
also achieved a real and meaningful review of our laws,
have adopted new laws in support of human rights and
have put in place policies and programmes that promote
and protect human rights in the country. The following
are examples of the progress we have made on human
rights, and also challenges and threats that we face in
the country. I spoke of progress and challenges, and I
would now like to elaborate further.
On women’s rights, we celebrated 8 March in
Afghanistan by issuing a report on violence against
women. We have noted that progress has been made
on addressing violence against women, which includes
the approval and implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women and numerous
policies, including the national action plan on women
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

and peace and security. The report also acknowledges
that the Government has taken concrete steps in giving
women an opportunity to apply for high office, and
the number of women in key Cabinet and Government
positions has increased. Women are striving for equality,
justice, recognition and meaningful participation in
Government, and they have had some success.
However, I am sad to say that, despite all the progress
we have made, women are not yet treated equally.
Women are victims of violence, and that remains a
very sad story of our time. Violence against women
is committed at home and in society, and by terrorist
groups in very barbaric ways. Many women have been
killed, stoned or mutilated by the Taliban — among the
horrible incidents that women hear of and fear every
day. On the other hand, the lack of a strong rule-oflaw system, harmful traditions, corruption and a
continuing culture of impunity continue to be factors
that contribute to violence against women.
Access to education has been the most important
progress in Afghanistan. More than 8 million children
are now enrolled in schools, and more than 30 per cent
of them are girls. Education is key to a prosperous and
strong Afghanistan. However, war and threats from
terrorist groups remain a real barrier to the expansion
and improvement of access to education. They continue
to close girls’ schools and do not allow modern education
for boys. Terrorist groups attacking cities and villages
deprive our children of access to education.
Four decades of war and conflict have destroyed
the foundation of justice, the rule of law and good
governance. We still have a weak judiciary and rule-oflaw institutions, while the concept of good governance
is a new phenomenon in the country. Support for justice,
the rule of law and good governance is a key issue for the
United Nations to focus on. Supporting the Government
to ensure justice and the rule of law by respecting the
independence of the judiciary and fighting corruptions
is a key for a democratic Afghanistan.
Democracy and democratic space for everyone must
be preserved and enhanced. Elections and electoral
processes have always been chaotic in our country. As an
early-warning system and for preventing any disputes,
it is important that UNAMA play its role to assist and
support the electoral system. We would like to see
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community support and ensure transparent, free and fair
elections. The new Independent Election Commission

S/PV.7896

needs support, and the Government must prevent any
interference in the electoral process in order to build
the confidence of the public in democratic processes.
The security and safety of Afghans is a prerequisite
for everything in Afghanistan. I am sad to announce
here that we — both the international community and
Afghans — have not been able to secure Afghanistan.
The lack of security in Afghanistan results in huge
displacement, refugees and increased poverty. Roads
and villages are not safe, and people are taken hostage
and killed. We hope that the international community
will continue to contribute to our security. The presence
of the United Nations and the international security
forces is needed as a gesture of the world’s commitment
to our security.
Civil society and human rights and women’s rights
defenders play an important role in Afghanistan. They
try to hold the Government accountable and champion
the protection of the rights and dignity of Afghans.
Threats and intimidation against them are increasing.
We are happy to say that we have developed a national
action plan on protecting human rights defenders
in Afghanistan. I would like to urge the Security
Council to consider adopting a draft resolution on the
importance of civil society and human rights defenders
and their protection.
Economic development is key to a better, free and
democratic Afghanistan. The country has the potential
to be a prosperous country. However, currently over
40 per cent of Afghans live below the poverty line,
and more than 60 per cent are extremely poor and
face food insecurity. We hope that the international
community and the Afghan Government will continue
their investment in trade and the economy. The Council
could consider calling on our neighbouring country to
open its borders to economic transactions, and not limit
trade for political purposes. Unfortunately, the closure
of the border by Pakistan has had an immense effect on
the people and on humanitarian needs. UNAMA could
ease tensions in the region and support Afghanistan in
dealing with its regional issues.
The people of Afghanistan need and deserve to
live in peace. While we welcome any meaningful steps
towards achieving peace, we must note that the standard
of not talking to terrorists must be the same everywhere
in the world. If Da’esh and other terrorist groups are
not to be negotiated with, then why are some countries
talking to the Taliban? The Taliban are terrorists, and

17-063815/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

we should deal with them in the same way as we do
Da’esh and other terrorist groups. In the meantime, the
lack of accountability and respect for justice and human
rights in the peace process is a failure; it does not lead
to sustainable peace and security. We are disappointed
with the Security Council’s decision to take the name
of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar from the sanctions list, as
well as the blanket amnesty that the Government of
Afghanistan provided to him and his commanders. We
believe they have committed crimes and violated human
rights in the past four decades. Despite the adoption of
a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), our
country is lagging behind in implementation and in
significantly including women in peace and security
processes. UNAMA should support an inclusive peace
process, with emphasis on accountability and justice
for victims of human rights violations.
Attacks against the Hazara community is a tragic
fact in Afghanistan. That ethnic group has been
targeted systematically by both Da’esh and the Taliban.
The Government of Afghanistan must do more to
protect this ethnic group against the immediate threat
of Da’esh and the Taliban, and bring to justice those
who commit crimes against them.
Afghanistan is not a safe place for returnees. I
would like to emphasize that the world community
must pay attention to the need and the plight of Afghans
who seek refuge worldwide. Forcibly deporting and
discriminating against refugees based on their origin is
not in conformity with the international law.
Transitional justice is a very important factor
in ending impunity and promoting a culture of
accountability. The four periods of war requires an
established framework to deal with war crimes and
crimes against humanity. I strongly urge the Council to
expand the mandate of UNAMA to include transitional
justice, and also to facilitate the intervention of the ICC
in Afghanistan.
I come from Kabul, the capital. The city was
attacked last week, and again this week. Many people
died. The recent attacks in front of the Parliament
buildings, the Supreme Court, a police station and, two
days ago, on a hospital are inhuman acts and show that
terrorism and the supporters of terrorism in the region
continue to kill innocent people and have no regard for
any values or norms, let alone international laws and
basic human rights. Last year alone, over 11,000 people
were killed or injured in Afghanistan, most of them by
6/35

10/03/2017

armed opposition to the Government. The continuation
of terrorism and conflict has placed Afghanistan
in danger. The danger to the very existence of the
country, its democratic system, human rights, freedom
and economy is immense and immanent. That causes
frustration and disappointment and inflicts pain on the
Afghan people on a daily basis.
International law and the Constitution require
Afghanistan to honour its obligation to respect, protect
and honour human rights. The country must combat
the human rights violations that occur daily and
are committed by influential people, and also fight
meaningfully and effectively against torture and the
inhumane and degrading treatment of people. It must
bring to justice all officials who violate human rights.
Good governance and strong institutions serving
to enforce the law and fight against corruption are
key to promote, protect and achieve human rights in
Afghanistan. I would like to call on the international
community to coordinate and cooperate with the
Afghan government in that regard. Establishing parallel
structures for short-term quick fixes, which undermine
the actual responsibility of formal institutions, will
not solve the problem. We all know that human rights,
development and peace and security are interconnected
and require stable, strong, transparent and accountable
institutions, with inclusive citizen participation.
Finally, I reiterate that the protection and promotion
of human rights are a shared responsibility, and the
people of Afghanistan need the Council’s continued
support. In that context, Afghanistan is a candidate for
the Human Rights Council for the period 2018-2020.
I look forward to the full support for our candidacy
by Member States. I call upon the international
community and the United Nations to support the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
to independently continue its job to monitor, protect
and promote human rights. The people of Afghanistan
deserve to live in full dignity.
The President: I thank Ms. Samar for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me congratulate the
United Kingdom on its leadership of the Security Council
this month. I thank the Secretary-General, António
Guterres, for presenting his first report (S/2017/189) on
the situation in Afghanistan. Allow me to also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto, and the Chair of
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
Ms. Sima Samar, for their respective briefings.
Given the severity of the situation in my country,
I would like to devote my statement today to the
challenging security situation, hidden agendas, the
peace process and the ever-increasing necessity for
regional and global cooperation.
In recent months, dozens of terrorist attacks across
Afghanistan have claimed scores of innocent lives. In
January, three simultaneous terrorist attacks in Kabul,
Kandahar and Helmand provinces killed or maimed
more than 160 people, including six United Arab
Emirates diplomats. In February, the Supreme Court,
our symbol of justice, was attacked, thereby causing
numerous fatalities. Last week, two separate attacks
in the heart of Kabul killed many civilians. Finally,
just two days ago, Afghanistan’s largest hospital was
attacked, leaving more than 140 killed or wounded,
many of whom were doctors, nurses or patients. The
Taliban has claimed responsibility for most of those
attacks, but regardless of whose names are labelled upon
them, our own investigations have clearly established
that they were generally plotted beyond our borders and
on the other side of the Durand Line.
That is the fundamental factor that needs to be
addressed. The Security Council promptly issued a
press statement (SC/12743) condemning those attacks
in the strongest terms, for which we are thankful. The
statement underlined,
“the need to bring perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of these reprehensible acts
of terrorism to justice”.
It also urged
“all States, in accordance with their obligations
under international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, to cooperate actively with the
Afghan authorities in this regard.”
That is indeed what Afghanistan has been asking for
over the course of many years. My Government and my
people would like to know why, after countless terrorist
atrocities and specific Security Council statements
condemning them, we are still witness to impunity for
the perpetrators and orchestrators of endless violence.
Let me be very clear: the conflict in our country is
not homegrown, as some desperately and deceptively
try to portray it. On the contrary, it is the nexus of illicit

S/PV.7896

narcotics, violent extremism and State sponsorship of
terrorism, with their regional dimensions and global
consequences. Tragically, it has morphed into an
undeclared war by a neighbouring State that has for
many years continued to coordinate, facilitate and
orchestrate violence through proxy forces and more than
20 terrorist networks. Those groups benefit from a fullfledged external infrastructure to keep Afghanistan
off-balance, for motives that are inconsistent with our
desire to live in a peaceful and prosperous region.
In earlier statements to the Council, we have
emphasized, time and again, Pakistani actions that
sustain terrorist activities in our country. Today, let
me quote the leading Pakistani officials themselves.
General Pervez Musharraf, who led Pakistan for eight
years as President, proudly commented in a 2015
interview with The Guardian newspaper that
“Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence had given
birth to the Taliban to counter Indian action
against Pakistan”.
Last year, Mr. Sartaj Aziz, the Prime Minister’s
Adviser on Foreign Affairs, went on record to say that
Taliban leaders reside in Pakistan and that they have
influence over them. A couple of weeks ago, Mr. Ashraf
Jehangir Qazi, former Ambassador of Pakistan to the
United States, Russia, China and India and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to Iraq and
Sudan, wrote in The Herald magazine of Pakistan,
“[a]fter the Soviet defeat and withdrawal, we
(wittingly or unwittingly) unleashed a ruinous civil
war and imposed a barbaric and medieval Taliban
upon the hapless Afghan people”.
His words only confirm the truth that “Pakistan talks
one policy, but walks the other”.
In a 2013 article in The New York Times, Mr. Husain
Haqqani, another former Ambassador of Pakistan to the
United States and Sri Lanka, categorized in clear terms
the ongoing links between Pakistan’s State apparatus
and the Taliban and mentioned in the context of peace
talks that
“the Taliban and their Pakistani mentors have
hardly changed their arguments or their tendency
to fudge facts”.
The quotes and admissions that I just read out were
not rhetoric from Kabul or emblematic of a blame game,

17-063817/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

as is often claimed by a known Member State. That was
Pakistan talking.
Against that backdrop, in February, a series of
unfortunate terrorist attacks in Pakistan killed dozens
and wounded many more innocent men, women
and children. As has always been the case, Afghans
always share the pain and anguish of their Pakistani
brothers and sisters. However, the Government of
Pakistan, immediately and without any regard for any
investigative process or clear facts, blamed Afghanistan
for the attacks and resorted to increased breaches of
its territorial integrity, closing main border crossings,
blockading trade and transit and harassing our nationals
travelling to, or living in, their country. Such measures
constitute a clear violation of the principles of the
World Trade Organization and the rights of land-locked
countries, including their access to the sea.
From January until today, we have recorded at
least 59 instances of violations of Afghan territory by
Pakistan’s military forces, including three violations of
our airspace, over 1,375 cross-frontier artillery shellings
which caused dozens of casualties, the displacement
of 450 families in the middle of a cold winter in our
eastern provinces, the burning of our forests, illegal
construction of infrastructure near the frontier region,
and hostile maneuvering of tanks and heavy weaponry.
The travesty of decorum in neighbourly relations
did not cease there, as the familiar pattern of the
obfuscation of facts and diversionary tactics took
over. We were then issued by the Government of
Pakistan a list of 76 so-called suspected terrorists in
Afghanistan which, after close inspection by us and
our international partners, was found to be in desperate
need of verification.

10/03/2017

the blowback effects of using violent proxies as
instruments of foreign policy, which was adopted by
decision-making circles in that country in the 1980s
and is still being pursued to this day. In other words, the
chickens are coming home to roost. We have reminded
our Pakistani counterparts on many occasions that you
reap what you sow. We say once again that it is time for
Pakistan to change that failed policy for its own sake,
desist from using radical terrorists as a foreign policy
accessory, and genuinely join the international fight
against all forms and shades of terrorism.
By making Afghanistan bleed, Pakistan is not
only trying to create a stalemate on the battlefield, but
it is also hindering the political track. Hoping to gain
legitimacy for groups, such as the Taliban, Pakistani
decision-makers continue to use plausible deniability
and shifting blame, as part of their defensive tactics
while manipulating geopolitical fault lines to their
advantage. They forget that legitimacy in my country
flows through the people and constitutional order,
not through acts of terror, intimidation and forced
imposition of extremist thinking and radical behaviour
by misinterpreting and misusing our sacred religion
of Islam. Talks leading to a peace process can only
succeed when policy is revised, the use of sanctuaries
is prohibited, terrorist financing is curbed and violence
is renounced. Peace cannot be achieved by paying lip
service and pretending to be a selective victim.

Our reaction to all these provocations has been
sober and methodical. We have submitted 25 protest
notes to the Government of Pakistan and, in the past
few weeks, have summoned their Ambassador to
Kabul on three occasions. We have submitted to their
Government a list of 86 known terrorists and 32 Taliban
training centres, including Haqqani network centres,
asking for their immediate closure. We have asked for
a third-party verification of the two sides’ efforts. No
response has yet been received. The Secretary-General,
the Security Council and other international partners
are all appraised of these developments.

As we speak, the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces are battling, with great resilience and
determination, a network of regional and global terrorist
groups, who have come to Afghanistan with various
objectives. In 2016, our forces prevented the Taliban
and terrorist affiliates from capturing major population
centres. In January, we adopted a four-year national
security strategy, which focuses on bolstering combat
capabilities, leadership development and improving
unity and coordination of command. The fight against
terrorism will continue with even greater resolve, on
the basis of our security strategy. That said, continued
support from our international partners remains
critical for the sustainability of our forces over the long
haul. In that light, I wish to reiterate here again that
Afghanistan’s strategic partnerships will in no way be
a detriment to any country within our region or beyond.
On the contrary, investments in Afghanistan’s security
are in fact an investment in regional and global security.

While terrorist attacks in Pakistan are strongly
deplored by our Government, we are surely witnessing

For years, the lack of a meaningful and resultsoriented channel of dialogue aimed at addressing the

8/35

17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

root causes of tension between Kabul and Islamabad
has created a huge trust deficit. Reducing this deficit
requires political will and healthy interactions between
our two countries. On our part, if we look at the record,
Afghanistan has always been ready to engage in
constructive and results-oriented dialogue.
We welcome any earnest and transparent initiative
to help us reach that stage of dialogue. In our view, the
Quadrilateral Coordination Group and the recent sixparty Moscow conference on Afghanistan can be useful
in that endeavour, if utilized and coordinated properly.
These initiatives, among others, emphasize a set of
guiding principles, most notably that any peace process
should be Afghan-led and that the region must support
the Afghan Government in its quest for sustainable
peace. Moreover, they also recognize the importance of
having all relevant regional and global actors on board
in a constructive manner.
We know from previous experience that any
prospect of success in peace efforts rests on a number
of important principles.First, any attempt at resolving
current and/or historic issues between Governments
requires strong national political will and an impartial
and agreed upon international arbitrator in good
standing. Secondly, all sides need to define and agree
on the scope of dialogue and negotiations, leading to
a specific set of deliverables and outcomes that can
be supported by regional stakeholders and eventually
guaranteed by the international community. Thirdly,
all sides need to be willing to address the root causes
of conflict, not its byproducts, and resolve areas
of contention by adhering to and making use of
international law, pragmatic precedence and/or other
best practices and judicial norms, and avoiding presumed
realpolitik assumptions. Fourthly, given Afghanistan’s
sensitive geopolitical position, all peacebuilding and
anti-terrorism efforts in the long run need to have all
key stakeholders on board, take the complexities of an
evolving regional and global security architecture into
account, and agree to a status that assures stability,
balance, non-interference, sovereignty and positive
engagement in Afghanistan. Fifthly, keeping principles
of sovereignty and non-interference central to our
objectives requires Afghanistan to become a symbol
of international cooperation, where global and regional
powers set aside their rivalries and short-term interests
by agreeing to cooperate in a spirit of confidence for
long-term mutual benefit.

S/PV.7896

In a few days we will celebrate Nowruz — the
start of our New Year and the first day of spring — a
festive occasion that symbolizes peace, solidarity and
togetherness among our people and the wider region at
large. But as recent attacks have shown, Afghans will
celebrate with a heavy heart. On the other hand, with
their planned so-called spring offensive, the Taliban
and other terrorist groups are adamantly focused on
producing more horror, panic and fear, leaving little
room for joy among our men, women and children.
This time, we hope to collectively counter their
new season of murder and mayhem. Our brave and
courageous national security forces are ready and highly
determined to defend our people with full confidence
and strength. We survived the post-transition 2015; we
countered and defeated every major plan of the terrorist
groups and their foreign backers to capture and control
the main population centres in 2016; and in 2017 we
will, with the Council’s support and by the grace of
God Almighty, humiliate and destroy the enemies
of peace and security in Afghanistan. We are fully
committed to making sure that our New Year will be
one in which we will open the way for durable peace
in our country, our region and around the world. We
join Secretary-General António Guterres in his appeal
to the international community for making 2017 a year
of peace. For us, it starts at home.
The President: I now give the floor to the members
of the Security Council. I would like to remind all
speakers that as per presidential note S/2010/507, the
presidency encourages all speakers to conclude their
remarks within five minutes. The red microphone
light will flash to indicate when the five minutes is up,
meaning that it is time for a delegation to wrap up its
remarks. We have a full morning of speakers inscribed
on the list and a busy afternoon as well, so if necessary
I will use the gavel to respectfully encourage speakers
to stick to the time limit.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Sima Samar, of
the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for their informative briefings today. They have given
us useful insights into the situation in Afghanistan
today and how the international community might
assist the Afghan people. We are working with the
other members of the Council to prepare a new draft
resolution extending the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which
we expect to adopt next week.

17-063819/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

As the Secretary-General’s most recent report
(S/2017/189) makes clear, there is little good news
coming from Afghanistan. Civilian casualties are at a
record high, an alarming trend that has continued since
2013. Some 30,000 people have now died in the course
of the conflict. Nearly 1,000 children were killed
in 2016 alone. That is an appalling waste of life and
potential for Afghanistan’s future. The numbers are
particularly tragic because human resources and human
development must be the foundation of Afghanistan’s
future economic development and self-reliance. This
year will continue to present grave challenges for
security in Afghanistan. The Council has already issued
four press statements condemning terrorist attacks.
While there are many initiatives and ongoing efforts
regarding security in Afghanistan, what we need most
are concrete results that counter the negative trends we
are seeing.
We should continue to insist on seeing progress
made with Afghanistan’s anti-corruption and reform
agenda, while also exploring mid-term and long-term
engagement that can strengthen the country’s basis
for socioeconomic development. Employment is key.
Japan’s approach in that regard is not as visible as the
various regional cooperation projects highlighted in the
related documents on Afghanistan. We believe that the
emphasis should be on strengthening the resilience of
society. That includes supporting core industries such
as agriculture through market rehabilitation and access,
and backing the Government’s comprehensive national
agricultural development priority programme, which
will help to increase employment.
We must address the imminent security threats.
We appreciated the outcome of the NATO Warsaw
Summit last year and its steady implementation. The
Resolute Support Mission’s role is essential. Regional
cooperation also contributes to security, and we ask
UNAMA to coordinate the various efforts for maximum
impact. Improving capacity and human resources in
the security sector is especially important. Afghanistan
requires a combination of short-term efforts and
mid-to-long-term engagement. Japan would like to
once again emphasize the importance of a resultsbased approach that goes beyond mere commitments.
Only actual implementation and outcomes will bring
hope to the Afghan people, through fewer casualties,
higher employment, more training and more land for
better agricultural production.
10/35

10/03/2017

As the lead country in the Council on this dossier,
Japan will strive to create greater opportunities for
better understanding the actual situation on the ground
and how the Council can do a better job of supporting
concrete improvements in security and development.
We hope that will link to reinvigorated discussion in
New York and a better future for Afghanistan.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin
by expressing our appreciation to Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his comprehensive briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/189) on Afghanistan and
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). And I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the report itself, which we
have found very useful, particularly for those, like us,
who make no claim to deep knowledge of the Afghan
situation. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan and the Chair of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission for
their remarks.
Despite the notable progress that has been made
in the three areas that Mr. Yamamoto referred to in
his briefing, Afghanistan continues to face enormous
challenges, as the Secretary-General’s report and the
statement by the representative of Afghanistan, even
more so, make clear. It is self-evident that the country
needs understanding and support. It seems that the
political situation, including at the highest level, also
needs coherence. It is in the light of this situation that we
see the need for sustained support and cooperation on
the part of the international community if Afghanistan
is to overcome those challenges. In that regard, the
efforts of UNAMA to promote peace, reconciliation
and development in Afghanistan, with full respect for
the country’s sovereignty and the Afghan Government’s
leadership and ownership of the process, continue to
be very important, and we support the renewal of its
mandate for another year.
As the Secretary-General’s report clearly states,
the security situation has not been improving. On the
contrary, it was worse in 2016 than in 2015, and that
trend appears to be continuing this year. The report
underlines, quite appropriately in our view, the fact
that it is civilians who are paying the highest price.
The threats posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other armed groups
are a serious security concern not only for the country
but also the wider region. The increasing numbers
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

of terrorist attacks, such as those that occurred
recently in Kabul and other parts of the country, are
a clear indication of how far the security situation has
deteriorated. We would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our firm condemnation of the terrorist attacks
and to express our deepest sympathy and condolences
to the families of the victims as well as the people and
the Government of Afghanistan. The illegal trafficking
of drugs has been further complicating the security
situation in Afghanistan and the wider region.
As Special Representative Yamamoto indicated,
Afghanistan’s long-term security and stability can be
ensured only through a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political process. In that
connection, we note the progress that has been made in
implementing the peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami
Gulbuddin, including the lifting of sanctions against
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. However, we understand that
the peace talks between the Government and the
Taliban have remained stalled. Obviously, listening
to the statement by the representative of Afghanistan,
we can see how that process is indeed daunting. As
the Secretary-General’s report notes, the role of other
countries in the region is also critical to creating the
necessary conditions for advancing the peace efforts.

S/PV.7896

that she is the first woman ever to speak in the Security
Council on Afghanistan.
Italy strongly condemns the heinous terrorist attack
that took place two days ago at a Kabul military hospital,
as well as all other attacks that have been carried out in
that country. We extend our deepest condolences to the
families of all of the victims.
We also reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Government of National Unity to combat terrorism and
violent extremism, which continue to represent serious
threats to the security and stability of Afghanistan.
It is essential to have Afghan security and defence
forces that are capable of addressing those persistent
challenges effectively and autonomously.
In the framework of the NATO-led Resolute
Support Mission, Italy is committed to providing
tangible support to the Government of Afghanistan’s
in its efforts to strengthen the national defence security
force. The members of the force deserve to be recognized
for their bravery. We also note the important progress
achieved thus far in improving the capability of the
security forces, also thanks to NATO and its partners
for their assistance. We hope those achievements can
serve as a solid foundation for further progress.

Lastly, the political and security situation in
Afghanistan will not improve if we do not take a
comprehensive approach to addressing the economic
and development challenges facing the country. It is
imperative that the international community provide
coordinated support to reconstruction and development
efforts through the implementation of the national
framework for peace and development in Afghanistan.
We hope that the commitments made at the Brussels
conference last October will be honoured.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan’s (UNAMA) statistics for 2016 consistently
show high levels of violence in the Afghan conflict.
We are deeply concerned about the further increase in
civilian casualties, as outlined in the Secretary-General
report (S/2017/189), as well as the alarming situation
of internally displaced persons and returnees. Our
imperative must be to work together, to renew our efforts
to break the spiral of violence and to lay the foundation
for lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan.

I would like to conclude by expressing our support
for and solidarity with the Afghan Government
in its herculean task of addressing the country’s
multiple challenges with a view to promoting peace,
reconciliation and development. I also wish to express
our appreciation to UNAMA for its role in support of
those endeavours and its efforts to fulfil its mandate
under difficult circumstances.

In that context, my country wishes to reiterate its
full support for the commitment of the Government
of National Unity to launch an Afghan-led and
-owned peace process. That objective would require
the constructive involvement of all international and
regional stakeholders capable of making a significant
contribution. In that regard, especially in its capacity as
a non-permanent member of the Security Council, Italy
strongly supports all of those initiatives.

Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto for his comprehensive
briefing, and to pay tribute to Ms. Sima Samar for her
work and courage as a powerful voice for human rights
and women’s rights in Afghanistan. I welcome the fact

In order to increase opportunities for dialogue
and political understanding in Afghanistan between
the Government and the insurgent movements, it is
essential that there also be a positive climate and true

17-0638111/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

cooperation among neighbouring countries. It is our
sincere hope that this condition will soon be met on
the basis of enduring common interests, such as the
fight against terrorism and violent extremism, which
is a dangerous destabilizing factor — not only for
Afghanistan but for the region as a whole.
Achieving peace, stability and development in
Afghanistan also requires the consolidation of its
institutions and the transformation of the State through
effective Government action that can meet the needs and
legitimate expectations of its people. The Government
of National Unity is engaged in a fundamental reform
process, most recently as it concerns the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework and the
priority national programmes. We therefore welcome
the determination of the Government of Afghanistan
and the many results already achieved in various sectors.
Together with our partners in the international
community, Italy renewed its tangible support for that
internal reform process at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan last October. Nevertheless, it is crucial that
those reform efforts, for which an internally cohesive
Government is an essential prerequisite, continue
making further progress towards self-reliance. Quick
and decisive action towards further reform is especially
important in order to meet the legitimate aspirations
of the overwhelming majority of the Afghan people.
Should those hopes be dashed, it will inevitably lead to
distrust in the institution of the State.
The fight against corruption must continue to be
a top priority. We therefore appreciate the engagement
and the initial measures adopted by the Government in
that regard, and we urge it to proceed resolutely forward
in that struggle.
Another priority must continue to be the persistent
defence and promotion of the rights of women and their
empowerment at every level of society. We are therefore
concerned about the risk of setbacks in that area, such
as limited access to education for young women and
girls — also due to the deteriorating security situation.
We invite the Government of Afghanistan to make
further efforts in that regard. Furthermore, we hope
that the affirmation of the rights of women can also be
achieved with a view to promoting the peace process
through their active participation in the framework of
future negotiations.
In the light of encouraging developments in recent
months in the area of elections, we urge the Government
12/35

10/03/2017

of Afghanistan to prioritize the completion of the reform
process, so as to allow for the holding of parliamentary
district elections in a democratic, transparent and
inclusive manner.
Afghanistan’s Government can count on the
international community’s full support, which has
provided an exceptional level of assistance to that end.
But Afghan institutions have to be in the driver’s seat, as
the primary responsibility for progress lies with them,
in keeping with the principle of mutual accountability,
which today, more than ever, constitutes a cornerstone
of our partnership.
Lastly, in the difficult and complex circumstances
that Afghanistan is currently facing, UNAMA
continues to play an essential role in coordinating the
international community’s support, with the common
goal of achieving peace and sustainable development
for the Afghan people. Italy therefore associates itself
with the expression of warm appreciation for its work
and supports the upcoming renewal of its mandate.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me join others in thanking
Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing
this morning. We very much welcome the report
(S/2017/189) of the Secretary-General, which underlines
the important work being carried out by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
We believe that UNAMA continues to play a critical
role in the stabilization process and in preventing
renewed conflict in Afghanistan. We are particularly
pleased to see the significant attention given to women
and peace and security in the report. In that light, I
would also like to welcome today’s very rich briefing
by Ms. Sima Samar.
Sweden remains fully committed to supporting
the Afghan people on their path to a democratic,
prosperous and peaceful society. The report before us
today makes clear that there is still some distance to
travel on that journey. It shows that, while progress
has been made in some areas, the economic, political
and security outlook remains bleak. Moving forward
will require the full implementation of the economic
and political reforms pledged by the Government at
the Brussels Conference on Afghanistan. We welcome
UNAMA’s continued efforts to support Afghanistan’s
full assumption of leadership and ownership for its
security, governance and development, consistent with
the transformation decade. As Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto just highlighted,
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the international community cannot afford to lose focus
of the socioeconomic development of Afghanistan. We
must channel our efforts to supporting equitable growth
that can tangibly deliver employment and prosperity for
all Afghans, particularly Afghanistan’s youth.
We encourage the Government to continue to take
the necessary steps towards holding free, inclusive and
transparent elections that are credible in the eyes of the
Afghan people. Women’s full and equal participation
in the electoral process is essential. We urge UNAMA
to continue to pay increased attention to women’s
participation in the electoral and political processes
in its reporting. Women’s full and active participation
in public and political spheres is crucial to ensuring
lasting peace and the elimination of poverty. Women’s
meaningful inclusion in the peace process, including the
ongoing implementation of the peace agreement with
Hizb-i-Islami Gulbuddin is therefore vital. Excluding
half of the population from the peace process is not only
wrong, but shortsighted. Women’s inclusion in peace
processes has been proven to lead to more successful
and sustainable peace agreements.
The humanitarian, human rights and the security
situation in Afghanistan remains alarming. We are
particularly concerned to hear that the number of civilian
casualties is at the highest level since 2009 — many of
them children. Indeed, Afghanistan is one of the most
dangerous places in the world to be a child. Shockingly,
in 2015, one out of every four casualties in Afghanistan
was a child. Children also live in fear of abduction,
hunger and recruitment as child soldiers. We call on all
parties to the conflict to stop all targeted and deliberate
attacks against civilians and to take all the necessary
measures to protect them.
All violations of international humanitarian law
must be condemned. We strongly condemn the recent
attack on the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as well as Wednesday’s attack on a hospital
in Kabul. All parties to the conflict must implement
and respect resolution 2286 (2016), pertaining to the
protection of health care in conflicts. We call on the
Afghan Government to report to the Secretary-General
on measures taken to implement the resolution. Places
where the young and the sick seek support should never
be targeted.
Building peaceful and inclusive societies is not
easy. It takes courage and determination from all
parties. A politically negotiated settlement to the

S/PV.7896

conflict in Afghanistan is the only way to achieve
a sustainable peace and the only way to build an
Afghanistan in which all citizens, regardless of gender,
religion or ethnicity, can fully play their part and reach
their full potential. Reaching such a settlement is more
urgent than ever. We strongly encourage continued
Afghan-owned and -led efforts towards unity and
cooperation, along the lines of the negotiated deal with
Hizb-i Islami. Increased political dialogue with other
insurgent groups, including the Taliban, is now needed.
As pointed out by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, regional tensions continue
to undermine long-term stability and economic
growth in Afghanistan. A peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan would benefit the entire region. We call
on all actors, not least Afghanistan’s neighbours, to act
constructively and responsibly for peace. We encourage
the United Nations system — both on the ground and
at Headquarters — to actively engage in activities and
dialogue promoting regional cooperation and stability.
Finally, Sweden has consistently and significantly
assisted Afghanistan for more than three decades. Our
support for the people of Afghanistan remains firm,
and we will continue to support them in their efforts
towards a peaceful and stable society for all.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to reiterate France’s condolences to
the Afghan people and to the families of the victims
of the attack committed 8 March in Kabul. France
categorically condemns these acts, which seek to
hinder Afghanistan’s recovery and whose perpetrators
must not go unpunished.
Allow me also warmly to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Tadamichi
Yamamoto, and Ms. Sima Samar, for being with us
today and for their briefings. France aligns itself in
advance with the statement to be delivered on behalf of
the European Union.
The National Unity Government is in the third year
of its mandate, and its commitment and its efforts to
ensure a democratic, stable and prosperous Afghanistan
must be welcomed. The Brussels conference in
October 2016 showed once again its determination to
move forward with reforms, but also was a reminder
that the international community was still standing
by Afghanistan. France reiterates its full support to
the Government of Afghanistan and encourages it to

17-0638113/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

continue its efforts to promote the development and
stabilization of the country.
Unfortunately, the continued deterioration of the
security situation is extremely troubling, as reflected
in the sad list of civilian casualties for 2016. Despite
the brave efforts of the Afghan security forces with the
support of international partners, attacks by the Taliban
and Da’esh continue to unremittingly target the civilian
population. On top of this already overwhelming
human cost is another cost, which is the way in which
the situation of insecurity weighs on the economic
development of the country and its progress towards
stability. We must not falter in our efforts to combat
this violence and to protect civilians, especially women
and children, as my Swedish colleague pointed out.
With respect to the security situation, it is all the
more urgent that we relaunch our efforts for a peace
process led by and for Afghans. The resumption of
dialogue with the Taliban remains a crucial prospect.
France therefore calls on all regional actors, in
particular Pakistan, to use their influence to enable
an end to the fighting and a resumption of peace
negotiations. The establishment of a lasting peace in
the country is our collective responsibility as well as
that of all Afghan actors.
I turn now to the issue of drug trafficking, which
has been fuelling the Taliban insurgency. It poses
a threat to the health of the Afghan population and
must continue to mobilize the Afghan Government.
Here too, the Government can rely on the support of
the international community in the implementation
of its national plan of action, including through the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which is
providing valuable technical cooperation. A high level
of ambition must at all costs be maintained on this
subject as well as in combating corruption, since both
are critical to bringing about positive changes in the
field of development and security.
Finally, the spike in 2016 in the number of internally
displaced persons and refugees also poses a major
challenge. As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2017/189), the Afghan Government has committed
to absorbing this flow as best it can. We therefore
commend and encourage the coordination planned with
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to respond to this migratory crisis, in
particular to provide assistance to undocumented
refugees, who are the most vulnerable group.
14/35

10/03/2017

There is a still a long way to go in the transformation
decade, but the course charted by the Afghan
Government is the right one, as reflected in preparations
for electoral reform and parliamentary elections. On
this issue as well as on others, Afghanistan can rely
on the full support of France and the international
community. Renewing UNAMA’s mandate, which is
due in the coming days, will be further proof of this.
In this still-fragile context, the full commitment of the
United Nations in support of the Afghan Government is
of crucial importance.
Let me conclude by commending the work done
on the ground by all United Nations personnel in
Afghanistan, who are dealing with particularly difficult
conditions, and we pay tribute to them all through the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for having
convened this debate on the issue of Afghanistan.
China has listened attentively to the briefing delivered
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and to the statements made
by Ms. Samar of the Afghan Independent Human
Rights Commission and Ambassador Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations.
At present, Afghanistan is in a crucial state
of transition. China commends the National Unity
Government for its unremitting efforts in maintaining
national stability, promoting national reconciliation and
facilitating economic development. At the same time,
the country is still facing grave challenges across the
political, economic and security fields. In order to help
Afghanistan respond to challenges, the international
community must continue to provide firm support in
the following areas.
First, it must vigorously improve the Afghan
security situation. The international community must
invest heavily in supporting the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces capacity-building, and
enhance its self-defence capacity to effectively deal
with the threats of terrorism, transnational crime
and drug smuggling. General Assembly resolutions
have confirmed the security cooperation between and
among regional countries, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and Afghanistan. We hope that all
parties concerned will continue to push it forward.
Secondly, it is important to steadfastly promote the
national reconciliation process. Advancing the national
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

reconciliation process is the only way to ensure longterm peace in Afghanistan. All parties in Afghanistan
must focus on the national interest and the people’s
interests and participate actively in the reconciliation
process. The international community must fully
support the inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
reconciliation process so that all parties can join the
peace talks with fruitful results without further delay.
Thirdly, it is imperative to substantively assist
Afghanistan in enhancing its governance capability.
On issues concerning Afghanistan, it is the people of
Afghanistan who have the final say. The international
community must truly respect the right of the Afghan
people independently to choose their political system
and development path, and at the same time, on the basis
of the national development strategy and specific needs,
assist the Government in enhancing its administrative
capability in a targeted way.
Fourthly, it must more effectively assist Afghanistan
in its integration into regional development. The
international community must make good on its
commitment of assistance and support Afghanistan in
its economic development. With resource endowments
and geographical strength, Afghanistan enjoys broad
prospects in regional economic cooperation.
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
have confirmed the great significance of the One
Belt, One Road project to promote Afghan economic
development and regional cooperation. It is our hope
that all parties can jointly promote the One Belt, One
Road project to enhance regional economic cooperation
and connectivity, so as to assistancest Afghanistan in
its social and economic development.
China commends the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for its work. We
laud UNAMA for its assistance to Afghanistan in
maintaining national stability, promoting economic
development and enhancing governance capability.
We will continue to support the work of UNAMA
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Yamamoto.
China and Afghanistan have been good friends
and close neighbours for generations. China looks
forward to the achievement of peace, security, stability
and development. China will continue to support
Afghanistan in enhancing its security capacitybuilding and in combating terrorism and will support
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization as it plays an

S/PV.7896

active part in that regard. China will continue to support
the Afghan peace and reconciliation process and
participate actively in the Quadrilateral Coordination
Group made up of Afghanistan, Pakistan, China and
the United States of America, and other relevant
mechanisms and processes.
China supports Afghanistan in its integration
into regional cooperation. We will align our One
Belt, One Road initiative with Afghanistan’s National
Development Strategy. Together with the international
community, we will make concerted efforts towards the
swift achievement of peace, stability and development
in Afghanistan.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Ms. Sima
Samar, Chair of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, as well as our colleague, Ambassador
Saikal, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan
for their briefings. I also thank Ambassador Kairat
Umarov, Permanent Representative of Kazakhstan, and
his entire team for the excellent work they have been
conducting at the helm of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) since January 2017.
The security situation in Afghanistan remains of
concern, with deadly terrorist attacks like that carried
out on 10 January in Kandahar, which killed 15 civilians,
including six diplomats of the United Arab Emirates,
and the attack carried out on 8 March — International
Women’s Day — on a military hospital in Kabul,
claiming more than 40 victims. On behalf of my
delegation, I take this opportunity to strongly condemn
indiscriminate terrorist attacks that take the lives of
thousands of innocent people. That tragedy serves to
remind us that despite the progress made, in particular
to promote political dialogue and national cohesion, the
country still faces major political, security, economic
and humanitarian challenges.
At the political level, we welcome efforts towards
a rapprochement between the country’s two leaders,
President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah
Abdullah through constructive dialogue to improve
their working relationship. Similarly, progress made
in implementing the peace agreement between Hizbinternational Islami (Gulbuddin) and the Government,
as well as the launch of the electoral reform process
and the good management and smooth functioning
of upcoming elections, not to mention the Afghan

17-0638115/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

Government’s efforts to combat drug trafficking with
new legislation, should be welcomed. Nonetheless, we
lament the lack of progress in the peace process between
the Government and the Taliban, as it continues to
have an adverse impact on the country’s continually
deteriorating security situation, in particular in
provinces in the south, north and north-east of the
country where fighting persists. In an environment of
frequent terrorist attacks, we are reassured nonetheless
by the presence and efforts of international forces
fighting against terrorist groups, in particular the
Taliban and Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
The human rights and the humanitarian situations
remain of concern due to ongoing insecurity, as
reflected by the increase in the number of civilian
victims, including women and children who continue
to pay a high price. The return of refugees, in particular
from Pakistan, including more than 650,000 additional
internally displaced persons — a record number in
2016 — exacerbates a humanitarian situation that is
already of concern in an economic environment that
remains grim. The work of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations that continue to meet
the needs of the needs of those people is remarkable.

10/03/2017

also supports the extension of the mandate of the Mission
by one year so that it can build on its achievements and
make further progress.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I thank you, Sir, for convening today’s
meeting. I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and I
take this opportunity to voice support for his efforts.
I also thank Ms. Sima Samar, Chair of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission, and His
Excellency Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, for their briefings.
I would like to thank you in particular, Sir, for that
moment of silence because it reminds us that at times
silence is more eloquent than words. In that regard,
we reiterate our full commitment to the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Afghanistan,
as well as to supporting its Government.

Nonetheless, it is clear that Afghanistan requires
additional support and solidarity from the international
community. In that regard, the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission that Ms. Samar so
courageously and ably chairs deserves special support.
With regard to regional cooperation, we welcome
the improvement of relations between the Afghan
Government and the Governments of neighbouring
countries, such as Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Iran, the
Russian Federation, the United Arab Emirates, in the
political, security and economic spheres.

We acknowledge the ongoing resilience and
commitment of the Afghan Government at this
difficult time. We support the Government and people
of Afghanistan in their fight against terrorism. We
recognize that terrorism is a global threat and that
the fight of various peoples — including the people
of Afghanistan — against terrorism is everyone’s
fight. My delegation reiterates its firm support for the
reconciliation and reintegration efforts undertaken by
the Government of Afghanistan out of respect for its
Constitution, non-violence and respect for the human
rights of the Afghan people. We would also like to show
our support for the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, which continues to provide information
on the situation and fulfil its mandate, in spite of the
recurring political, security and economic challenges.

In conclusion, once again, on behalf of the
Senegalese delegation, I would like to offer
congratulations and encouragement to the Afghan
Government on its commendable efforts to combat
corruption and impunity, as well as on its land tenure
legislation and commitment to promoting gender
equality and improving the status of women. I reiterate
Senegal’s support for the Special Representative and
his team at the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan. Once again, Senegal calls upon the
international community to offer ongoing, multifaceted
support, as illustrated at the 2016 Brussels Conference,
and to remain committed to the stability and recovery
of the great country that is Afghanistan. My delegation

According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/189), the Afghan Government continues to
face serious challenges. The report also underscores
the ongoing gravity of the situation. The ongoing
deterioration of the security situation is of concern. The
number of security incidents stood at a record 23,702 in
2016. That figure, which is alarmingly high, translates
to approximately 65 incidents per day or almost three
per hour. Armed clashes between the security forces
and the Taliban accounted for 63 per cent of the security
incidents. We voice our concern about the presence and
potential increase in the number of Da’esh affiliates in
Afghanistan who are a serious threat to the security of
Afghanistan and of countries in the region, including

16/35

17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

those in Central Asia. We also reaffirm our support for
the efforts of the Afghan national security and defence
forces as they seek to combat these threats, as well as
our support to the international partners of Afghanistan.
We are troubled by the continuous terrorist
activity in the region. On 8 March a terrorist attack
perpetrated by local affiliates of Da’esh took place in
Kabul, resulting in more than 120 victims — including
the dead and the injured. Already in 2017 we have had
the 10 January attack in Kabul, which also resulted in
more than 120 dead or injured, and the suicide attack
in Helmand, in which over 13 people were killed. That
is in addition to the 7 February attack on the Supreme
Court in Kabul, which resulted in at least 21 dead and
more than 40 wounded.
We are also concerned about the plight of civilian
victims, in particular children and women. There have
been reports of a 24 per cent increase — in comparison
to 2016 — with regard to violence against children.
Moreover, violence against women is still frequent,
as seen in the attacks against women in their places of
work. The humanitarian situation, as pointed out in the
report, is quite troubling. We call upon the international
media to refrain from either ignoring this or engaging
in double standards when talking about the havoc
wrought by terrorism. The world must be aware and
continually reminded of the sacrifices of the Afghan
people in combating these global threats.
The commitments of the international community
made during various conferences to provide assistance
in terms of security and development to the people and
Government of Afghanistan, including the Brussels
Conference on Afghanistan and the recent Ministerial
Conference of the Heart of Asia — Istanbul Process,
transformed political will into concrete initiatives
intended to promote the stabilization and reform efforts
incorporated in the Afghanistan National Peace and
Development Framework.
We express our support for the efforts of the
Afghan Government to combat drug trafficking, which
continues to serve as a significant source of financing
for terrorist groups. In that regard, the international
community needs to take more decisive action with
respect to tax havens, which serve as a means to
introduce money from drug trafficking into the
international financial system.
We welcome the 21 January launch by the
Government of Afghanistan and the United Nations of

S/PV.7896

the humanitarian response plan for $550 million, with
a view to meeting the critical humanitarian needs of
5.7 million people.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize the
need to promote greater socioeconomic development
as a necessity to the achievement of lasting peace,
stability and prosperity in Afghanistan. In that vein,
we welcome initiatives aimed at promoting close
cooperation between Afghanistan, regional associations
and the international community. Lastly, we remain
convinced that the United Nations, with full respect
for the sovereignty of Afghanistan, will continue to
play a key role, contributing to the realization of the
aspirations of Afghanistan to achieve national unity
and lasting stability.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto
for his comprehensive briefing, which was based on
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security (S/2017/189).
I should like to underline the important role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) last year. In 2016, we bore
witness to many developments, which the Mission
addressed positively. We therefore look forward to
working with other Council members in the next few
days to extend the mandate of UNAMA for a further
12 months.
We also wish to congratulate the Afghan
Government on the major efforts it has undertaken
in the face of grave challenges, in particular the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the troubling
consequences for women and children. In that vein,
we urge the international community, and UNAMA in
particular, to make further efforts to mediate between
the Government and the Taliban in order to end the
cycle of violence and conflict between them.
We also encourage the Afghan Government to
reach internal agreements. In that regard, we appreciate
the latest achievements with regard to the establishment
of a consultative mechanism on high-level Government
posts and power-sharing. We also support the efforts of
the Government to complete the organizational bases
for elections in order to hold parliamentary elections as
soon as possible. As for the efforts of the Government
to combat corruption, we believe that the creation of
the Anti-Corruption Justice Centre is a step on the right

17-0638117/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

path. We encourage further steps to achieve justice and
to draw in further foreign investments.
Egypt strongly condemns the barbaric acts of
terrorism that have been committed in Afghanistan
over the past few months. We express our concern at the
exponential rise in such attacks during the past year.
We condemn in particular the barbaric acts against a
major hospital in Kabul yesterday.
Allow me to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
importance of combatting and uprooting Da’esh in
the context of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
We also stress that the narcotics trade is a threat to
stability and security in Afghanistan and Central Asia
as a whole. Moreover, we express our concern at the
increase in opium production in 2016, in addition to
the exponential increase in the production of synthetic
drugs. We stress the importance of close regional and
international coordination with the Afghan authorities
with a view to combating the narcotics trade, including
by addressing the issue of illegal money transfers.
That cannot be separated from the efforts to combat
terrorism because drugs are one of the main sources of
funding for armed militias and terrorist groups.
Egypt appreciates fully its historic and traditional
ties with Afghanistan. We also appreciate the
repercussions the security situation there has on
stability in both Central Asia and the Middle East,
and we support the efforts of the Afghan Government
to combat terrorism. We support the efforts of the
Afghan authorities to develop programmes aimed
at increasing the prosperity of the Afghan people,
as well as the important cooperation of Al-Azhar in
spreading enlightened Islamic thinking and concepts of
moderation and non-violence in Afghanistan.
In conclusion, Egypt reiterates its full support for
Afghanistan. We also appreciate that country’s need
to improve its capabilities so that it can overcome
these important obstacles and achieve stability, peace,
security and sustainable development.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank Ms. Samar, Mr. Yamamoto
and our colleague Ambassador Saikal for their
respective statements.
I must first of all refer to the brutal terrorist attack
committed on Wednesday in Kabul against a medical
facility and reiterate on this occasion our condolences
to the people and Government of Afghanistan.
18/35

10/03/2017

Uruguay categorically condemns this and all terrorist
attacks. We are troubled by the increasing frequency
of indiscriminate attacks against medical facilities. We
call for full compliance with resolution 2286 (2016) on
the protection of the sick and wounded, and of medical
personnel and facilities. Moreover, we recall that attacks
on hospitals and medical personnel are a violation of
international humanitarian law and may constitute war
crimes. We insist that those crimes not go unpunished
and that the perpetrators be brought to account.
Uruguay supports the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to extend its mandate by a further year. My delegation is
troubled by the deteriorating security conditions in the
country, which have been described by the SecretaryGeneral as the worst since the deployment of UNAMA.
In 2016, we saw the highest number of victims in a
single year since 2009. We are also troubled by the lack
of progress made toward peace between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban, a group that has increased
its activities, as well as its influence over part of the
Afghan territory.
The United Nations and the international community
must maintain their support for Afghanistan, given
the long road that still lies ahead in restoring and
consolidating lasting peace and in rebuilding the
country. The strengthening of democratic institutions
is a priority in order to achieve stability. I therefore
wish to highlight the progress made in the electoral
process, the preparation of next year’s parliamentary
elections and the Government’s efforts in the fight
against corruption.
While the strategy and action plan on the elimination
of violence against women for the period 2016-2020,
adopted by the Government, is a positive step, we are
concerned that a joint commission comprising members
of the lower and upper houses of the National Assembly
approved a revised text of the law on the elimination
of harassment against women and children. The plan
awaits implementation and presidential approval.
The situation of human rights in Afghanistan
has deterioated over the past year. As ever, girls and
children suffer disproportionate violence in conflicts.
During the September 2016 debate on Afghanistan
(see S/PV.7771), my delegation made a reference to
the practice of child marriage and to the need to adopt
new legislation to prevent such practices. We welcome
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the recent news that this practice has finally been
criminalized in Afghan legislation. What will be much
harder is to enforce the law and, most important of
all, to make it a cultural blueprint for condemning the
practice as aberrant.
Uruguay encourages the Government of Afghanistan
to pursue reconciliation, acting with leadership to
overcome short-, medium- and long-term challenges
and making the reforms necessary for the reconstruction
of the country in a climate of peace, security and
economic development.
In conclusion, we reiterate our thanks to all
United Nations personnel and all those involved in
the provision of humanitarian aid in the country, who
continue to work despite extremely difficult conditions
and being subject to frequent attacks.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
for his comprehensive briefing, as well his for the
commitment and contribution of the team of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to peace and security in Afghanistan.
We also thank Ms. Sima Samar, Chair of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission,
for her briefing, firmly calling for the protection
of women’s rights and their wider engagement in
Afghanistan’s development.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for his statement.
As a State of the region, Kazakhstan takes to heart
all the issues regarding the development of Afghanistan
and is genuinely interested in its stable, secure and
prosperous development. Kazakhstan commends the
Afghan leadership for its continued efforts to ensure
more effective coordination and proactive engagement
with the opposition political parties within the country
in order to find common ground on critical issues the
country faces. We encourage the recently established
Independent Election Commission to introduce new
reforms to ensure successful impartial parliamentary
and regional elections.
Our delegation highly appreciates the commitment
of the Government of Afghanistan to the peace process
and calls on all interested sides within and outside the
country to exert every effort to support it. We recognize
that the political process in Afghanistan is Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned. At the same time, Kazakhstan

S/PV.7896

welcomes multilateral engagement at the regional level
and supports the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the role of regional countries remains vital
to any political process.
We are concerned about the deteriorating
situation in Afghanistan, which remains unstable and
fragile because of well-known international terrorist
organizations — not home-grown, as stated by our
Afghan colleague — operating out of that country and
posing serious security threats to Afghanistan itself
and the countries of the region, including Central
Asian States. Kazakhstan underlines that the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization constantly address the situation in
Afghanistan. We commend the work of the NATO-led
mission and the efforts of a number of countries to train
the Afghan National Defense and Security Forces and
reform the security sectors of the army and police.
The increase in poppy cultivation and opium
production in Afghanistan poses another big threat to
security. We need to combat this scourge and support
the coordinated measures taken by Government of
Afghanistan, together with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL. The Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
for Combating Illicit Trafficking in Narcotic Drugs,
Psychotropic Substances and their Precursors, located
in Almaty, plays important role, and we encourage
closer cooperation among the countries of origin,
transit and destination in that regard.
The armed conflict has resulted in a grave
humanitarian situation, with increased numbers
of deaths of civilians. Kazakhstan is particularly
concerned that the destruction of hospitals and schools
has continued. All these violations of international
humanitarian law must be prohibited, prosecuted
and condemned.
We need to support UNAMA’s assistance to the
Government in promoting human rights and taking care
of the influx of refugees into Afghanistan, as well as
in launching the proposed national countering violent
extremism strategy for Afghanistan. Kazakhstan
provides assistance to Afghanistan by sponsoring the
education of 1,000 Afghan students and providing
humanitarian assistance to vulnerable Afghan citizens.
Kazakhstan and Japan have launched a project that
focuses on human rights and the economic independence
of Afghan women.

17-0638119/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

Regional trade and economic and transit-transport
cooperation are critical to the economic revival of
Afghanistan. Countering terrorism will not be effective
unless we properly address the issues of development.
My country therefore proposes the establishment of a
United Nations regional centre in Almaty, which already
hosts 18 United Nations regional and subregional
offices. The centre would promote development,
disaster risk-reduction and resilience-building, and
coordinate cost-effective humanitarian aid from the
United Nations.
We support the development strategy of the One
Belt-One Road initiative, as proposed by China, which
could bring economic growth and prosperity to our part
of the world. Kazakhstan will continue to contribute
to bilateral, regional and multilateral action for the
recovery, stability, peace and progress of Afghanistan.
Finally, the work of UNAMA is acknowledged
as indispensable to these objectives. Its presence,
its achievements and successes are necessary in
Afghanistan. We support the extension of its mandate
for another year.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Yamamoto for his briefing and for the work of the
team of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) in supporting the restoration of
peace, reconciliation and development in Afghanistan.
I also thank Ambassador Saikal and Ms. Samar for
being with us here today.
The United States joins in the strong condemnation
of the deadly attack on an Afghan National Army
hospital in Kabul on 8 March. Deliberately targeting a
medical facility that provides care for the brave Afghans
working to protect their fellow citizens has no possible
justification. We extend our deepest and most heartfelt
condolences to the families, friends and colleagues of
the victims of that senseless and cowardly act.
Since we last met to discuss Afghanistan in
December (see S/PV.7844), we have been encouraged by
progress towards the goal that we all share of ensuring
a secure, inclusive and democratic Afghanistan for all
Afghan people. President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah continue to work together to strengthen the
National Unity Government, establish mechanisms for
determining Government appointments, and combat
corruption. Election reform is making steady progress,
20/35

10/03/2017

as demonstrated by the transparent and consultative
process to select and install commissioners, as well
as President Ghani’s appointment of Mohammad
Warimach as Chief Electoral Officer on 1 March.
We commend the Afghan Government for its
continued commitment to an inclusive, Afghan-led
peace process, in spite of the continuing attacks. The
progress made in implementing the peace agreement
with Hizb-i Islami gives us hope for similar progress
towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict with the
Taliban. The United States calls upon the Taliban to
enter into negotiations with the Afghan Government.
We also call on Afghanistan’s neighbours and the
international community to increase pressure on the
Taliban to come to the table for talks with the Afghan
Government. A political settlement between the Taliban
and the Afghan Government remains the best way to
end violence and to bring stability to the region.
However, despite those positive developments,
Afghanistan continues to face challenges that would
test even the strongest Government. Regrettably,
those challenges are not new; we have discussed them
repeatedly in the Council. But they are within the power
of Afghanistan, its neighbours and the international
community to address. The Taliban, including the
Haqqani Network, affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham and other armed groups are increasing
their attacks, resulting in the death and injury of
thousands of Afghans and delaying the progress that
Afghanistan so badly needs. The internal displacement
of citizens fleeing insecurity presents a humanitarian
challenge that is exacerbated by the return of more
than 850,000 refugees and undocumented migrants
from neighbouring countries. And while development
assistance remains robust, a precipitous decrease
in domestic and foreign investment has stalled the
private-sector-led growth that Afghanistan requires
to employ its youth, reduce poverty and provide hope
to communities.
In that challenging environment, UNAMA is an
essential partner for the people and the Government
of Afghanistan and for the international community.
The United States therefore strongly supports the
renewal of UNAMA’s mandate for an additional year.
UNAMA plays a critical role in supporting peace and
reconciliation, empowering women’s voices, defending
the human rights of all Afghan citizens and coordinating
humanitarian assistance. I also want to highlight that
UNAMA’s 12 provincial offices are in many places
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

the only permanent international presence outside of
Kabul. Those offices are critical in engaging Afghan
citizens outside of the capital as well. In conclusion, we
look forward to working with all members on finding
ways to maximize UNAMA’s very important efforts.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Tadamichi Yamamoto for his briefing, as well as
to express our full support for the important role
played by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and all United Nations agencies
in supporting Afghanistan and coordinating the
international community’s assistance to that country.
Our special thanks go to Ms. Sima Samar, the first
woman to brief the Security Council on Afghanistan.
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be made later today on behalf of the European Union, I
would like to raise several points in my national capacity.
Ukraine remains committed to supporting the
Afghan-owned and Afghan-led national reconciliation
process aimed at bringing lasting peace to Afghanistan.
We commend the efforts of the Government of
Afghanistan and its international partners in creating
an environment conducive to overcoming the stalemate
in the peace negotiations and reaching a sustainable
resolution of the decades-long conflict in the country.
Yet there can be no tangible progress towards
stabilization without the readiness of other regional
players to set aside differences and to exert influence
on Taliban leaders by denying them shelter and forcing
that terrorist group to renounce aggression against
Afghanistan. As reported by UNAMA, the situation
remains tense. The Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and their affiliates continue to
maintain their presence in certain parts of Afghanistan.
Their armed assaults and recurring suicide attacks
continue to claim a high death toll and to have an
adverse impact on the country’s political, economic and
security situation.
We are concerned about the acts of violence and
attacks against diplomatic missions and their personnel,
as well as humanitarian and medical facilities, which
impede international efforts to aid the people of
Afghanistan. We are also alarmed by the continued
flagrant violations of human rights, maltreatment of the
civilian population, summary executions, deliberate
abuses and continuing discrimination against women
and girls, as well as the use of child soldiers on the

S/PV.7896

territories under Taliban and other terrorist groups’
control. In that regard, putting the current Taliban
leadership under increased pressure takes on additional
importance. We believe that can be an effective
tool in persuading them to earnestly participate in
peace negotiations.
A successful example of such practice is the peace
deal signed with Hizb-i Islami, which greatly contributed
to the restoration of normal life in the territories under
the control of that group. We call on the Government
of Afghanistan to continue the implementation of the
agreement in order to build upon achieved results.
We also commend the Afghan Government for
implementing its commitments to fight corruption,
which hinders the country’s development, while also
promoting good governance, the rule of law and human
rights, continuing electoral reform and strengthening
coordination between security forces and lawenforcement agencies to ensure that they can effectively
tackle existing security threats.
Cooperation with relevant international financial
and trade organizations, as well as regional forums
such as the Heart of Asia and the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, should
continue so as to further the implementation of the
Government’s economic reform agenda.
The implementation of the national action plan on
women and peace and security is also of paramount
importance for the sake of creating a stable future for
the country by eradicating gender-based violence and
elevating women as full and equal partners. We also
believe that women’s voices have to be included in
peace and security decision-making, particularly given
the sustained violence against Afghan women leaders
and human rights defenders. We ask UNAMA to
support the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
in promoting the standards I mentioned while fulfilling
the respective national action plan.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for his detailed
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. We actively
support his work and that of his highly professional
team in Afghanistan and of the Secretariat. We are
prepared to extend the mandate of his operation, with
just a few slight changes.

17-0638121/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

We listened with interest to the statement made by
Ms. Samar, as we did to the one by Mr. Saikal. I want
to say at the very outset that, for Russia, Afghanistan
has always been, and remains, a friendly country, one
which today is undergoing difficult times.
We once again reiterate our condolences to the
people and the Government of Afghanistan for the
victims of the deadly terrorist attacks. We earlier stated
our solidarity with our diplomat colleagues from the
United Arab Emirates, who were also killed as a result
of dastardly terrorist attacks.
We are worried at seeing how things are developing
in Afghanistan. We are concerned by the deterioration of
the security situation and the surge in terrorist activity
over the past few months. The negative trends we are
seeing are hampering regional and international efforts
to resolve problems in Afghanistan and bring about
sustainable development. Civilians are increasingly
suffering from the violence. In 2016, the number of
peaceful Afghan civilian victims and of people dying
as a result of military action or terrorist attacks reached
an alarming level of 11,500 victims. We need urgent
measures in order to stop those dangerous trends.
We must be honest in recognizing that many issues
facing the international military presence have gone
unresolved in the past 15 years. We say that not to
point the finger at any one, allocate blame or distract
attention. We mention it so that everyone realizes that
the goal of a resolution in Afghanistan requires the
consolidation of regional and international efforts. Only
by working together can we address the entire host of
built-up complex problems, of which unfortunately
there are many.
We are particularly concerned about the growth
of the Islamic State and its aspirations to absorb other
elements of the armed opposition. The strengthening of
that group has been demonstrated by the attack on the
hospital in Kabul on 8 March, resulting in numerous
victims. We believe that approximately 3,500 members
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham are operating
within the country. Given all the sympathizers and
sleeping cells, a much higher number may be more
realistic. The main theatres of operation are centred
in the provinces of Nangarhar, Kunar, Helmand,
Kandahar, Faryab, Baghlan and Kunduz. We therefore
call on everyone to devote increased attention to that
problem and not attempt to ignore it.
22/35

10/03/2017

A serious threat to the stability of Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries, our friends in Central
Asia, is generated from the drug problem. We are
concerned that, once again, in 2016 there was a surge
in poppy cultivation. The increase in drug revenue will
inevitably further fuel terrorist activities. We therefore
believe that it is necessary to step up international
efforts towards combating Afghan drug trafficking.
We deem that efforts to assist Afghanistan in that
regard need to proceed through using tried and tested
regional structures such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization. We see much potential in strengthening
counter-terrorist and counter-narcotics cooperation
between Afghanistan and those entities.
We support the Afghan Government’s policy aimed
at achieving national reconciliation. We are ready
to provide assistance to advancing the negotiation
process, including flexibly approaching the issue of the
possibility of easing the sanctions regime of the relevant
sanctions committees with regard to Afghanistan,
provided that it does run contrary to the national
interests of the country. The main priority of national
reconciliation is to bring on board the Taliban in the
framework of peace talks. That matter remains to be
resolved. We need the harmonization of approaches and
the synchronization of all the stakeholders including
for collectively combating terrorism.
We take note of the positive potential of
Kazakhstan’s initiatives. A fundamental response
to the challenges that we face involves establishing
genuine good-neighbourly relations in the region. The
Taliban movement must join the national reconciliation
process with Kabul playing the lead, based on the three
well-known and approved United Nations principles:
recognizing the Constitution of Afghanistan,
disarmament and cutting off ties with Al-Qaida, the
Islamic State and other terrorist organizations.
Ensuring stability in Afghanistan must lie with
the national security forces. Russia has provided
Afghanistan free of charge a large provision of
weapons and ammunition. We are training Afghan
personnel in relevant Russian education institutions.
Russia is playing an active role in combating terrorism
in Afghanistan. We intend to help Kabul establish
its army and police. In order to reinvigorate the
settlement process in Afghanistan, Moscow decided to
intensify efforts towards developing a single regional
approach aimed at promoting the process of national
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

reconciliation. To address that issue, on 27 December
2016 we convened a meeting with China and Pakistan
in Moscow and continued with the same format on
15 February with Afghanistan, Iran and India. During
the next phase of that process, we believe that it would
be important and timelyto involve our Central Asian
partners as well as the United States.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his briefing and for all of his and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan’s (UNAMA) work
in Afghanistan. He has the United Kingdom’s continued
and full support. I also want to pay particular tribute to
Ms. Samar, who is not only the first briefer from civil
society of our presidency, but also the first-ever civil
society briefer from Afghanistan to speak before the
Security Council. It has taken 37 years of Afghanistan
being on our agenda for this day to become a reality,
and I look to future presidencies to make sure that it
does not take another 37 years for it to happen again.
As so much has already been said about the
situation in Afghanistan, I am going to focus on just
two core issues: the need to reduce the violence, and
the ongoing priority of human rights. The recent
abhorrent attacks underscore the pressing, immediate
need for us all to work together to end the violence.
The people of Afghanistan have suffered for too long.
The human cost has simply been too high, and now,
more than ever, a coordinated response is needed from
the Afghan Government and society, the region and
the international community. As we know all too well,
the violence will only increase in the coming weeks as
the winter weather retreats across most of the country.
We must focus on achieving meaningful steps from all
sides. That means tackling the terrorist sanctuaries,
their funding and logistical support.
I want to pay tribute to the continued sacrifice
of the Afghan security forces as they perform that
dangerous and unrelenting task. They have the United
Kingdom’s full support. As the coalition’s lead on
the Afghan National Army Officer Academy, we are
proud to help train the next generation of Afghanistan’s
military leaders.
Secondly, we must not lose focus on the pressing
need to sustain progress on human rights in Afghanistan,
as Ms. Samar so eloquently made clear. The human
rights situation today is unrecognizable from that of

S/PV.7896

2001. Women now hold 28 per cent of parliamentary
seats, which was something unthinkable under Taliban
rule. For comparison’s sake, in the United Kingdom
that statistic is 29 per cent. Seven million children are
now attending school, of whom more than 3 million
are girls. Legislation protecting the rights of the
marginalized is in now in place, and Afghanistan’s new
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre held its first trial late
last year in a fair and transparent manner. Those are
significant steps. However, as we look to the future
of Afghanistan, we should recognize that being better
than 2001 is not the benchmark to which to aspire.
We need to help Afghanistan build on the steps
taken so far so that all Afghans can enjoy an even safer
and more prosperous future in which human rights
are a given and not in question. The United Kingdom
is doing its part to ensure progress on a broad range
of human rights challenges. We are helping increase
women’s social, economic and political participation
and supporting the Government of Afghanistan to
reform its electoral system in order to improve the
transparency and credibility of elections. We are
helping fund institutions that empower Afghans to
develop human rights monitoring capabilities, and we
are providing training in international humanitarian
law to combat abuses. We are doing so because the
United Kingdom remains committed to helping the
National Unity Government realize its constitutional
and international human rights obligations. We will
continue to support the Government of Afghanistan,
local and international non-governmental organizations,
civil society organizations and international partners to
help make that a reality.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I thank the representatives of members of the
Security Council for respecting the time limit, and
I respectfully remind future speakers of the need
to conclude their remarks within five minutes. If
necessary, after the light begins to flash, I will use the
gavel to stake the time.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): To begin, let me also
thank Special Representative Yamamoto for his
comprehensive briefing, and the representatives of
Afghanistan who are present here at the table.

17-0638123/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

10/03/2017

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

group of victims in its capacity as Chair of the local
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

In his report (S/2017/189), the Secretary-General
highlights some encouraging political developments.
Germany welcomes the peace agreement with
Hezb-i-Islami and the first steps taken in its
implementation. Successful implementation will be
crucial in convincing other militant groups that lasting
peace is possible in Afghanistan. The precondition, of
course, is that they be willing to pursue their objectives
through political means, cut ties to international
terrorism and respect the universal human rights
enshrined in the Afghan Constitution. I would like
to commend the National Unity Government for
keeping its doors open to peace negotiations with the
Taliban. A comprehensive peace and reconciliation
process remains the only way to long-term stability in
Afghanistan and the region.

As reported, 1.5 million Afghan individuals were
displaced internally or returned to Afghanistan from
neighbouring countries in 2016. The Government of
Afghanistan will require substantial help from the
international community to deal with that situation.
Germany remains committed to supporting the
Afghan Government’s efforts towards a sustainable
reintegration of the returning refugees and internally
displaced persons.

Furthermore, like you, Mr. President, we are
encouraged by the progress made in electoral reform,
and particularly the nomination of a Chief Electoral
Officer on 1 March. Afghanistan now has the necessary
institutions in place to hold parliamentary and district
council elections. Next, a clear and realistic timetable
needs to be established for the remaining electoral
reforms and for credible, fair, equal and free elections.
The fragile security situation remains the main
challenge in Afghanistan. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report, the number of armed clashes rose by
5 per cent, the number of civilian casualties continued
to rise and the number of child casualties increased
by 24 per cent. This is far too much. While the vast
majority of those casualties are caused by non-State
actors, the Government can do more to protect, in
particularly children.
As the Secretary-General also reports, the
targeting of health services and health-care workers
also continued. Just two days ago, we witnessed the
horrible attack on a military hospital in Kabul. On
this occasion, we offer our heartfelt condolences to
the Afghan people. Sadly, this tragedy has served to
underline once more the findings of a report entitled
Every Clinic is Now on the Frontline, presented by the
non-governmental organization Watchlist at an event
that Germany co-hosted on 6 March in New York.
Children suffer in particular from a lack of access to
medical treatment. Germany will continue to raise
awareness about the suffering of this most vulnerable
24/35

We are currently finalizing financial assistance
agreements with the International Committee of the
Red Cross, the World Food Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Organization for Migration, and
we encourage all Member States to join us in this
endeavour. At the same time, we call upon all parties
to ensure that the return of refugees is conducted in a
dignified manner and takes into account the absorption
capacity of Afghanistan.
Let me conclude by reiterating Germany’s full
support for the continued important role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and United Nations agencies working in
Afghanistan. As co-Chair of the International Contact
Group for Afghanistan, Germany especially commends
UNAMA’s efforts to strengthen cohesion among
international and regional stakeholders for promoting
peace in Afghanistan. It is very important, therefore,
to renew the UNAMA mandate without further delay.
We welcome the strategic review of the Mission, which
the Security Council intends to request. The review
should be conducted in the spirit of optimizing ongoing
activities and strengthening the Mission even further.
Germany remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan in close cooperation with the Afghan
Government and our international partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2017/189), and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto
and Ms. Samar for their briefings this morning.
We reject the baseless allegations made against
us by Afghanistan’s representative this morning. His
Government would do better to deal with its vast
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

challenges than to externalize internal problems. The
Government of Afghanistan [NOTE: speaker said
“Pakistan” but appears to have meant “Afghanistan” has
consumed hundreds of billions of dollars of international
assistance, and what it has to show for it is reflected
in the Secretary-General’s report. The report observes
that there has been no significant improvement in the
political, security or economic situation in Afghanistan;
attacks by insurgent groups have intensified; economic
opportunity remains absent; the reconciliation process
has stalled; and the confluence of these factors has
magnified the suffering of the people of Afghanistan
and threatens regional peace and security. It is indeed
threatening the peace and security of my own country.
Shifting the blame to my country will not help
the Afghan Government shroud its own failures. It is
Afghanistan that has failed to end its wars and internal
strife and, as a result, has undermined the security of
the entire region. This forum should not be misused for
gratuitous sermons; it should be utilized for problemsolving and finding solutions. Peace in Afghanistan
is in Pakistan’s own vital interest. It is one of my
Government’s top priorities, but we wonder if this
aspiration is shared by some of our regional partners.
Pakistan has paid a staggering human and financial
cost for the conflict in Afghanistan, yet the resilience
of our proud people and the remarkable success of
our military and law-enforcement measures have
successfully broken the back of terrorist outfits. It
was only possible due to indiscriminate targeting of
all terrorist groups. But instead of cooperation and
appreciation and applying a similar squeeze on its side
of the border, we have heard complaints that our strong
action was pushing terrorists into Afghanistan. The
fact is that terrorists found safe haven in Aghanistan
because of conducive conditions and weak border
management. But instead of blaming Afghanistan,
Pakistan invited Afghanistan time and again to talk
about border management. We proposed a number of
border standard operating procedures two years ago.
They are still awaiting finalization.
Afghanistan’s only response thus far has been
sheer indifference and in some cases facilitation of
the continued use of Afghan territory for launching
attacks in Pakistan, killing and maming hundreds of
innocent civilians, including women and children.
Yet we prefered restraint over escalation, cooperation
over confrontation and dialogue over conflict. And we
have been exercising maximum restraint in the face

S/PV.7896

of provocations by terrorists from across the Pakistan
border. We were forced to close our border temporarily to
secure our territory from the terrorists who reorganized
in Afghanistan and launched terrorism against us.
Yet, on purely humanitarian grounds, we reopened
the border temporarily, risking our own security to
alleviate the sufferings of the Afghan people.
There are multiple factors, both military and
non-military, that have contributed to the existing
stalemate in Afghanistan. Singling out Pakistan and
pinning the blame on it for everything that goes wrong
in Afghanistan is neither fair nor accurate. Pakistan
has consistently called for a negotiated settlement
in Afghanistan, but such a settlement remains the
responsibility of the parties to the conflict. There has
been strong international consensus supporting this
solution. We engaged sincerely in the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, which as a mechanism can still
be utilized, but we should remembered who sabotaged
this process not once but twice. Therefore, if one wants
to blame someone for not being sincere, it is definitely
not us.
Pakistan remains fully committed to voluntary
repatriation of Afghan refugees. Today, as countries
close their borders to refugees, the international
community, and in particular Afghanistan itself,
should be able to fathom the depths of our generosity in
hosting more than 3 million Afghan refugees for almost
40 years.
Last week in Islamabad, Pakistan hosted the
thirteenth Summit of the Economic Cooperation
Organization in a reiteration of our commitment to
a peaceful neighbourhood. In Islamabad we jointly
recommitted to transforming the region into a zone of
peace and collective prosperity, and to facing regional
challenges, including terrorism and drug-trafficking,
together. One Belt, One Road is an example of other
such initiatives that can have positive effects on
promoting development and prosperity, and therefore
peace, in the region. Pakistan remains committed to
those ideals, and we hope that our partners will share
in them with the same zeal. We can make the region
a centre of peace, progress and prosperity, but we can
only do it together.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Begeç (Turkey): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2016/189),

17-0638125/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

10/03/2017

Special Representative Yamamoto for his briefing and
Ambassador Saikal and Ms. Samar for their statements.

and through our training of Afghan women police
officers in Turkey.

At the outset, I would like to express in the strongest
possible terms our condemnation of the heinous attack
that targeted a hospital in Kabul earlier this week,
which claimed many innocent lives and maimed many
others. We offer our condolences to the brotherly
Government and the people of Afghanistan and wish
the wounded a speedy recovery. We would also like to
reiterate our heartfelt condolences to the Ambassador
of the United Arab Emirates to Kabul on the deaths
of five of his compatriots and fellow diplomats, who
lost their lives as a consequence of the terrorist attack
perpetrated in Kandahar in January. I would once again
like to emphasize that Turkey will continue its support
to the Government of Afghanistan in its fight against
terrorism and its efforts to bring peace and stability to
the country.

Because the National Unity Government symbolizes
Afghan unity, we consider its functions important. The
international community should continue to support it
and encourage its components to work in harmony with
one another.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report,
which highlights the achievements and provides
guidelines for the future efforts and responsibilities
of both Afghanistan and the international community.
We commend the role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
standing with the Afghan people and coordinating
international stakeholders’ efforts there, and we will
continue to support those activities and efforts. In
that understanding, we look forward to the Security
Council’s upcoming adoption of a draft resolution
renewing UNAMA’s mandate.
The achievements of the past 15 years in
Afghanistan must be sustained and enhanced. The
international community’s continued support during
the transformation decade is therefore extremely
important. We were pleased to see the international
community reiterate its support to Afghanistan at the
Warsaw Summit and the Brussels Conference, and that
it is keeping up with its commitments to Afghanistan.
Turkey has maintained its previous level of development
contributions and has pledged another $150 million for
the years from 2018 to 2020. We are also providing
$60 million to help sustain the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces for the same period, in line with
the NATO Warsaw Summit decisions. We will continue
to support the Afghan Government’s security and
development efforts both bilaterally and on multilateral
platforms. In that context, we will continue the support
we give through the NATO Resolute Support Mission
26/35

As the report of the Secretary-General reflects,
the deteriorating security situation in Afghanistan is
a source of serious concern. We applaud the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces for their
determined fight against terrorism. The presence of
Da’esh on Afghan soil, as mentioned in the report, is
another source of grave concern and another reason
why we must continue to support Afghanistan. Lasting
peace in the country can be achieved only through
a successful conclusion to the national peace and
reconciliation process. We hope that the agreement
between the Government and Hizb-i-Islami will serve
as a model for others. We will maintain our support to
the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace efforts.
Last but not least, we believe that enhancing
the dialogue among the countries of the region is
particularly important. In that regard, Turkey will
continue its contributions to Afghanistan within the
multilateral platforms, including through the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Gregoire-Van-Haaren (Netherlands): I thank
you for this opportunity to speak in this debate on behalf
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Mr. President.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union,
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2017/189). I would also
like to thank Special Representative Yamamoto and
Ms. Sima Samar for their briefings.
Today I will focus on three issues — reconciliation
and regional cooperation, the security and humanitarian
situation, and the role of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
Reconciliation is key to achieving a truly stable
Afghanistan and, to that end, the countries of the region
have a critical and positive role to play in support of
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan. A regional approach is crucial to achieving
structural security and stability, and requires all
partners to be genuinely engaged and working together.
However, the peace process should be Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned. Moreover, the meaningful participation
of women in any peace process remains essential to
achieving durable and inclusive peace. President Ghani
has stated that peace talks are a clear objective for the
Afghan Government. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
welcomes the peace deal that has been reached between
the Government and Hizb-i-Islami and considers it to
be an important step in the reconciliation process. We
hope for its smooth implementation so that the deal
can function as an encouragement to other insurgency
groups, such as the Taliban, to abandon violence and
engage seriously in peace talks.
In the past few months, unfortunately, the armed
clashes between Afghan security forces and the Taliban
have continued. Only two days ago, an attack in Kabul
for which local affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant claimed responsibility left more than 120
people killed or injured, and I would like to express
my condolences to Ambassador Saikal in that regard.
While we commend the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces (ANDSF) for their continued efforts to
counter the Taliban and other insurgents, international
support remains necessary. The international
community, including the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
has supported the ANDSF for more than a decade now,
and we continue to do so through our contribution to
the Resolute Support Mission.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is particularly
concerned about children’s disproportionate suffering
in the deteriorating security situation, as well as about
the steep rise in the numbers of internally displaced
persons (IDPs). Afghanistan’s limited capacity to
absorb the vast increase in IDPs and returnees has the
potential to lead to growing numbers with no prospects
of steady jobs or incomes and at risk of joining
insurgency groups. In response to last year’s United
Nations flash appeal, the Netherlands contributed
€4.5 million to provide humanitarian assistance to the
most vulnerable groups in Afghanistan.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands commends
UNAMA for its role in supporting the Afghan
Government in fulfilling its commitments in the area
of reform, and we therefore support the continuation of
its mandate. We would particularly like to emphasize
our appreciation for its coordinating efforts among

S/PV.7896

international partners, as well as the thorough UNAMA
human rights reports. As Ms. Samar just underlined,
while much progress has been made in recent years,
human rights, including women’s rights, continue to
be a matter for significant concern in Afghanistan, and
we applaud United Nations efforts to work with the
Afghan Government and civil society in enhancing the
position of women there. We would like to emphasize
our appreciation for the broad United Nations presence
throughout the country and to stress how important
we believe it is to ensure that UNAMA continues to
operate throughout Afghanistan rather than retreating
to Kabul alone. A presence in the field is crucial to the
Mission’s success.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a longterm partner of Afghanistan and has contributed
significant aid to it in the areas of peace, justice and
development. At the Brussels Conference on 5 October,
our Minister for Foreign Trade and Development
Cooperation pledged €230 million to continue our
support for Afghanistan’s reconstruction. In that spirit
of partnership, the Kingdom of the Netherlands remains
committed to supporting Afghanistan throughout the
transformation decade, a decade of increasing Afghan
ownership and leadership.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s debate on
the situation in Afghanistan. We also appreciate the
insightful and frank briefings by Special Representative
Yamamoto and Ms. Sima Samar, which have added to
our understanding of the current circumstances.
The unimpeded and increasingly brutal terrorist
attacks, the territorial gains by terrorist groups with
support from outside Afghanistan and the emerging
grave humanitarian crises are all portents of dreadful
times. The recent terrorist attack on Afghanistan’s
largest hospital in Kabul poignantly depicts the very
complexity of the problems faced by Afghans as a
people, in the most graphic manner. Afghanistan, a
wounded nation reeling with multiple injuries — in
dire need of healing and at its most vulnerable — was
attacked in the most gruesome manner by disguised
attackers who target caregivers.
In the past few months, terrorism in Afghanistan
has grown enormously in intensity, brutality and scope.
Terrorist groups have been successful in their efforts

17-0638127/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

to capture and hold territory. The Taliban has tried
to expand its influence to territories in the north and
northeast, and to the southwest where it has traditionally
not been so strong. The nexus between terrorist
networks and criminal groups has further strengthened.
We salute the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces, who are countering the forces of
terrorism and extremism with courage and resilience.
India remains committed to standing with Afghanistan
and supporting and strengthening its capabilities to
fight terrorism and violence. Even as the international
community pours in resources and efforts to support
that wounded nation, steadfast efforts to ensure that the
support can be absorbed and utilized by Afghanistan
are crucial. In that regard, it is our first and foremost
duty to ensure that the resurgent forces of terrorism
and extremism do not find sanctuaries or safe havens
of any shape or form. Experience shows that situations
in which foreign assistance is available to insurgents
tend to fester and take a greater toll. We also must not
differentiate between good and bad terrorists or play
one group against the other. The Taliban, the Haqqani
network, Al-Qaida, Da’esh, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba,
Jaish-e-Mohammed and others of their ilk are all
terror organizations — many of them proscribed by
the United Nations. They should be treated as such and
their activities must be universally opposed.
It is obvious that the political process that the
United Nations started and the sanctions regimes that
the Council had split have not quite worked. The fact
that the Council has not taken action against the Taliban
leaders, as it had vowed in resolution 1988 (2011), is
now well documented. It took the subsidiary body of
the Council four months to confirm the death of the
Taliban’s former leader. Seven months later, we still
await the decision of the Council’s same subsidiary body
regarding the freezing of that slain terrorist’s accounts.
Even as the democratically elected Government of
Afghanistan battles against terror, it is being saddled
with mounting problems that are not of its making.
We are seeing a paradoxical phenomenon of the
return of almost a million Afghans to their homeland,
many involuntarily, in the most difficult security and
economic situation the country has witnessed. As if all
this were not enough, the landlocked country’s access
to the high seas is becoming an issue of contention.
The collective humanitarian impact of all this
is staggering, as outlined in the Secretary General’s
28/35

10/03/2017

report (S/2017/189) and by the briefers today. Has the
trend of reversing of the gains of the international
community and Afghan people in the last decades
perhaps now started? Can all of us, who have invested
so much in support of the Afghan people, remain
watching on the sidelines? Can we simply look on as
territories are captured by terrorists, people are killed
or forced, under threat, to go back to a situation that
is the same or worse than the one they fled? Here and
now, it is imperative that we take decisive action. We
must not forget the implications the world faced in 2001
for its lack of action. History never forgives those who
forget it.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
would like to express my appreciation to the United
Kingdom for having organized this debate and to the
Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement, as well
as to Mr. Yamamoto and Ms. Samar.
I express our deepest sympathies and condolences
to the people and Government of Afghanistan over the
two most recent terrorist attacks on 1 and 8 March,
carried out by the Taliban and Da’esh, respectively.
According to the latest Secretary-General report
(S/2017/189), the overall security situation continued
to worsen throughout 2016 and into 2017 with 23,700
security incidents — an increase of nearly 5 per
cent compared to 2015 and the highest number ever
recorded by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). At the same time, we note that
the number of such incidents in 2015 — an increase
of 22 percent over 2014 — was the highest level since
the United Nations started recording security incidents.
This has been a very disturbing trend since 2001.
Today, the Afghan National Unity Government
is at the forefront of the fight against terrorism. The
sustained support of the international community
is needed more than ever to support the Government
in its fight against terrorism and extremism, as well
as to address its security, political, economic and
development challenges.
In my previous statements, I warned about the
emergence of Da’esh and its affiliates in Afghanistan.
The terrorist attack on 23 July and the most recent
organized terrorist attack on the Kabul hospital last
Wednesday, 8 March, are clear indications concerning
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.7896

that emerging security threat for Afghanistan and
the region.

are crucial in order to make the repatriation of Afghan
refugees more successful.

Our support for the Afghan National Unity
Government is unrelenting; we stand ready to work
constructively with the Afghan authorities. We welcome
any Government progress towards peace and hope that
an Afghan-owned and -led peace process brings about
lasting and comprehensive peace in the country and the
region. Iran is indeed very eager to see a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan as its neighbour, since security
in Afghanistan directly and indirectly affects security
at our borders and in the region.

In conclusion, we support UNAMA as well as United
Nations agencies in their efforts to provide development
and reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a genuine commitment by the United Nations to a
sustained partnership with Afghanistan, as set forth in
the final report of the Tripartite Review Commission
on the United Nations in Afghanistan.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and a major pathway to
consolidating peace and economic development
and stability in the region. The trilateral Chabahar
agreement between Iran, India and Afghanistan on
the development of the Chabahar port, which gives
Afghanistan access to world markets through the
open seas, and the Khaf-Herat railway are two major
transit projects under way. Those projects have the
capacity to change the regional economic prospects of
Afghanistan. We invite all interested regional actors to
consider participating in them.
For the past 37 years, Iran hosted no less than
3 million Afghan nationals at any given point. They have
access to most of the subsidized services available to
Iranian nationals, including basic commodities, public
transportation, public health and public education.
We continue to provide them with social services and
educate nearly 400,000 undocumented Afghan students
with minimum burden-sharing assistance from the
international community.
Repatriation of Afghans from Iran remains steady
but continues to represent the lowest recorded returnee
rate since the establishment of the voluntary return
programme in 2002. We welcome all efforts aimed at
helping to overcome the main reintegration challenges
faced by returnees and to formulate a comprehensive
voluntary repatriation and reintegration strategy.
Success in voluntary repatriation depends first and
foremost on providing for the basic needs of repatriated
refugees in Afghanistan, which underscores the need for
greater international support. A stronger, coordinated
approach between the Government, donors and the
United Nations, and an overall strategy for addressing
the combined needs of displaced persons and returnees

Let me conclude by reaffirming the resolve of the
people and the Government of the Islamic Republic of
Iran to continue their support for the fraternal people
and Government of Afghanistan as they move through
this difficult period of their history towards a stable,
safe and prosperous Afghanistan, and on the eve of
their New Year, I wish them a happy Nowruz.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. João
Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves with
this statement.
Due to time constraints, I shall read out a slightly
shorter version of my statement. The full version, as
agreed, has been distributed in the Chamber.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2017/189). I thank also
the Special Representative and Ms. Samar for their
briefings today.
First, I wish to convey the condolences of the
European Union to the Afghan authorities and the
Afghan people in connection with the tragic attack
on a military hospital that took place a few days ago
in Kabul.
I should like to start by reiterating our full support
for the important role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
all the United Nations agencies in supporting the

17-0638129/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghan people and in coordinating the international
community’s assistance.
The Warsaw conference held in July and the
Brussels conference on Afghanistan of October 2016
made clear the strong international commitment
to Afghanistan. At the Brussels conference, the
international community sent a clear signal in support
of a process towards peace, security and stability.
All international security, political, economic,
development and regional efforts should now be
aligned to further such a political process. Terrorism
and violent extremism are fundamental threats to all
State actors, just as terrorism and the use of violence
undermine regional peace and stability.
The EU remains fully committed to supporting
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process
that includes all Afghan citizens and their legitimate
interests and preserves Afghanistan’s unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity as well as equal rights for all
Afghans under the Constitution of Afghanistan.
After the signing of the Hizb-i Islami peace
agreement, for which the parties deserve credit, it
will now be important to implement it and open the
way for future peace agreements. In this regard, we
welcome the Security Council’s decision to de-list
Hizb-i Islami’s leader, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, as an
important step towards the full implementation of the
peace agreement. The EU is ready to support further
the implementation of this agreement.
We welcome the undeterred willingness of the
Afghan Government to engage in a political process
with the Taliban and other Afghan groups opposing
the Kabul Government to reach a lasting political
settlement. We welcome all initiatives to create an
environment conducive to such a process and call on all
parties to engage so as to devise constructive solutions.
We welcome the further work that has been done by
the Afghan Government since the Brussels conference
to advance the implementation of its commitments
and the progress made in anti-corruption, election
preparation, revenue collection and budget execution as
an example that must now followed by further, tangible
results in the implementation of the reform agenda. The
EU will remain attentive to the next steps.
I would like to highlight the importance of and
the need for continued focus on ways and means of
empowering Afghan women to build a stable and
30/35

10/03/2017

prosperous Afghanistan, as well as reinforcing the
political and human rights of Afghan women and the
realization of the full enjoyment of those rights in
everyday life.
The EU welcomes the priority that the Afghan
Government places on fighting corruption, which
remains a major obstacle to development and stability,
and stresses the need to further strengthen efforts
to tackle corruption. The EU further welcomes the
important results already achieved and looks forward
to further follow-up.
We also support the reform of the security sector,
with a focus on making advances in civilian policing
in Afghanistan, building on the achievements of the
European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan. The
establishment of the new EU Special Representative
police advisory team will contribute to the
implementation of the new Afghanistan security-sector
reform plan.
At the Brussels Conference, the international
community welcomed the Afghan National Peace
and Development Framework and its ambitious
development vision.
The EU and its member States welcome the adoption
of the new election law and the appointment of the new
commissioners to the electoral management bodies.
These must now work in a professional and transparent
manner to rebuild public confidence in the electoral
processes. While technical aspects of the elections
play an important role, the political will of Afghan
stakeholders and a strong and cohesive leadership are
necessary to deliver credible elections. The EU supports
an early engagement with the electoral-management
bodies and UNAMA’s coordinating role. Any assistance
must be forward-looking, leading to the implementation
of meaningful electoral reforms as well as to the
sustainable development of electoral institutions and
improved electoral processes.
On 18 February, the signing between the EU and
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan of their first
contractual relationship, the Cooperation Agreement
on Partnership and Development, sent a strong political
signal of the EU’s enduring support for the country
through the transformation decade and beyond. The
Agreement will also provide the basis for developing
a mutually beneficial relationship in an increasing
range of areas such as the rule of law, health, rural
development, education, science and technology, as well
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

as actions to combat corruption, money laundering, the
financing of terrorism, organized crime and narcotics.
It also foresees cooperation on migration.
On behalf of the European Union and its member
States, I would like to reiterate that joint State-building
and development efforts in Afghanistan need to
build on reinforced regional cooperation. Regional
cooperation remains key to lasting peace and stability
in Afghanistan and the region. Threats of terrorism
affecting all countries of the region can be confronted
only with increased security cooperation. In the same
vein, it is indispensable for sustainable development.
In this regard, the EU strongly supports regional
forums such as the Heart of Asia or the Regional
Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan to
continue to be used to facilitate cooperation among all
regional actors.
To conclude, the EU and Afghanistan continue with
the implementation of the EU-Afghanistan joint way
forward agreement on migration issues and the bilateral
member States’ memorandums of understanding. In
this process, the European Union puts strong emphasis
on ensuring sustainable reintegration and providing
substantial support to the Afghan Government to
facilitate return and reintegration.
The EU has also continued its efforts to
promote a regional approach and intends to focus on
sustainable reintegration, local development, social
cohesion in host communities and durable solutions
to protracted displacement. UNAMA has played an
important role in coordinating the international efforts
to that end. We would encourage UNAMA to continue
that work and the dialogue with the Afghan Government
on the inclusion of internally displaced persons and
returnees. The EU aims to develop a comprehensive
EU response to bridge the humanitarian-development
nexus and promote durable solutions to the challenges
posed by the protracted nature of that crisis.
UNAMA’s report on civilian casualties in
Afghanistan documents a record number of civilian
casualties in 2016, the majority of which were due to
insurgent attacks. We call on all parties to do their
utmost to protect the civilian population, especially
Afghan women and children. We also need to continue
to protect the vital role of humanitarian agencies and
respect their impartiality and humanitarian space in
addressing the most urgent needs of the most vulnerable.

S/PV.7896

It is important that the international community
remains strongly committed to supporting Afghanistan
towards long-term progress and stability. The EU
continues to consider UNAMA to be a key partner in
achieving peace and stability in Afghanistan. UNAMA
has an invaluable role in ensuring the broadest possible
international support for an Afghan-led and Afghanowned process. For that reason, we support the renewal
of UNAMA’s mandate, as proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in his most recent report.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Australia.
Ms. Wilson (Australia): Like others before me,
I would like to express Australia’s condemnation
and condolences following the heinous and cowardly
terrorist attack that took place in Kabul on 8 March. We
extend our condolences to the families of the victims
and the Government of Afghanistan.
Australia thanks the Secretary-General for his most
recent report (S/2017/189). Despite declines in a number
of indicators in the report, Australia believes that 2017
could be a year of substantive progress in Afghanistan
if the successes of Warsaw and Brussels are able to be
capitalized on. The performance indicators have been
agreed and Afghanistan has the sophisticated plans and
funding in place to achieve them.
Challenges remain, including ongoing concerns
about corruption, and access to Government services
fuelled by insecurity and political instability. To that
end, we welcome the Afghan Government’s commitment
to countering corruption and to reaching out to opinion
leaders within and beyond the Government. We
encourage the Afghan Government to recall its social
contract with the Afghan people and continue progress
towards the holding of elections in the coming year.
A stable Afghanistan remains central to stability
in the region. Violent extremism has never respected
national boundaries and we encourage all countries
in the region to continue building on the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process by engaging in dialogue and
cooperation to advance peace and stability. Australia
remains committed to helping the Afghan security
services rise to the challenge presented by the
insurgency, and at Warsaw we extended our deployment
of approximately 270 personnel to the NATO Resolute
Support Mission. We remain in the top five donors
contributing to the sustainment of Afghan forces.

17-0638131/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

We were deeply distressed to see civilian casualties
rose by 3 per cent last year, to the highest level recorded
since 2009. Australia calls on all parties of the conflict
to enact measures that protect the vulnerable, especially
women and children. Long-term stability will require a
successful Afghan-owned and -led peace process. We
are encouraged by progress made towards implementing
the agreement with Hezb-i-Islami in 2016. We urge
the Afghan Government to continue engaging with
empowered negotiators, including women, to bring an
end to the insurgency.
Insecurity is fuelling a humanitarian crisis, with
a record level of conflict-induced displacements and
unprecedented numbers of people returning from
Pakistan and Iran in 2016. Australia’s humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan — of almost $19 million
last year — helped provide support that included
critical shelter, food and health care to over 6.9 million
Afghan people.
Australia remains committed to working with
Afghanistan to address its development challenges.
We have provided community-based education classes
to more than 19,000 children since 2001. More than
70 per cent of the children were girls. Such classes are
just a small part of our development programme in
Afghanistan, and at the Brussels Conference Australia
pledged to maintain current levels of aid funding
through to 2020.
In conclusion, Australia sees a real opportunity
for progress in Afghanistan this year. We call on the
Afghan Government to build on the successes of 2016.
We urge continued international cooperation to improve
country and regional stability. We congratulate the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan for
its important contribution. On his retirement, we would
like to acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator,
Mr. Mark Bowden, who has made a great contribution
to Afghanistan.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks the Secretary-General for his quarterly report
(S/2017/189) on the situation in Afghanistan. I also
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his clear and
enlightening briefing.
32/35

10/03/2017

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.
First and foremost, on behalf of my country, I would
like to strongly condemn the reprehensible attack on
the military hospital in Kabul. Targeting a hospital
is a particularly vile, cowardly and barbaric act. Our
condolences and sympathy go to the families of the
victims and to the people of Afghanistan. Belgium,
along with the international community, will continue
to support Afghanistan in the fight against such acts
of terror.
Regrettably, the report of the Secretary-General
also reminds us that civilians continue to pay a very
high price in the conflict. The increase in the number
of children killed or injured is particularly unbearable.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for an end to
attacks on civilians and to ensure that impunity does
not triumph and that schools, hospitals, teachers and
health workers are no longer targeted.
Paradoxically, despite those serious security
problems, peace in Afghanistan is not a pipe dream.
First, the current military impasse demonstrates that
a military solution to the conflict simply does not
exist. Secondly, the Afghan population, as a whole,
exhausted by so many years of war, longs for stability
and development. Finally, the restoration of peace will
benefit both Afghans and their neighbours. I would like
to mention four points that seem key to giving peace
every chance to be restored.
First, it is important for the National Unity
Government to continue to make every effort to gain the
trust of the Afghan people through the implementation
of policies aimed at ensuring the security of the
population, eradicating corruption and impunity,
promoting human rights — in particular those of
women — and addressing shortcomings in the area of​​
justice and good governance.
Secondly, it is important that the process of
reconciliation and reconciliation encompass all
components of Afghan society, including those that are
currently opposed to the National Unity Government.
Failing that, peace will remain elusive. In other words,
we must ensure that the process is taken in hand and
run by Afghans themselves. Women also have a crucial
role to play in achieving lasting peace. They must be
fully involved in the peace and reconciliation process.
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

Thirdly, the role of regional partners in the success
of the peace and reconciliation process must be
emphasized. In that regard, Belgium calls on all regional
actors to use their influence to promote the resumption
of peace talks and an end to the fighting, while leaving
Afghans to take charge of their own destiny and
complete the process of peace and reconciliation on
their own.
Finally, economic development is another
priority, as it will make the country less dependent on
international aid, on the one hand, and illegal trade, on
the other. The ongoing conflict profoundly affects the
opportunities for growth; resources allotted to war are
not used for development purposes.
However, deep economic reforms are also needed
to create an environment conducive to the return of
investment and the reappropriation of their future by
the Afghans. The commitments made by the Afghan
authorities at the Brussels conference with respect to
their reform programme show that they are determined
to do so. We encourage them to move forward in order
to create the conditions to give the younger generations
of Afghans, who are increasingly educated and harbour
legitimate aspirations, the prospect of a better future in
their own country.
Allow me to conclude by welcoming the action
of United Nations personnel in Afghanistan. They
do outstanding work under particularly difficult
conditions. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) illustrates the international
community’s resolve to partner with the Afghans.
With the renewal of the UNAMA mandate in the near
future, the United Nations will once again reiterate its
commitment to Afghanistan and its people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Mr. González de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin my statement by firmly
condemning and offering the heartfelt condolences of
Spain for the terrible attack that took place two days
ago against the Sardar Daud Khan hospital in Kabul.
We reiterate our full solidarity with Afghanistan in its
fight against terrorism.
I also recall the universal obligation to respect the
principles and norms of international humanitarian law
and the protection of civilians in situations of conflict,
in particular the mandate of resolution 2286 (2016)

S/PV.7896

on the obligation to safeguard, always and without
exception in situations of armed conflict, the integrity
of health personnel and humanitarian personnel
dedicated exclusively to medical missions, as well as
their means of transport and equipment, hospitals and
other health facilities.
I thank the Special Representative Yamamoto and
Ms. Sima Samar for their briefings, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his statement.
I fully endorse the statement delivered by the Head
of the Delegation of the European Union.
We particularly welcome the presence here today
of Ms. Samar, in her capacity as Chairperson of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
We admire her personal journey as a committed and
active advocate for the rights of women and girls in
Afghanistan, and we highly value her very important
role and the work of the institution she chairs so
ably. The promotion and protection of human rights
are inseparable from the maintenance of peace and
the achievement of social progress in every society.
Afghanistan is no exception.
Support for Afghanistan and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been
one of Spain’s priorities during our recently conclude
two years as a non-permanent member of the Council.
We are convinced that the Council must maintain its
traditional spirit of commitment and consensus on
this issue. Such consensual support for UNAMA and
the authorities and people of Afghanistan is essential
to help the Afghans, who are the true owners of their
future, to overcome the conflict and advance along the
path of progress and reconciliation. Spain encourages
them to continue along this line.
It is only necessary and fair to acknowledge the
remarkable progress made by Afghanistan, such as
in its anti-corruption actions and policies for the
promotion and protection of women’s rights, whose
implementation and dissemination still require strong
and sustained efforts. We must nonetheless recognize,
as does the Secretary-General’s report (S/2017/189),
that security situation remains grave and has even
suffered setbacks last year and early in this. Spain and
the international community as a whole support the
Government and the Afghan people in their efforts in
the face of these grave challenges.

17-0638133/35

S/PV.7896

The situation in Afghanistan

10/03/2017

The unity of all political actors around these
efforts is essential to the success of those efforts.In
that regard, the electoral process whose foundations are
currently being laid will be decisive. We therefore call
on all political and social actors to demonstrate their
commitment to democracy and progress and to rise to
the vision that all Afghans expect and deserve.

National Unity Government and its reform agenda
are fundamental to peace, stability and progress in
Afghanistan. Canada commends the progress that has
been made on electoral reform and anti-corruption
efforts, and supports continued reform. Canada is also
pleased that parliamentary and district council elections
are scheduled to be held in 2018.

But together with the consolidation of a democratic
system of governance, Afghanistan needs peace and
reconciliation in an increasingly more urgent way.
All members of the international community have
important contributions to make in that regard, but
the input of the countries of the region is irreplaceable
and essential. That is why we appeal to all countries
neighbours and friends of Afghanistan to redouble their
commitment to the stability of the country and to work
for reconciliation with renewed energy and decision.

(spoke in English)

The statistics concerning the terrible effects of
conflict civilians, as contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, must make us all lead to reflect,
encourage us to maintain our solidarity, renew our
determination to support Afghanistan’s efforts and,
above all and apart from other considerations, resolve
us to spare no effort in favour of peace, reconciliation,
stability and progress for Afghanistan and the Afghans.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council. Canada would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary General,
Mr. Yamamoto, for his insightful briefing.
I would also like to welcome Ms. Sima Samar, Chair
of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission.
Canada is a long-standing believer in the work of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission and
supports its programmes.
I take this opportunity to extend our sincerest
condolences to the people of Afghanistan, and
especially to the families and friends of the victims of
the horrible attack on a Kabul hospital. This is another
unfortunate reminder of the difficult security situation
in the country.
Canada fully supports an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process
and acknowledges the efforts made to date by the
Government of Afghanistan. The continuity of the
34/35

Secondly, Canada is deeply concerned over the
continuing deterioration of security in Afghanistan,
with higher civilian and aid worker causalities
reported in early 2017 than for the same time frame in
2016. We are dismayed by the toll on civilians. Their
displacement, increased vulnerability and losses are
unacceptable. In particular, we are concerned about
the impact of instability and insecurity on women and
children. We echo the statement issued by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan that all
parties to the conflict need to take urgent steps to
halt the killing and maiming of civilians. We look to
Afghanistan’s neighbours to continue to work with
the Government of Afghanistan to better coordinate
and manage the return of Afghan refugees in order
to support increased regional stability and decreased
violence within the country.
Thirdly, Canada would like to commend the
Afghanistan Government for launching in December
its strategy and action plan for the elimination of
violence against women for the period 2016-2020. Last
year, President Ghani inaugurated a dedicated fund
to sponsor emergency services for women survivors
of life-threatening acts of violence, and Canada
encourages the Afghan Government to make this fund
and the implementation of the law on ending violence
against women a priority.
Canada’s
programming
supports
women’s
inclusion and empowerment through Afghanistan’s
development, as well as a wide variety of efforts to
address violence against women. Examples include
our assistance in implementing the law on the
elimination of violence against women; delivering
services for survivors of gender-based violence; and
providing education, awareness-raising and capacitybuilding on women’s rights and gender-based violence.
Canada’s programming is also supporting women to
take on decision-making roles in their households
and communities, and to build livelihood skills and
capacities for economically marginalized women.
17-06381

10/03/2017

The situation in Afghanistan

If peace, security and development are to take root
in Afghanistan, women must join men at the centre of
decision-making at all levels of Afghan politics, society
and the economy. Canada stands with the Afghan people,
especially Afghan women and girls, as they strive for a
more secure, prosperous and peaceful future.

S/PV.7896

The President: I thank our briefers and all
participants for their contributions to an interesting
debate. I look forward to returning to the issue of
Afghanistan with a vote on the renewal of the mandate
of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
next week.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

17-0638135/35
