UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

UN ~.-~~~~~~~~
JAN ‘L 2; 1993

U~~~~~~$lL~C T\ON

2532””

MEETING:

3 MAY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2532). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Adoption of the agenda.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cypnis to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16514) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

SIPV .2S32

. .
,: I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2532nd MEETING
Held in New YoLk on Thursday, 3 May 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

pose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarif(Afghanistan) took the place reservedfor him at the side of the
Council chamber.

agenda (S/Agenda/2532)

3. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
The Security Council will now resume its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The first speaker on my list is
the representative of Antigua and Barbuda. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

of the agenda

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the .Security Council (S/16514)
The meeting

4. Mr. JACOBS (Antigua and Barbuda): Mr. President, may I offer you my congratulations
on your
assumption of your important position and say that I am
confident that your skill, charm and experience will no
doubt assist you in guiding the deliberations of this
body successfully.

was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

5. I have asked to speak in this debate on Cyprus
because my Government
considers it of paramount
importance that the world community fully understand
that small countries, such as Antigua and Barbuda,
view the circumstances of Cyprus with grave concern.

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 30 April 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16514)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Iacovou (Cyprus), Mr. Dountas (Greece) and Mr. Kirca (Turkey)
took places at the Council table; Mr. Jacobs (Antigua
and Barbuda) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

6. The invasion of Cyprus in 1974 by Turkey and the
occupation of 37 per cent of its territory was in itself an
act of utter disregard for the principles of international
law and the traditions of international
practice. But
Turkey added international insult to global injury when
it ignored General Assembly and Security Council resolutions calling upon it to withdraw from Cypriot territory. Over the years Turkey has challenged the effectiveness of this Organization by treating its resolutions
with contempt while tightening its stranglehold on Cyprus by exporting its own Turkish citizens to Cyprus,
by illegally distributing
houses and lands owned by
expelled Greek Cypriots and by imposing its own currency as legal tender in that part of Cyprus which it
continues to occupy.

2. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan in which he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I pro-

7. In an attempt to encourage a solution to the Cyprus
problem, many countries turned a blind eye to these
excesses by Turkey in the hope that intercommunal
talks between the Greek and Turkish Cypriots would
produce a viable framework for the stable and peaceful
development of all the Cypriot people in the context of

1. The PRESIDENT
[interpretation
from Russian]:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 2531st
meeting I invite the representatives of Cyprus, Greece
and Turkey to take places at the Council table; I invite
the representatives of Antigua and Barbuda and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.

1

secure national independence. Alas, this was not to be,
and a principal contributor to the failure of these intercommunal talks was the continued presence of Turkish
forces on Cypriot soil, for, as I had occasion to remark
in the General Assembly last year, “No people can
reach a lasting solution to their internal problems if
external forces exert undue influence on one side or the
other.”

request that he redouble his efforts, for there have been
some encouraging signs. The public statement of the
Cypriot Government and the concessions that it is prepared to make offer at least an opportunity on which to
build. But the Council must not be content merely once
again to throw the Secretary-General to the wolves. He
must enter the arena clothed in some armour against
those who would make light of grave international
injustice. In this context the Council must now call for
effective sanctions against the bogus Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus, and equally, it should urge sanctions against those States which would seek to give
comfort and relief to the illegal Government.

8. On 15 November last year, even as the nations of
the world were looking forward to a winter of progress
in renewed intercommunal
talks following last spring’s
serious attempt by the United Nations to establish a
framework to settle the Cyprus problem, the Turkish
Cypriot leadership shocked us all by declaring occupied
Cyprus an independent State. I can think of no words
that more graphically describe this act than those used
by the Cypriot President when he addressed the General Assembly one week after this disturbing development. He said:

12. It may appear that the problems of Cyprus should
hold little concern for a Caribbean island separated
from it by so many oceans. But that perception would
be wrong, for injustice is real, however far away it may
be perpetrated, and illegality remains illegal, whatever
the distance of its occurrence. In these circumstances
the people of Cyprus share a common bond with the
people of the world, and every man has a sacred duty to
safeguard that bond. But my country is also a small
island State, like Cyprus. We too are vulnerable to the
adventures of larger and more powerful States. Therefore, in calling for justice to be done in Cyprus we are
doing no more than calling for justice for all small and
vulnerable States, such as our own.

“The bogus entity set up by Turkey in the occupied
area has . . . legally no territory except the territory
controlled by the Turkish occupation troops. It is
therefore the offspring of aggression and the result of
a continuing criminality”.’
9. The Security Council recognized that the attempt
to create a “Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus”
was invalid and contributed to a worsening of the situation in Cyprus. On 18 November, just three days after
the unilateral declaration of independence, the Council
adopted resolution 541(1983), which deplored the declaration of the Turkish Cypriot authorities of the purported secession of part of the Republic of Cyprus.
Within a week the Commonwealth
Heads of Govemment Meeting at New Delhi denounced the declaration
as legally invalid and reiterated the call for its nonrecognition and immediate withdrawal. The European
Economic Community,
at the level of the Council of
Ministers, last month repeated its condemnation of the
unilateral declaration of independence and went on to
express its regret that Turkey had decided to accord
recognition to this illegal entity.

13. We are reminded of the words of Martin Luther
King, Jr., who said in another context, but with equal
compulsion: “A threat to justice anywhere is a threat
to justice everywhere.*’ We look to the United Nations
for such justice. We look in particular to the Security
Council. In this context we urge that it act for the
legitimate State of Cyprus and, by so doing, act for the
world.
14. The PRESIDENT
[interpretationfrom
Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey.
15. Mr.
KIRCA
(Turkey)
[interpretation
from
French]: At the beginning of my statement permit me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. Personally I hold you
in great respect. You are one of the most capable and
pleasant personalities it has been my honour and pleasure to encounter in the course of my career. Furthermore, I wish to reiterate publicly at this time that my
Government attaches primary importance to its policy
of good-neighbourliness
in relations between our two
countries. I should also like to congratulate the representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,
Mr. Vladimir Alekseyevich Kravets, who so skilfully
guided the Council’s work last month.

10. World opinion on this matter has seldom spoken
with a more unified voice. The people of the world are
tired of strong-arm tactics by the big over the small.
They are fed up with continuous violations of international principles and practices. They are disturbed at
the spectre of global chaos which such behaviour portends. It is crystal clear that the leadership of the Turkish Cypriots is being told that the world will not accept
the unilateral declaration of independence. It is crystal
clear that the Government of Turkey is being told not to
encourage and protect such a flagrant violation of international law.

16. Before I come to the substantive part of my statement I should like to declare, on the express instructions of my Government, that Turkey has serious reservations with regard to the Secretary-General’s
report
of 1 May 1984 [S/I65Z9] as a whole, as well as on certain
passages therein. However, out of deference to him and

11. The Secretary-General
has laboured hard and
long on this matter, and he deserves the admiration of
us all for his tireless toil in a vineyard which has offered
few fruits. It is right that the Security Council should
2

to his mission of good offices, my Government prefers
to discuss the matter with him through the normal diplomatic channels.

the question of Cyprus can be resolved only in the
context of respect for the equality of the two great
Turkish and Greek peoples, which must everywhere
coexist peacefully in friendship, actively co-operate at
all levels and together nurture this incredible wealth of
common characteristics and values, finally burying all
enmity, rivalry and squabbles inherited from the past.

17. The Security Council is meeting once again to
discuss the question of the independence of the Turkish
State of Cyprus at the request of the Greek Cypriot
administration.
/

22. Ever since the coup d’e’tat of 1963 the Turkish
Cypriot community has continued its struggle in order
to regain its status as an equal partner in the Cypriot
State, thanks to the unwavering support of Turkey.

18. On 17 and 18 November last year [24981h and
2500th meetings] I had the opportunity to express the
views of my Government on the question. At that time
my Government informed the Council of its decision to
reject resolution 541 (1983) in its entirety and of its
desire to continue recognizing the Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus. The reasons behind this are very
simple and I shall, with the Council’s permission, set
them forth briefly.

23. As long as the attributes of that status are not
restored and recognized as envisaged in the Treaty of
Guarantee, the proclamation
of independence of the
Turkish Cypriot community
is perfectly justified on
moral and juridical grounds based on the right to selfdetermination
it has already exercised on an equal footing with the Greek community of the island, on the
principle of self-defence and, lastly, on the principle
according to which anyone whose rights are trampled
upon may under international law resort to retaliation,
Indeed, that act was not one of secession, since it was
aimed only at reaffirming the equal status of the two
communities and since it can be revoked once the two
communities reach agreement, within a reasonable period of time, to restore and restructure the State organs
of the Republic within the framework of a bicommunal
and bi-zonal federation, as was stipulated in the highlevel agreements of 12 February 1977 [see S/22323,
para. 51 and 19 May 1979 [see S/13369, para. 521,
agreements which were referred to in the SecretaryGeneral’s opening statement of 9 August 1980 [S/14100,
annex]. Furthermore, at the political level that decision
had become inescapable.

19. Following a series of unilateral actions, towards
the end of 1963 the Greek Cypriot community overthrew the legislative, executive and judicial organs of
the Republic of Cyprus as they had been established in
the unalterable Basic Articles of the 16 August 1960
Constitution, thus violating the Treaty of Guarantee2 of
the same date, for the purpose of robbing the Turkish
community of the island of its status of co-founder of,
and equal partner in, the Republic and relegating it to
the position of a persecuted, exploited and dominated
minority.
20. That coup d’e’tut totally upset the political equilibrium that had been established between the Turkish
community and the Greek community on the island.
Never in the history of Cyprus has the Greek community obtained de jure or defacto the position of ruling
majority vis-ci-vis the Turkish community. There has
never been either a majority or a minority in Cyprus.
The historical truth is that two national and quite separate communities
have continued to coexist on the
island. Each one of these two communities is nothing
but the extension of a nation whose spiritual identity
and collective soul were forged throughout centuries of
history. The very unusual context of relations between
Turks and Hellenes has required and continues to require the establishment of a political equilibrium based
on the idea of equality between the two nations-Turkish and Greek. When Turkish and Greek statesmen
deserving of the name prepared and signed the 11 February 1959 Zurich Agreement3 and, with the co-operation of the United Kingdom,
the 19 February 1959
London Agreement,3 they laid the foundations for that
intercommunal
equilibrium,
just as the more general
equilibrium between Turkey and Greece and the Turks
and the Hellenes in that part of the world at the time had
been established by the 24 July 1923 Lausanne Peace
Treaty.’ The Constitution and the Nicosia agreements
of 16 August 1960 in fact only set down in detail the
principles that had already been worked out between
Turkey and Greece.

24. Intercommunal
negotiations
were resumed in
September 1980. The Turkish Cypriot community then
submitted a comprehensive plan. Later, it accepted the
Secretary-General’s
“evaluation’*
paper of 18 November 1981 as being one of the major elements constituting
the basis on which the talks should proceed.
25. During these negotiations, which could have continued regularly and in a serious manner geared to
eventual success on this mutually agreed-upon basis
-that
is, the high-level
agreements, the opening
statement of the Secretary-General
and the “evaluation” paper-the
Greek Cypriot administration
took
advantage of every possible opportunity
to interrupt
and delay them, since the purpose of the Greek Cypriot
administration
and its constant accomplice, Greece,
was to do away with the Secretary-General’s
opening
statement and “evaluation”
paper. On this point,
I refer members of the Council to my letter of 9 May
1983, contained in document A/37/809, which faithfully
reproduces the exact chronology of the negotiations.
26. To achieve that goal, the Greek Cypriot administration brought the matter to the General Assembly, in
violation
of its commitment
under the high-level

21. Hence it is only in that historical context that one
can have a true picture of the question of Cyprus. And
3

agreements not to attempt to internationalize the problem. On 13 May 1983the General Assembly adopted
resolution 37/253, which the Turkish Cypriot community and Turkey immediately rejected in toto. That
recommendation-a masterpiece of bias, distortion of
historical truth, and disregard for the elementary rules
of international law, in particular of the principle of the
inviolability of treaties-exasperated the Turkish community.

this excessive agitation? These are not even symbols
specific to independence. After all, this meeting is
taking place in a country where statesof the federation,
counties, municipalities and even administrative units
have their own flags, and where it is usual for each of
the states of the federation to have its own constitution. Indeed, the organization of elections is the duty of
a democratic State which respects human rights. Why
is there such emotion when the new State exchanges
ambassadors with mine; this is a routine affair between
States which recognize each other as such.

27. At that point it became convinced that as long as it
waited and refrained from restoring itself to a position
of equal footing with the Greek Cypriot community
there could be no chance of convincing the Greek Cypriot community to negotiate seriously with a view to
achieving a comprehensive, just and lasting solution.
That is why it decided to declare its independence.
Mr. Rauf Denktaz, President of the Turkish Republic
of Northern Cyprus, has reiterated this once again:
unless there is a final agreement on a federal solution,
that decision is irrevocable. Also irrevocable is Turkey’s decision to recognize the new State. Anyone who
knows a bit about the Turkish people will know that its
determination cannot be broken and that that people
refuses to yield even an inch on problems concerning
national honour, whatever the designs -of those who’
would exert pressure; they will no doubt come to understand, as they have in the past, that their mistakes are
equalled only by their ignorance.

30. Apparently, the critics do not want the new Turkish State to consolidate its independence. But it will
continue doing so, with the full support of the people
and the Government of Turkey, and, as long as it requests it, under the protection of the Turkish armed
forces.
31. Yet the new State has not failed to put forward
very’ constructive proposals aimed at bringing the
Greek community back to the intercommunal negotiating table; among them were those of 2 January and
18April last. These proposals, unfortunately, received
no positive response from those to whom they were
made. In that connection, I wish also to state, on
express instructions from my Government, that at no
time has Turkey agreed to support or to encourage any
proposals, ideas or suggestions other than those off&
cially put forward by the competent authorities of the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus.

28. On 18 November 1983, the Security Council, following the example of the General Assembly, adopted
resolution 541 (1983), a biased, unjust and untimely
resolution. How could it be expected that the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus and Turkey could come
to terms with a recommendation which, on the basis of
the Treaty of Guarantee, deplores the independence
of the Turkish community? The Security Council, like
the General Assembly and the majority of States Members, did not even remember that Treaty when, from
late 1963, the Greek community was trampling on the
Cypriot Constitution, which had been established
and guaranteed by international treaties, when it was
persecuting, plundering and massacring the Turkish
community, or even when an internationally notorious
murderer seized power on the island in 1974 with the
assistance of Greece in order to achieve the island’s
fmal union with that country. How could they heed the
representatives of States which are always ready to
preach to one and all the primacy of the rule of law and
to counsel moderation to the Turkish and Turkish Cypriot peoples when they themselves are responsible for
having cast the Treaty of Guarantee into oblivion and
for being the accomplices of the usurper, recognizing it
as the legitimate Government of the Republic of Cyprus
and recalling the Treaty only in order to deplore the
Turkish community’s cries of exasperation.

32. I wish also to stress another point: no pressure
-whether by Governments or by parliaments-can
break or bend the determination of the Turkish people
to support their Cypriot brethren. Until they are renounced totally, these pressures, these “conditions”,
will, unfortunately, constitute a major obstacle in the
quest for a final solution to the Cyprus question.
33. It is quite possible to convince the Turkish community not to establish its independence definitively.
But that result cannot be achieved by pursuing a policy
of ostracism and isolation against it; it already possessesa framework within which it can be secure and
certain to be able to live in perfect happiness, proudly
enjoying full national identity.
34. Those who wish to prevent the Turkish Cypriot
community from progressing on the path of independence are taking the wrong approach. They ought
rather to make it clear to the Greek Cypriot administration and to Greece that they hold the key to reopening
the path to the re-integration of the Turkish community
into the Cypriot fold. They must therefore consent
to resume the intercommunal. negotiations, without
thereby implying that they recognize the independent
Turkish Cypriot State, under the auspices of the mission of good offices of the Secretary-General entrusted
to him in paragraph 6 of Security Council resolution 367
(1975), “on a mutually agreed basis,” which is the
terminology used by the Secretary-General, with a

29. We are here again today because of amazement at
the fact that the Turkish Cypriot community now has its
own flag and its own national hymn and is about to have
a new Constitution and to organize new elections. Why
4

view to reaching a comprehensive settlement within the
framework of a bicommunal, bi-zonal and non-aligned
Cypriot federation based on the principle of equality
between the two communities on the island, Turkish
and Greek.

tion of Cyprus. The reasons for which the Council has
dealt with the matter so many times in the past result
from the threat of the use of force and the use of force
proper by Turkey against the sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus.

35. In this connection I should like-to reiterate that my
Government continues to support the Secretary-General’s mission of good offices. My Government is also
of the view that the interlocutors of the Secretary-General in his efforts to bring about a resumption of the
intercommunal negotiations are, within the context of
his mission of good oftices, as always the Turkish Cypriot community and the Greek Cypriot community.

42. In his address this morning 1253Ist meetinnl President Kyprianou presented a clear, balanced andhonest
picture of the situation in Cyprus and of the perspectives and possibilities for a fair solution. My Govemment fully endorses and supports the views expressed
by the President of the Republic of Cyprus.
43. At this stage I should like to confine myself to a
few remarks which reflect the basic philosophy of my
Government with regard to the question of Cyprus and
the situation this problem is creating in the entire
region.

36. Let the Greeks and the Greek Cypriots indulge
themselves in their continual dream that one fine day
the miracle they so desire will come to pass and that
Turkey and with it the Turkish Cypriot community will
succumb to one sort of pressure or another or even that
Turkey will sink into such decadence that pan-Hellenism can once again attempt to invade the Turkish territories that are still labeled on official maps as “lost
Hellenic provinces*‘. If they can be satisfied by such
ridiculous illusions, they can go on harbouring them for
as long as they like, even to the end of time. It is up to
wise and well-intentioned third-party Governments to
do what is necessary to make them seereason and face
up to realities, rather than pamper them in their insane
dreams and allow them to remain bogged down in the
unreality of their myths and fictions.

44. In flagrant violation of all norms of international
law Turkey in July 1974 invaded the Republic of Cyprus. As to the Turkish contention that their invasion
was based on the Treaty of Guarantee, this has been
repeatedly rebutted with valid legal arguments such as
those that appear, inter alia, in the records of the 2405th
meeting, paragraphs 154to 156. Under the dome of the
Charter there is no room for military action against
an independent sovereign State Member of this Grganization .
45. Since that time the United Nations has deplored in
numerous resolutions the continuing military occupation of part of the Republic of Cyprus. In his turn the
Secretary-General has taken many initiatives in his indefatigable efforts towards bringing the parties together
at the negotiating table. Unfortunately, those efforts
have all failed because Turkey has been unshakeable in
its position that a solution should be based on the principle of equal partnership in sovereignty over the Republic by the Greek and Turkish communities, which constitute respectively 80 and 18 per cent of the Cypriot
population. Equally unshakeable has been Turkey’s
position that the Turkish community should control a
territory twice the size of what its population ratio
would justify. So Turkey plans to achieve both: territorially, the partitioning of the Republic of Cyprus
and, constitutionally, the co-ownership of the whole of
the Republic on a 50-50 basis by the two communities,
one representing 80 per cent and the other 18per cent of
the population. Moreover, Ankara insists that the
whole arrangement should be guaranteed by Turkey.
Allow me, to submit that if this were to happen the
independent Republic of Cyprus would for all practical
purposes be turned into a protectorate of Turkey. This
would be the first step towards total subordination of
the Republic to Turkey.

37. I repeat, there is no way other than intercommunal negotiation; there will be no final solution other
than one that recognizes for the Turkish community of
Cyprus its status as co-partner, on an equal footing, in a
bicommunal, bi-zonal and non-aligned federation.
38. I reserve my right to speak again during the course
of these discussions if I deem it necessary;
39. The PRESIDENT [interpretationfrom Russian]:
The next speaker is the representative of Greece, upon
whom I now call.
40.. Mr. DOUNTAS (Greece): I thank you, Mr. President, and the members of the Council for acquiescing
to my request to participate in this debate. Before embarking on the subject of my statement, I should like
to congratulate you warmly, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the current
month. Your vast experience and personal finesse and
your sense of tact, as well as the fact of your speaking
with the authority of the country you represent, constitute the grounds for our confidence that you will
guide the deliberations of the Council with wisdom and
efficiency. I would be remiss were I to fail at this stage
to congratulate Mr. Kravets for the excellent manner in
which he conducted the business of the Council during
the past month.

46. What has happened in Cyprus has, in our view,
very little to do with intercommunal differences. It
would indeed be inconceivable if minority communities
were allowed to request the military ‘intervention of
foreign Powers in order to acquire disproportionate

41. The Security Council is meeting again to deal once
more with the almost perennial-unfortunately-ques5

status within a State. If this principle were to be
accepted I am afraid that most of the States Members of
the United Nations could be dismembered. If it were for
the people of Cyprus to find a bicommunal
balance
within the framework of internationally
accepted patterns, I do believe this goal could have been attained in
a matter of a few weeks. However, the problem of
Cyprus stems directly from Turkish expansionism in
the eastern Mediterranean
and the so-called geopolitical interest of Turkey in Cyprus. In view of this
reality, whatever happens in the occupied part of the
Republic of Cyprus is, we believe, the sole responsibility of the Government of Turkey because Ankara is
the authority which totally controls militarily that part
of the Republic.

50. President Kyprianou this morning made a genuine
and honest appeal for a peaceful solution to the problem
of Cyprus. On behalf of my Government I join in the
appeal of the President of Cyprus to the Council to
examine ways and means to help the Government of
Cyprus to restore the exercise of the sovereignty of
the State all over the Republic, because, as President
Kyprianou said, what is at stake there is the very survival of an independent sovereign State Member of the
United Nations, and to a great extent the hopes for the
survival of the State rest with you-members
of the
Council.
51. My Government
is deeply preoccupied by the
continuation of the situation in Cyprus. We really believe that if the Council fails at this juncture to check the
steadily increasing provocations and acts by Turkey
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, the options for a peaceful solution
to the problem will dangerously shrink.

47. So Turkey alone bears the responsibility
for the
unilateral declaration of independence of the Turkish
Cypriot pseudo-State. Turkey has the sole responsibility for permitting the announcement of elections for
its consolidation, an act which, inter da, runs counter
to the provisions of Security Council resolution 541
(1983). Turkey also bears the sole responsibility for the
purported exchange of ambassadors, again an act violating that resolution. These acts by Turkey are not only
in violation of the Charter and international
law in
general, and in particular of resolution 541 (1983), but
are also a manifestation of disrespect for the SecretaryGeneral’s recent initiative aimed at bringing the parties
together at the negotiating table.

52. The Government of Cyprus has repeatedly stated
that it is willing to participate in a fair compromise.
However, what Turkey is asking for is an unconditional
surrender, on the basis of its military might. This is a
development that we shall never accept. In view of this
situation, I should not be exaggerating in saying that
Turkey, with its acts against Cyprus, is indeed endangering peace in the island, thus aggravating the situation
in a region already overburdened with tensions and
conflicts.

48. The Secretary-General,
who, understandably,
is
very cautious in his utterances, could not help saying in
his recent report that he had authorized the following
statement:

53. In this context I should like to express-I think it
is appropriate-our
deep appreciation of the mission of
the United, Nations Peace-Keeping
Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP).
This appreciation is addressed particularly to the States that contribute men and material to
the maintenance of the Force. UNFICYP
has proved to
be an invaluable factor for the safeguard of peace in the
island. I can say with a great degree of certainty that but
for the presence of UNFICYP
in Cyprus, peace would
have been gravely endangered.

“The Secretary-General
deeply regrets the ceremonies” -the
exchange of ambassadors-which
took place today in northern Cyprus and Ankara,
respectively. The Secretary-General
has instructed
his Special Representative,
Mr. Hugo Gobbi, to
transmit immediately to those involved his great concern over these developments,
which have placed
in’ jeopardy
his current efforts.”
[See S/16529,
para. 20.1

54. Before concluding I should like to refer to the
famous theme of emsis-the
union of Greece with
Cyprus-on
which the Turks have been harping for
many years. On 18 October 1983, in reply to certain
allegations of this nature by Turkey, I sent a letter to the
Secretary-General
which was circulated as document
S/16079. I should like to quote from this letter, because
it gives a definitive reply to the famous allegations that
Greece is seeking enosis with Cyprus. The letter says:

49. One could speak for hours and hours about the
various aspects of the Cyprus problem. The only hope
for a speaker is to address the common sense and
experience of the representatives in the Security Council. It is in this spirit that I dare say that the omens are
not favourable for the independence of Cyprus and for
peace in the region. Turkey is acting with provocative
arrogance, an outgrowth of its military might. It seems
to us strange indeed that a country which relies heavily
on foreign aid to maintain its military apparatus is permitted the luxury of spending more than $200 million a
year to maintain its occupation force in the Republic of
Cyprus, against international law and against the resolutions of the United Nations. I submit that this is a fact
which should be of crucial concern to the countries that
lend their support to the Turkish military machine.

“It is a historical fact that, in the 195Os, the people of
Cyprus were struggling for self-determination,
the
realization of which might have led to a union with
Greece and that Greece had supported this anticolonial struggle. In 1960, a historical compromise
was reached, whereby a sovereign and independent
Republic of Cyprus was established. The Greek
Government has always adhered to this compromise,
notwithstanding
the initial. reaction of a part of
6

Hellenic public opinion. This reaction has since completely subsided, and any reference to the goals of the
anti-colonial struggle of the people of Cyprus during
the 1950s is of a purely historical nature and can in
no way be construed as constituting a policy statement. The people and the democratic Governments
of Greece have genuinely accepted and have ‘been
unwaveringly
supporting’ ‘-and will /unwaveringly
support- “the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus. If there
is a country that is violating each and every one of
these principles, it is Turkey, by its invasion of Cyprus in 1974 and by its continuing occupation of one
third of the territory of the Republic.*’

in violation of the declarations of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and the resolutions of the General Assembly on the question of Cyprus.
58. On 18 November
1983 the Security Council
adopted resolution 541 (1983) in which, inter a&z, the
Council deplored the declaration of the Turkish Cypriot
authorities of the purported secession of part of the
Republic of Cyprus; considered the declaration to be
legally invalid and called for its withdrawal; called upon
all States not to recognize any Cypriot State other than
the Republic of Cyprus and requested the SecretaryGeneral to pursue his mission of good offices in order to
achieve the earliest possible progress towards ajust and
lasting settlement in Cyprus. The resolution further
called upon all States and the two communities in Cyprus to refrain from any action which might exacerbate
the situation and called upon the parties to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General
in his mission of good
offices.

Invoking the famous theme of enosis is like calling a
shadow of the past into existence to justify the crimes of
the present.
55. I trust that no matter what the Turks say they will
fail to blur the fact that Turkish troops occupy part of
the Republic of Cyprus, and that they will fail to refute
that the question of Cyprus is one of foreign occupation
of an independent,
sovereign State Member of this
Organization, which is why the question of Cyprus is
brought before the Council.

59. We had hoped that the almost-universal
denunciation of the action taken by the Turkish Cypriot leadership and the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 541(1983) would have made wiser counsels prevail
and would have encouraged a process of restraint and
reversal so that the grave situation already created
would be alleviated. We were somewhat heartened to
learn subsequently of the talks initiated under the
auspices of the Secretary-General
on the basis of ideas
put forward by him to both sides in January of this year.
We were hopeful that the willingness of both parties to
undertake a fresh dialogue and the presentation of proposals by them would presage a reduction of tensions
and an honest effort to work out a negotiated settlement
which would, inter alia, involve as an indispensable
element the freezing and eventual reversal of the unilateral action taken by the Turkish Cypriot side.

56. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): Allow me to state, at the
very outset, how pleased my delegation is to see you,
Sir, presiding over our deliberations. We congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. Our two countries are
bound by close ties of friendship and multidimensional
co-operation. Your own personal charm, high competence and long and varied diplomatic experience are
too well known and I do not need to dwell on them at
any length. Those qualities shall surely stand us in
good stead during the Council’s consideration of urgent
and critical issues. I extend to you, Mr. President,
the wholehearted co-operation of my delegation in
helping you discharge your onerous responsibilities.
Permit me also to express a word of sincere appreciation to Mr. Vladimir Kravets of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic for his very competent and dignified
stewardship of the Council during the month of April.

60. Against that background, it is particularly unfortunate and-regrettable that further actions should have
been taken by the leaders of the Turkish Cypriot community in direct contravention of resolution 541 (1983)
and the Secretary-General’s
endeavours. As we are all
aware, on 10 April 1984 the Turkish Cypriot leaders
announced that the so-called Turkish Republic of
Northern Cyprus intended to conduct a constitutional
referendum in August and elections in November 1984.
On 17 April ceremonies took place in Ankara and Nicosia which were publicly described as constituting the
submission of “credentials”
for the establishment of
diplomatic relations between Turkey and the so-called
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Those actions
-not to mention other steps such as the adoption of a
separate flag, anthem, etc.-flew directly in the face of
the provisions of resolution 541 (1983) and of the Secretary-General’s call to “freeze” the unilateral declaration of independence. As the Secretary-General himself
observed, those actions placed in jeopardy his current
efforts.

57. Barely five and a half months ago the Security
Council met to discuss the situation in Cyprus, in the
wake of an event which caused shock and constemation the world over, namely, the unilateral proclamation of a so-called Turkish Republic of Northern
Cyprus. That action, which was denounced in most
capitals of the world, infinitely complicated an already
serious situation in Cyprus and caused a severe setback
to the painstaking efforts, made over several years, by
the Secretary-General
to promote a negotiated settlement to the Cyprus question through intercommunal
dialogue. At the time, my delegation spoke before the
Council [2498rh meeting] and I had occasion to express
the profound shock and concern with which the Government of India had learnt of the unilateral declaration
of independence. We deplored that action, which was

61. My delegation has listened with great attention to
the address delivered this morning before the Security
7

Council by the President of the Republic of Cyprus,
Mr. Spyros Kyprianou. President Kyprianou has presented his country’s case before the Council in poignantly lucid terms. Having listened to his statement,
we are able to appreciate to an even greater extent how
critical are the circumstances that confront Cyprus today. The unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of a Member State of the United Nations are under serious threat. Fundamental principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and
espoused by the Non-Aligned
Movement are at stake.

Mr. Denktas’s assurance to the Council that he is not
seeking the partition of the country, but the course
that he has now taken would appear to go just in that
direction.
66. The report of the Secretary-General
contained in
document S/16519 describes the efforts he has made in
pursuance of the resolutions of the Security Council,
including resolution 541 (1983). As the Secretary-General himself has stated in his report, “The developments outlined in this report speak for themselves”.
The exchange of correspondence annexed to the report
is revealing. It is clear that the Turkish Cypriot community’s response and actions have created a complete
deadlock, thereby threatening the very process of communication and negotiations which the Secretary-General has been trying to reactivate and which he has
emphasized in his report. On the other hand, the Government of the Republic of Cyprus has, in spite of
extreme provocation, demonstrated its continued willingness to undertake meaningful negotiations.

62. President Kyprianou has warned us that, if the
process set in motion last November is not reversed,
the partition of Cyprus will become inevitable and Cyprus as a unified island entity will cease to exist; the
responsibility
for this would rest squarely with this
Council and especially its permanent members. His
urgent appeal to the conscience of the world community cannot go unheeded. We must and shall come
forward with an adequate response.
63. I have listened with care to the statements made
by other representatives today. I have also followed
with close attention the statement made to the Council
by Mr. Denktas, as representative of the Turkish Cyr,
priot community. My delegation has always advocated
that the legitimate rights of the Turkish Cypriot community should be respected and defended. However,
we do not see any force in the arguments advanced to
justify the series of illegal and unacceptable actions
taken. We have always believed that the Cyprus question needs to be resolved in a peaceful manner and
without delay. An equitable solution has to be found by
which the people of Cyprus, Greek and Turkish alike,
as partners sharing a common destiny, can live in dignity, with equal rights and in friendship and harmony in
an undivided country. We have consistently pointed to
intercommunal
negotiations as the only possible means
towards this end. Nevertheless, the actions taken over
the past six months by the Turkish Cypriot community,
in spite of professions to the contrary, can in no way
promote such negotiations; indeed they have served
only to bring them to a complete halt.

67. The Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries has always reiterated its full solidarity with and support for
the people and Government of the Republic of Cyprus
and reaffirmed its respect for that country’s independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and nonalignment. At their Seventh Conference, held at New
Delhi in March 1983, the heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned
Countries stated, inter aliu, that “the
de facto situation created by the force of arms and
unilateral actions should not in any way affect the solution of the problem”
[see S/15675 and Cm-r.1 and 2,
sect. Z, paru. 2301. What was actually happened is a
succession of attempts to create de facto situations
which are unacceptable to the international
community.
68. Immediately
after the unilateral declaration of
independence by the Turkish Cypriot community
on
15 November
1983, the Prime Minister of India and
Chairperson of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, addressed a special message
on the subject to heads of State or Government of nonaligned countries. I should like to quote from that message:

64. It is true that the negotiations have been long and
protracted, often frustrating and frequently stalemated.
This is not surprising, given the history and complexity
of the problem and the deep-seated suspicions and mistrust which have grown over the years. But the way to
stimulate these negotiations is not by creating conditions which make the continuation of the negotiations
impossible. If the dialogue is to be revitalized, surely it
can be done only by renewed commitment
and not by
actions and measures leading to a division of the country which would render further talks irrelevant.

“This unilateral declaration undermines the unity
of Cyprus, violates its territorial integrity, transgresses its sovereignty, calls into question its independence and puts in jeopardy the non-aligned status of
the island as a whole.
“The Non-Aligned
Movement must reiterate its
consistent position of principle that force of arms and
unilateral actions should not in any way affect the
solution of the problem. To this end, our Movement
will, I hope, concert action for the revocation of the.
unilateral declaration and the immediate resumption
of intercommunal
talks on the basis of the high-level
agreements of 1977 and 1979. The Movement should
unitedly back the efforts of the United Nations Sec-

65. To make a unilateral declaration of independence
and to take steps which are claimed to be “in implementation of the natural and legal consequences” of that
declaration is to destroy the very .basis qn which the
dialogue is predicated., We have taken due note of
8

retary-General to ensure respect for the unified
status of the Republic of Cyprus.”

74. Mr. MOUSHOUTAS (Cyprus): The distortions
and outright falsehoods of the Turkish side compel
my delegation to exercise its right of reply even
though those falsehoods have been repeatedly and fully
exposed in past meetings of this Council.

69. The Government of India deplores the latest
actions taken in contravention of Council resolui
tion 541 (1983), in particular the decision involving the
exchange of so-called ambassadors between Turkey
and the so-called Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. We believe that this causes a serious setback to
the efforts of the Secretary-General to promote a negotiated settlement. We urge that these latest actions be
rescinded immediately.

75. As in the past, I consider the statement made by
the individual who has appeared under rule 39 as having
been made by the Turkish representative, for he who
does things through others does them himself. The
Turkish fabrications remind me of the saying of a great
American President: “You can fool all of the people
some of the time, and you can fool some of the people
all of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all
of the time.”

70. If1 may revert to the report of the Secretary-General to the Council, he has, ‘as I noted a while ago,
declared that in the present situation, “One important
requirement would seem to be the maintenance of a
continued process of communication and negotiation. *’
We are in complete agreement with this assessment.
We continue to believe that the mission of good offices
entrusted to the Secretary-General remains the only
possible channel through which the two sides could be
engaged in meaningful negotiations. In spite of the
obvious frustrations and disappointments that have
been strewn in his path, the Secretary-General has been
good enough to indicate that he is prepared to continue
to discharge his mission of good offices as long as there
is unambiguous support for it. We believe that the
Secretary-General should be requested to persist in his
admirable efforts. It would only be appropriate, therefore, for the Council to strengthen his’ hand. In particular, all States which have influence in the region
have a special responsibility, and they should give the
Secretary-General active support and reinforce his
efforts. They must display greater determination than
they have been willing to display so far to ensure that
resolution 541 (1983) is respected and implemented.

76. The gist of Turkey’s policy in Cyprus and the
statements heard today in the Council-both of themis indeed a cynical attempt to fool all of the people all of
the time. First let me say that I consider it to be the
apotheosis of the absurd when the aggressor, Turkey,
the usurper of our homes and lands and the occupier of
almost 40 per cent of our territory, accusesits victim of
usurpation. To which “usurpation” does the Turkish
representative refer? To the usurpation of the country?
We are in Cyprus and we shall remain there because we
belong there. It is the ancestral home and land for all
Cypriots-Greeks, Turks, Armenians, Maronites and
Latins. It has been so for centuries. Turkey is the alien
and undesirable element in Cyprus. Its presence there,
by the Turkish Prime Minister’s own admission, is
based on expansionist reasons and is intended to safeguard Turkey’s security. Imagine, a half million Cypriots constituting a threat to the 45 million Turks.
77. We are here in the Council because we are the
sole, legitimate Government of Cyprus. We are ademocratic Government at that. We are here because we are
duly recognized by the whole world: all nations, all
international forums and, gratefully, not by the aggressor, Turkey. Our governmental system is free and not a
parody of democracy as is that of the representative of
Turkey. We did not expel anyone-least of all any
Turkish Cypriot offtcials-from the Government. The
Turkish Cypriot ministers and other Government off&
cials are not, regrettably, at present in the Govemment. That is not of our own doing or by choice on our
part, but because of harassment and intimidation by the
aggressor so as to undermine and cause the collapse of
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus. There are
still, however, a few courageous Turkish Cypriots who
defied Turkey and remained in their posts. I repeat
-and this is the gist of the issue-they were not
expelled; they were forced by Turkey to abandon their
Government posts by threats to their lives. As a matter of fact, we yearn and struggle for their return.
The members of the Turkish Cypriot community were
never, and are not today,,considered by us as secondclass citizens. Our senseof fairness and pride-healthy
pride, not like the one invoked by the representative of
Turkey, whose pride is directed only towards the violation of resolutions-would not allow it. We repeat that

71. We are under no illusions about the vexed nature
of the question of Cyprus, which has now been rendered even more difficult and complicated by recent
events. However, the most important challenge before
the Council today is checking the drift towards a state of
hopelessness.The present intolerable situation must be
reversed and a meaningful dialogue resumed.
72. The Government and people of India are bound to
the Government and people of the Republic of Cyprus
by deep ties of friendship and co-operation. Cyprus,
like India, is a founding member of the Non-Aligned
Movement. All of us in the Movement are firmly committed to lending our full support to the sovereignty,
independence, unity, territorial integrity and non-alignment of that friendly country. This is also the objective
of the United Nations, and it is the solemn duty of the
Security Council to take resolute action in pursuance of
that objective. We trust that the Council will find it
possible to do so.
73. The PRESIDENT [intergretarionfiom Russian]:
The representative of Cyprus wishes to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call upon him.
9

the Turkish Cypriot community constitutes a precious
and inseparable part of the people of our country, and
that is how it has been treated. Should our community
be let free the world will stand witness to one of the
most moving scenes of reunion among countrymen
with a common destiny and country.

But years after the return of the democratically
elected
President of the Republic of Cyprus and of constitutionality to Cyprus, the Turkish occupation troops remain
in Cyprus as living evidence of contempt for United
Nations resolutions demanding their withdrawal and of
Ankara’s conviction that the bigger the lie the better the
chances of its being accepted.

78. The Turkish representative repeated a number of
allegations. Let me start with his reference to the problem itself, the invasion and occupation of Cyprus. Turkey used many pretexts for that act of aggression,
which left 5,000 dead and about 1,600 missing and rendered 200,000 Cypriots refugees in their own country.
The dimensions of the refugee situation in Cyprus are
staggering.
Comparatively
speaking,
they would
equate to 85 million refugees in the USSR, 80 million
in the United States, 20 million in the United Kingdom,
20 million in France and about 300 million in China. Of
course, we heard this morning that there is no crisis in
Cyprus.

83. Time and again .Turkey has appeared before this
forum telling the world community that what it is doing
in Cyprus is not designed to partition the island. But the
grim record belies the Turkish allegation. This abomin-able record of Ankara’s actions in Cyprus has been fully
documented by my President in his statement to the
Council. Need I recount the mass expulsions of Cypriots, the colonization of their homes and lands, the
further series of further aggressive actions and illegalities, culminating
in the secessionist declaration of
15 November 1983 and the recent exchange of “ambassadors” between the culprit and its offspring? Need
I refer to the adoption of a flag, to the setting up
of a hand-picked “Constituent
Assembly” and to the
announced decisions for a so-called constitutional
referendum and elections?

79. At the time of the invasion Turkey told the world
that “a peace operation”,
as it called it, was prompted
by the need to provide security for the Turkish Cypriot
community, which, by the way, was neither threatened
nor involved in the coup and fighting that ensued.
Then Turkey, through the mouth of none other than
Mr. Gilnes, the Foreign Minister at the time of the
invasion, changed its tune and said on 20 July 1980:
“Cyprus is valuable as a right arm for a country inter-estedin its defence and for expansionist aims.” “There
are those”, he continued, “who wish to see the invasion of Cyprus as merely a desire to protect the Turkish
Cypriots in the island, whereas the actual problem is the
security of the 45 million Turks in their motherland.”
The words are his.

84. Suffice it to say that the move for a unilateral
declaration of independence, condemned by the whole
world, made the Government of Turkey look ridiculous, for it will be recalled that when Turkey invaded
Cyprus in 1974 it stated quite clearly that it was intervening to restore the independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus. Thus actions spoke louder than words.
85. As a result, we have today a secessionist and
illegal entity set up through the barbarity of uprooting
the indigenous people, one which is using the Turkish
lira, has been integrated into the postal service of Turkey and is running on Turkish time and on water and
electricity freely-I
repeat, freely-supplied
for years
by the Government of Cyprus-even
after the secession, notwithstanding
what members of the Council
heard this morning.

80. Cyprus is important to Turkey and to any country
that harbours expansionist aims. Here in a nutshell is
the cause of our tragedy: our strategic importance,
which has been a curse for our people. As if confirmation of this fact were necessary, Turkish Prime Minister
Ozal’s statement of 30 November 1983, published in
The Christian Science Monitor, that “Cyprus is a dagger stuck in the belly of Turkey” updates and reconfirms the expansionist aims of Turkey with regard to
Cyprus. This Turkish lie was thus exposed.

86. Even former non-believers admit that they are
confronted with an unparalleled case of international
deceit. Turkey is now openly and notoriously a renowned international
outlaw. But the actions to dis,member a small State under the boot of the aggressor
are still going on. The so-called elections, a luxury
which Mr. Denktag has been so anxiously demanding
of his masters in Ankara in order to maintain himself as
so-called President in the occupied areas, are still to
come.

8 1. The argument that Turkey acted in accordance
with the Treaty of Guarantee also falls flat on its face
because, as is well known, Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations prohibits the use of force
in international relations. The word “action” stipulated
in article 4 of the Treaty of Guarantee cannot be interpreted to mean military action. If it were so, the Treaty
would be contrary to the provisions of the Charter and
would thus be null and void ab initio as per Charter
Article 103, which states that obligations under the
Charter shall prevail over the obligations of a State
under any other agreement.
82. Then it was the Turkish allegation
sion was justified in order tore-establish

87. Elections presuppose a free democratic process.
Elections cannot be held under the boots and bayonets
of the occupation forces. Elections presuppose terriz
tory. Where is that territory? Is it the territory usurped
and robbed from its rightful owners, the territory which
under international law remains under the sovereignty
of the Republic of Cyprus, as is indisputably recognized
by international law and confirmed by United Nations

that the aggresthe status quo.
10

resolutions? Which people will participate? The Anatolian settlers who were brought into Cyprus by the
thousands by Turkey after the indigenous population
was forcibly uprooted in order to change the demographic character of the island?

92. Why did the Turkish side mention it? The answer
is obvious: in order to mislead the Council, since the
Turkish policies are not and cannot be based on truth,
moral principles, the Charter, international
law and
United Nations resolutions. They cannot justify their
actions of segregation, partition and division in the
enlightened world of the twentieth century. They cannot justify their bantustanization policies. They cannot,
I repeat, justify their Ian Smith policy of so-called
equality in partnership, meaning that the 18 per cent
equals 82 per cent. They cannot justify it, because this
theory is unnatural, regressive and unjust. This diatribe
was rejected by the people of the country then called
Southern Rhodesia. The rejection was also world-wide
and absolute. We proudly see today the representative
of Zimbabwe, a country which tasted the trials of a
unilateral declaration of independence,
occupying a
seat in the Security Council without the vicissitudes of
so-called equality in partnership.

88. On this heinous crime of importing settlers, Turkey again gave a series of contradictory answers to the
serious charges against it. First, it desdribed them as
seasonal workers. When confronted with the question
as to how a region with 25 per cent unemployment
could
be importing labour, it changed its version and added
another lie that the settlers were Turkish Cypriots returning to the island. But when again Turkey was confronted with the cold facts, the migration statistics
taken by the United Kingdom during the colonial years
which proved the Turkish answer utterly false-unless,
of course, we were dealing with rabbits-Turkey,
like a
snail, withdrew into its shell, brushing away any question on this subject with the ridiculous reply that the
question of settlers was an internal matter of its puppet
regime.

93. The Turkish representative spoke about his favourite subjects, ones he holds close and dear: the
alleged intercommunal
strife and the so-called suffering
of the Turkish Cypriot community.
Yes, there were
some staged intermittent
clashes instigated from outside. Yes, lives were lost-some
Greek Cypriot and
some Turkish Cypriot. Yes, they occurred during the
colonial years and again in 1964 and 1967, when Cyprus
was independent. They were instigated and orchestrated by Turkey, a tactic reminiscent of the methods of
those who intentionally
set fire to someone else’s home
in order to have a pretext to enter the house and steal his
belongings.

89. Unprecedented
in criminality
are the illegalities
being committed
against the Republic of Cyprus:
aggression, invasion, occupation, dismemberment
of
its territory, uprooting of its people and steps to change
its demographic character. All these directly affect Cyprus. But this body and the world organization in general are also being victimized and subjected by Turkey
to contemptuous treatment. Its decisions are flouted,
its resolutions scorned, its edicts tom up by a country
with a history of oppression and continuing regressive
policies.
90. Reference was made to discrimination
against the
Turkish Cypriots at the hands of my Government. That
is another ludicrous attempt to mislead the world community, for when 18 per cent of the population is given
30 per cent of Government posts, when that 18 per cent
has 40 per cent of the police and security posts, as the
Turkish community had under the 1960 Constitution, it
is strange-indeed,
an outright lie-to brand the Government of Cyprus as discriminating against or suppressing the Turkish Cypriot community.

94. But beyond the causes of the clashes, is there any
Member State in this forum which has not had internal
unrest? Is there any State Member of the United Nations or the world community which has not experienced this sad development? I believe there is none. Must
we, as a result of internal clashes, justify invasion by a
third country, indiscriminate
napalm bombing of defenceless civilians, occupation, uprooting of people, colonization of the occupied areas by settlers and the
unilateral declaration of independence? I say no.

91. The Turkish representative referred to the 1954 to
1974 era. The history of Cyprus is centuries old. But
like an amateur surgeon, Mr. DenktaS singled out
20 years of some scattered intercommunal
incidents
and discarded five centuries of continuous peaceful and
friendly relations between our Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities.
He sought, as always, to
create the image of a threatened Turkish Cypriot community, and upon this propaganda he purports to justify
his destructive policies, cultivates fear and hate, speaks
of graves, warns of nonexistent
dangers and promulgates division. Whenever cornered, he regurgitates the
fear of enosis, knowing full well that in 1979 and 1981
the House of Representatives of the Republic of Cyprus
by unanimous resolutions ruled out both enosis and
partition. There is also the 1979 high-level agreement
which excludes both endsis and partition.

95. In this very chamber sit the representatives of
countries which went through communal strife; thousands upon thousands were the victims, billions upon
billions the destruction to property. Should those countries have been dissected?
96. What about the hardships of the Turkish Cypriot
community, to which they refer? Why did the Turkish
Cypriot community suffer? It was because of Turkey’s
policies of separation and division, which forcibly
segregated, and still segregate, the Turkish Cypriot
community from the trunk-of the economic and social
progress of our people. The words of the sagacious
Secretary-General
U Thant, the highest independent
authority on the question of Cyprus, are again to the
point. They were cogently referred to this morning by
President Kyprianou,
and I shall quote them only in
11

part: “the hardships suffered by the Turkish Cypriot
population are the direct result of the leadership’s selfisolation, imposed by force on the rank and file” [see
S/6426, para. 1061.

particularly true in the case of the latest crimes against
Cyprus and its people as a whole, namely the purported
secession from and dismemberment
of the Republic
and the so-called exchange of ambassadors.

97. What is the record of Turkey on human rights, on
which it capitalizes with such hypocrisy? Turkey now
stands accused in the Council of Europe for violations
of the human rights of its own people in its own territory, while it has already been tried, convicted and
condemned for systematic, hair-raising, mass human
rights violations in Cyprus. What about Turkey and the
annihilation of millions of people of other ethnic backgrounds? This is the country which invaded Cyprus to
“liberate”,
and “protect the human rights” of, the
Turkish Cypriot community.

102. I remind members specifically that in November
1983, while the representative of the Secretary-General
was in Cyprus to hand Mr. DenktaS the scenario for a
high-level meeting which he himself had requested and
which had been accepted by my President, the unilateral declaration of independence was proclaimed.
The same pattern was followed this year; the scheme to
deceive continues.
103. It was indeed with deep regret that we heard
today the insulting and disgraceful accusations made by
Mr. Denktas against a statesman, Mr. Galo Plaza, whohas served as the United Nations mediator in Cyprus.
Mr. Galo Plaza is internationally
recognized as a man of
dignity and of high moral standard. He pursued his high
mission with great devotion and dedication to the principles of the United Nations. Mr. Galo Plaza studied the
Cyprus problem in depth and came to the conclusion
that partition would ultimately destroy Cyprus. Such a
conclusion, of course, did not please Turkey, which all
along had aimed at the partition of Cyprus. They rejected Mr. Galo Plaza’s proposals outright, unlike the
Government of Cyprus, which immediately
accepted
them. We are now witnessing an attempt by the agent of
Turkey to smear the reputation of the United Nations
and its representatives. I hope that members will take
due note of the seriousness of this matter and of the
ulterior motives behind this attitude. The attempt of
Mr. Denktag to falsify the record on the acceptance of
Mr. Galo Plaza’s proposals by the Government of Cyprus does not impress me in the least; I believe that, by
now, he is in no position to mislead the members of the
Security Council.

98. Turkey complained
of “bias” in the Security
Council. A host of resolutions and decisions have been
adopted in the United Nations on the question of Cyprus. All of them, without exception, vindicate our
positions and condemn Turkey. We are not a superPower; we are not even a Power in the military sense.
We have no war machine, nor can we blackmail or
intimidate. We rely solely on the merits of our case and
on the provisions of the Charter, which we have consis-“
tently and faithfully observed. There lies our strength,
and upon that strength we carry on, half free and half
occupied.
99. Turkey, on the other hand, follows the policy of
the big lie. That deceitful policy, and the Turkish expansionism, pursued through division and partition, were
and are at the root of the problem of Cyprus. Instead of
unity, Turkey pursues division; instead of integration
it dictates segregation; and instead of equality before
the law it tries to impose privilege and discriminatory
arrangements based on ethnic criteria, the latter distorting the principle of equality and thus shaking the
roots of peaceful coexistence. Such inequalities strike
at the roots of the balance which exists in federal systems and which Turkey so hypocritically proclaims that
it supports as a solution.

104. The time has come for the Council to send the
right signal to Ankara-indeed,
to all potential aggressors. The Charter of the United Nations is quite explicit
about the measures to be taken.

100. All along, the concern of Ankara has not been the
protection or promotion of the Turkish Cypriots at all,
but rather their use-or misuse-in order to promote its
own aims of partition. In an interdependent world, in a
United Nations era, where the obvious and compelling
need is for unity if mankind is to survive, the Turkish
policy in Cyprus is one of regressive division, bantustanization and outright apartheid.

105. Ten years ago the Council unanimously found
Turkey guilty of aggression and of the occupation of
almost 40 per cent of the territory of Cyprus. It has by
now, I am sure, reached the conclusion that the perpetrator of those crimes is unrepentant and that stronger
measures, as provided for in the Charter, are long overdue in order to force Turkey to cease and desist its
continuing
and ever-escalating
aggressive actions
against Cyprus and its people.

101. Reference was made to the high-level meetings
and to the talks. It should not escape the attention of
any member of the Council that every time the Turkish
side resorts to a unilateral action against the Republic
of Cyprus it immediately
rallies its resources towards
securing efforts by independent authorities aimed at
talks and high-level meetings, only to use them to neutralize world condemnation and the international
outcry against its illegal actions, and to buy time for its next
annexationist step. I remind the Council that this ii’

106. We look to the Council confidently, relaying to it
the agonizing plea of the vanquished, but not defeated,
people of Cyprus, who are crying out for justice and
vindication, and are seeking from the Council remedy
and redress. With an indomitable
spirit the people of
Cyprus look to the Council and expect action. They
expect a verdict based on international
law and the
indelible principles of justice and international morality; a verdict based on the Council’s own resolutions.
12

NOTES

Can the Council afford to let them down? Or, if I may
paraphrase, can the Security Council afford to let itseif
down? I confidently trust that the answer will be a
resounding “no”.
The meeting

I See Oficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-eighth Session, Plenary Meetings, vol. II, 68th meeting, para. 11.
2 United Nations. Treati _ Series. vol. 382. No. 5475.
’ Conference on Cyprus: Documents signkd and initialled at Lancaster House on 19 February 1959, Cmnd. 679 (London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofice, 1959).
’ League of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XXVIII, No. 701.

rose at 6 p.m.

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
CQMMEM

UMTED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
ma? be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLlCAlIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaircs du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Get&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACLONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en libret-ias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas piirtcs del mundo. Cons&e a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Section de Yentas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.
.‘_ .

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

.

00400

90-61313-January;993-2.050
