S/2014/208

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 March 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014), in which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
report to it on the implementation of the resolution by all parties in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
2.
The report provides information on the humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic and on the implementation of the key elements of resolution
2139 (2014), including violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law, humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach areas, including across
conflict lines and across borders, the expansion of humanitarian relief operations,
the free passage of medical personnel, equipment, transport and supplies and the
safety and security of personnel engaged in humanitarian relief activities.
3.
The report covers the period from 22 February to 21 March 2014. To give the
Security Council as full a picture as possible of the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic, some information is included that predates the reporting period (where
full data are not yet available for the reporting period or the data presented benefit
from contextualization). The information contained herein is based on the limited
data to which United Nations actors have access, in addition to reports from open
sources, sources in the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the
independent international commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
4.
During the reporting period, indiscriminate and disproportionate attacks,
including aerial bombings, shelling, mortars and car bombs in populated areas,
caused mass civilian death and injuries and forced displacement. Publicly available
reports indicate that clashes between government and opposition forces continued in
most parts of the Syrian Arab Republic. There were continued reports of artillery
shelling and air strikes, including the use of barrel bombs, by government forces.
Car bombings and suicide attacks, including against civilian targets, resulted in
civilian deaths and injuries. Many such attacks were claimed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and the Nusrah Front. Clashes also took place between armed
opposition groups and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, mainly in the north.
14-27034 (E)

240314

*1427034*

S/2014/208

Government-controlled cities and towns, including Damascus, were subject to
mortar attacks by armed opposition groups. Reported daily death tolls were on
average in excess of 200 people, including civilians.
5.
Fighting was particularly intense in Aleppo, Dar‘a and Rural Damascus
governorates. At least 500,000 people have been displaced from the eastern part of
the city of Aleppo since late January. Around 200,000 people have fled to the west
of the city and around 300,000 to the north of the country. Approximately 100,000
internally displaced persons are sheltering in camps close to the Turkish border,
while some 22,300 people fled to Turkey during the reporting period. In Dar‘a
governorate, fierce fighting between government forces and armed opposition
groups escalated, leaving around 159,000 people displaced as at the end of February.
In Rural Damascus governorate, around 50,000 people have fled the city of
Yabroud, which was recaptured by government forces on 16 March, including nearly
14,000 who have fled to Arsal in Lebanon.
6.
With regard to neighbouring countries, security incidents were reported across
the Lebanese border and the disengagement line in the Golan. The Nusrah Front
claimed responsibility for rocket attacks in the Bekaa valley in Lebanon on 3 and
5 March.
7.
The worsening security environment notwithstanding, the United Nations and
its partners continue to reach millions of people with lifesaving assistance. In
February, the World Food Programme (WFP) and partners provided food to
3.7 million people in 13 governorates. Some 180,000 people were reached with food
in February and March in areas of Rural Damascus, Deir-ez-Zor, Dar‘a and
Ar-Raqqa governorates that had been cut off for a prolonged period. Between
22 February and 8 March, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and partners delivered essential relief items for more than
1 million people in all governorates, except Deir-ez-Zor. On 25 February, the
International Organization for Migration reached Deir-ez-Zor governorate for the
first time since March 2013 with basic lifesaving commodities for 13,000 internally
displaced persons. Since 23 February, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) has delivered food for 140,000
Palestine refugees and primary education to 41,500 children throughout the country.
During the reporting period, the United Nations Children’s Fund and partners
provided water treatment supplies benefiting approximately 1.8 million people in
Tartous and Deir-ez-Zor governorates. Also during the reporting period, the World
Health Organization reached nearly 441,000 beneficiaries with medicines
(excluding vaccines) in Homs, Aleppo, Rural Damascus, Damascus, Idleb and
Ar-Raqqa governorates. More than 46,000 internally displaced persons have
received primary health care through UNHCR in Damascus, Rural Damascus,
Aleppo and Al-Hasakeh governorates since 22 February.
8.
During the reporting period, the fourth round of the polio vaccination
campaign was carried out, reaching 2.8 million children under 5 years of age. The
number of children vaccinated in hard-to-reach areas increased and some previously
inaccessible areas became partially accessible owing to local arrangements and
contacts on the ground, including Ghouta in Rural Damascus governorate, Nubul
and Zahra in northern Aleppo governorate and parts of Quamishli city.

2/13

14-27034

S/2014/208

III. Violations of human rights and international humanitarian
law by the parties
9.
During the reporting period, the independent international commission of
inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic presented the findings from its report
(A/HRC/25/65) to the Human Rights Council. The report, which covers
investigations from 15 July 2013 to 20 January 2014, states that government forces
and pro-government militia have committed crimes against humanity and war
crimes, including massacres. Armed opposition groups have also committed war
crimes and other violations of international humanitarian law, including massacres.
10. The commission of inquiry found that torture and other inhumane acts
constituting crimes against humanity and war crimes were committed by
government forces and militia. Torture and ill-treatment were routinely committed at
official detention facilities, by intelligence agencies, at checkpoints around besieged
areas, in house raids and as part of the sieges of communities that are being used to
control and contain people. The commission also found that non-State armed groups
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic inflicted severe physical or mental pain on
civilians in areas under their control, during apprehension and/or detention. It noted
that the increase in such patterns constituted an emerging widespread and systematic
attack on the civilian population and that the rise in torture and the inhumane
treatment of civilians in areas controlled by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and affiliated groups provided reasonable grounds to believe that such groups
promote the widespread and systematic attack on the civilian population. In his
statement to the Human Rights Council of 18 March 2014, the Chair of the
commission noted that, in Ar-Raqqa governorate, the widespread detention of
civilians and their systematic torture by identified armed groups amounted to a
crime against humanity.
11. Throughout the reporting period, United Nations field sources reported
continued air raids, including the use of barrel bombs, by government forces in
Aleppo, Dar‘a, Deir-ez-Zor, Hama and Rural Damascus governorates. In its oral
update on 18 March 2014, which covered violations from 20 January to 10 March,
the commission of inquiry reported that, since 20 January, the Government had
ramped up its campaign of dropping barrel bombs into residential neighbourhoods
of Aleppo city, with devastating consequences for civilians. In launching those
attacks, government forces made no effort to distinguish civilians from military
targets. Other examples reported by United Nations field sources include the
dropping of barrel bombs on Hmeirat in the rural north of Hama governorate on
3 March, killing at least nine civilians, and on both western (Yadudeh and Mzeirab)
and eastern rural areas (Neimeh) of Deir-ez-Zor governorate on 3 and 4 March.
12. According to the oral update, armed groups have shelled towns and villages in
Aleppo, Damascus, Hama and Al-Hasakeh governorates. There has been an
increased use of car bombs, some of which targeted wholly civilian areas. For
example, according to United Nations field sources, at least 15 people were killed
and 12 others wounded by a car bomb on 6 March in the Armenian district of the
city of Homs, home to mostly Christian and Alawite communities. No group has
claimed responsibility for the attack.
13. Also according to the oral update, non-State armed groups have increasingly
resorted to suicide bombings and the use of improvised explosive devices. On
11 March, three fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant wearing
explosive vests detonated themselves at a municipal office in Quamishli,

14-27034

3/13

S/2014/208

Al-Hasakeh governorate. Five people were killed and eight wounded. There were no
military targets in the area. The primary purpose of the attack was to spread terror
among civilians, a violation of international humanitarian law.
14. During the reporting period, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights received reports that, in Ar-Raqqa governorate, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant imposed discriminatory measures on the
Christian community, including prohibiting the building or repair of churches and
monasteries, the display of crosses and bibles in a visible manner, the ringing of
church bells and the practising of rituals unless in a church. It further called for
Christian adult men to pay a special tax for non-Muslims (jizyah).
15. Hospitals, ambulances and medical staff continued to come under attack. For
example, the commission of inquiry stated in its oral update that, on 23 February, a
car bomb targeted the Orient Medical Clinic in the opposition-controlled town of
Atmeh, near the Syrian-Turkish border, killing at least nine people. The Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant claimed responsibility for the attack. According to
United Nations field sources, 5 civilians were killed and 13 injured in an explosion
near Al-Zaem hospital in the government-held Akrama neighbourhood of the city of
Homs on 27 February. Medical facilities also continue to be used for military
purposes. At least 20 hospitals remain occupied by armed forces and armed
opposition groups with no respect for their civilian character.
16. Children and women continue to bear the brunt of the conflict. The United
Nations Children’s Fund reported in March that, by conservative estimates, at least
10,000 children had been killed during the conflict and that the real number was
likely to be higher. In its oral update, the commission of inquiry stated that sexual
violence against women and men in government detention was continuing and that
non-State armed groups had targeted female family members of government forces.
According to United Nations field sources, more than 300 cases of gender-based
violence were recorded during the reporting period in three health clinics in
Damascus and Rural Damascus governorates alone.
17. In violation of customary international humanitarian law, world heritage sites,
including Palmyra, Krak des Chevaliers, the Church of Saint Simeon Stylites in the
northern Syrian Arab Republic and the Aleppo citadel, have suffered considerable
and sometimes irreversible damage and continued to be used for military purposes
or be transformed into battle sites during the reporting period. Archaeological sites
are systematically looted, especially in opposition-held areas, and illicit trafficking
in cultural objects has increased dramatically.
18. On 25 February, in a briefing to the General Assembly, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reiterated her call for the situation in the
Syrian Arab Republic to be referred to the International Criminal Court.

IV. Humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach areas,
including across conflict lines and across borders
19. As the conflict intensifies and fighting between armed groups increases, more
people are slipping out of the reach of humanitarian organizations. Around
3.5 million people are now estimated to be in need of assistance in hard-to-reach
areas, an increase of 1 million since the beginning of 2014.

4/13

14-27034

S/2014/208

20. Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic established a working group composed of
representatives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Social Affairs, the
United Nations country team in the Syrian Arab Republic and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent to discuss ways to enhance humanitarian access and implement the
resolution. At the request of the United Nations, the working group also includes
representatives of the government security forces so as to expedite the
implementation of agreements reached. In a letter to the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator dated 19 March, the
President of the National Coalition of Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces
pledged the commitment of the Coalition and the Free Syrian Army to complying
with the resolution.
21. During the first meeting of the working group, on 5 March, the United Nations
shared a detailed list of 258 priority areas in the Syrian Arab Republic where
humanitarian access, if granted, would allow a significant expansion of relief
operations. In subsequent meetings, detailed negotiations focused on convoys to
29 areas in eastern and rural Aleppo governorate, Rural Damascus and Dar‘a
governorates, in addition to the governorates of Al-Hasakeh, Deir-ez-Zor and
Ar-Raqqa. Discussions are also continuing at the governorate level in Homs, Hama,
Latakkia and Tartous on three-month assistance plans for Wa’er, Ar-Rastan,
Talbiseh, Tir Maallah, Taldu, Houla, Hisn and Zahra in Homs; Kafr Zeita, Latmana,
Aqrab, Halfaya, Tremseh and Qamhaneh in Hama; and Ma’arrat An Nu’man,
Saraqab, Ariha, Foah and Kafraya Maar Tamsarin in Idleb.
22. Significant challenges to the delivery of assistance remain, including the need
for multiple requests for approval of inter-agency convoys, which often go
unanswered; the Government’s lack of internal communication of approvals to those
on the ground, resulting in denial of access or delays at checkpoints; and continued
insecurity. Increased fighting between armed opposition groups, including between
groups aligned with the Free Syrian Army and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, has complicated the delivery of assistance, including through the cutting off
of key access routes in the northern parts of the country.

A.

Access to besieged areas
23. Around 220,000 people remain besieged in the old city of Homs, Nubul and
Zahra, Madamiyet Elsham, eastern Ghouta, Darayya and other locations (see map 1).
Around 175,000 people are besieged by government forces and 45,000 by
opposition groups.
24. No new ceasefires were reached in besieged areas during the reporting period.
In Madamiyat Elsham, as well as in Bwayda village and Qudsaya, ceasefire
negotiations were unsuccessful. In Zahra and Hosn (rural Homs), parties to the
conflict did not agree upon proposals for a ceasefire by local councils.
25. In addition, breaches of existing ceasefire agreements were reported. In the
Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp, clashes resumed on 1 March, preventing the
delivery of aid until 18 March when UNRWA was able to deliver 1,020 food parcels
and other relief items. Malnutrition continues to be a serious concern for residents
of the camp.

14-27034

5/13

S/2014/208

26. In Homs, following the ceasefire that allowed the evacuation of 1,366 people
from the old city in early February, shelling and bombing returned to pre-ceasefire
levels during the reporting period. Since 15 March, an additional 200 people,
including 35 adult men, have been evacuated from the old city following an
agreement between the parties and the Governor of Homs. An estimated 150 male
evacuees, including the 35 recently evacuated adult men, remain at a screening
facility pending government processing. On 8 March, visits by United Nations
protection monitoring teams to the facility were suspended after it was struck by a
mortar. Ten people were injured and hospitalized, including five children. It is
estimated that 2,000 people remain trapped in the old city.
27. In Aleppo governorate, opposition groups are demanding that the siege of
eastern Ghouta be lifted before they lift the siege of Zahra and Nubul, where around
45,000 people remain besieged. However, 5,088 children were vaccinated against
polio in March.
28. In Rural Damascus governorate, unverified reports indicate that around
15,000 to 20,000 people returned to Madamiyet Elsham in February and March
following a decrease in the intensity of the conflict and the relative stability of the
local ceasefire agreement. The United Nations has submitted 15 requests for
government authorization to gain access to Madamiyet Elsham since 25 March
2013. On 1 March, the Government approved such a request, but the convoy was
unable to proceed because some opposition groups asked for an additional 48 hours
to prepare themselves to receive the assistance. Following a further request, the
Government informed the United Nations that a convoy could depart on 15 March.
On 14 March, however, although the trucks had already been loaded, the
Government postponed the convoy to 17 March. Lengthy searches of relief supplies
destined for Madamiyet Elsham were undertaken on 17 March, during which
government security officials said that medical supplies would not be allowed, the
approval received by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs notwithstanding. The convoy
sought to reach Madamiyet Elsham on 18 March, but had to turn back because
pro-government forces would allow deliveries only in government-controlled areas.
29. An estimated 8,000 people in Darayya, Rural Damascus governorate, have
been besieged by pro-government forces since November 2012. Increased hostilities
and heavy shelling, including the reported use of barrel bombs, were reported in the
past month.
30. An estimated 160,000 people have been besieged by pro-government forces in
eastern Ghouta since late 2012. With the exception of the vaccination of around
40,000 children in Douma in March, no aid has entered the area and an escalation of
the conflict has been reported. On 27 February, three separate notes verbales for
inter-agency convoys were submitted to the Government. All went unanswered.
New notes verbales were submitted on 2 March. Feedback from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs was received on 13 March requesting that convoys to Nubul and
Zahra be prioritized. On 17 March, however, the Ministry approved a convoy with
limited supplies to Douma. On 20 March, a United Nations convoy successfully
reached Douma with 600 food rations and non-food items to cover the needs of
3,000 people. All parties upheld the temporary ceasefire for the period of the
delivery. The United Nations observed several hundred women and children near the
front line seeking to leave Douma.

6/13

14-27034

S/2014/208

B.

Access to hard-to-reach areas
31. Limited aid was delivered to a number of hard-to-reach areas in the reporting
period for the first time in several months. In Dar‘a governorate, WFP partners
reached Bisr Elharir on 28 February with food for 10,000 people. In Ar-Raqqa
governorate, UNHCR dispatched assistance to local charities to help 5,000 people
on 1 March — the first relief to reach the area since November 2013. On 8 March,
WFP trucks reached Ar-Raqqa governorate with supplies for 20,000 people. On
11 March, food rations sufficient to assist a further 16,000 people for one month
reached the warehouse of a WFP implementing partner. In Idleb governorate, an
inter-agency convoy dispatched assistance to the warehouse of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent in Salqin on 1 and 2 March to be distributed to 17,500 people in camps for
internally displaced persons in Harim, some of which have not been reached by the
United Nations or the Syrian Arab Red Crescent for more than nine months. In
Damascus governorate, regular deliveries of assistance have begun following the
truce concluded in Barzeh in January. After lengthy negotiations with the
Government, a United Nations convoy to the west of Aleppo city on 16 March
delivered medicines and medical supplies to assist around 82,000 people, food and
medicines for 32,000 Palestine refugees in Neirab camp and non-food items for
5,000 people. On 27 February, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, supported by WFP,
sent a convoy of assistance for 13,400 families to Deir-ez-Zor city and the rural
areas of Abu Kamal city, Al Mayadin city, Muhasan subdistrict and Kabayeb, which
had not been reached with food for several months.
32. There were, however, several instances in which aid convoys either could not
proceed or were prevented from carrying essential items, such as medicines.
Deliveries of supplies to Deir-ez-Zor governorate, for example, have been on hold
since 1 March because several trucks, including those carrying WFP food rations for
approximately 45,000 people, are being held at the government-controlled Sukhnah
checkpoint in Palmyra. In Rural Damascus governorate, the agreement of the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs notwithstanding, a convoy to Adra Umaliyeh (held by
the Government) and Adra al-Balad (held by the opposition) on 12 March was held
at a government checkpoint for hours, making it impossible to reach the convoy’s
destination and distribute relief items by nightfall. Government officials also
removed medical supplies from the convoy before its departure on the basis that
there were no functioning health facilities in the two locations. The following day,
the convoy again could not reach the two locations owing to sustained shooting,
shelling and the lack of sufficient assurances of safe passage from the Nusrah Front.
In Homs governorate, the United Nations delivered humanitarian assistance to
20,000 people in the opposition-held area of Houla and to 2,000 people in
government-controlled Shin on 7 March. Some medicines initially approved by the
Government were, however, removed from the convoy by the government security
focal point.
33. Many of the 258 hard-to-reach areas have yet to be reached with assistance
(see map 2). They include locations that host large numbers of Palestine refugees,
such as Khan Eshieh camp, in Rural Damascus governorate, and Mzeireb and Jlein,
in Dar‘a governorate. The latter have been under the control of opposition forces
since 2012 and UNRWA has not, to date, been permitted to conduct cross-line
missions.

14-27034

7/13

S/2014/208

C.

Cross-border assistance
34. Following repeated requests from the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic for permission to use the shortest routes possible to reach
people in need, including across borders, the Government informed the
Secretary-General in writing on 22 November 2013 of its decision to allow the entry
of humanitarian aid through official border crossings with Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon.
The Government has repeatedly said that using crossing points from Turkey, which
are not under its control, “is a red line”. Relief supplies continued to transit through
the official government-controlled crossings with Jordan and Lebanon. The
Ya’rubiyah crossing with Iraq remained closed, however, because the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic objected to the raising of the Kurdish flag there by the
Democratic Union Party. Given the urgent need to deliver supplies to Al-Hasakeh
governorate, where 500,000 people have been without assistance for more than six
months, United Nations agencies organized numerous airlifts from Erbil and
Damascus to Quamishli while negotiations continued to secure the opening of the
crossing. Such airlifts are, however, a limited and highly cost-ineffective alternative
to land access.
35. On 6 March, following repeated requests from the United Nations, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic orally communicated to the
Organization that the Government had approved the opening of the Nusaybin border
crossing with Turkey for the dispatch of humanitarian relief supplies to Al-Hasakeh
governorate. A written agreement was received on 13 March and a note verbale sent
to the Government with details of the cross-border convoy request on 16 March. On
20 March, the first eight trucks of the United Nations humanitarian convoy reached
Quamishli. The convoy includes 79 trucks carrying food, blankets, mattresses,
hygiene kits, medicines and medical supplies for 268,000 people in need.
36. During the reporting period, the United Nations reiterated its request to the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic that other border crossings
be opened or better utilized to deliver humanitarian assistance to people in need.
This includes additional crossing points with Turkey (Bab al-Hawa and Bab-al
Salameh) for access to around 3.35 million people in need in Aleppo and Idleb
governorates and Jordan (Al-Naseeb and Tal Shihab) for access to around 452,000
people in need in Dar‘a and Quneitra governorates. The Government restated its
position that any border crossing could be opened provided that it was a “legal”,
official crossing point and would not compromise the sovereignty of the
Government.

V. Administrative hurdles
37. The formation by the Government of the working group on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014) notwithstanding, there was no progress in streamlining
and speeding up procedures to facilitate inter-agency convoys during the reporting
period. The process for approval remains extremely complex and time-consuming.
Each United Nations field mission or convoy continues to require a request to the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 72 hours in advance, a facilitation letter from the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent following the approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the

8/13

14-27034

S/2014/208

issuance of a facilitation letter by the Ministry of Social Affairs. In the case of
medical assistance, an additional letter issued by the Ministry of Health is required.
38. The humanitarian response in the Syrian Arab Republic also continues to be
hampered by limited operational capacity. There are currently 18 international
non-governmental organizations approved to operate in the Syrian Arab Republic.
The number of national non-governmental organizations currently authorized to
partner directly with the United Nations increased by three during the reporting
period to 77, yet the number approved in the most affected governorates remains
limited. Restrictive requirements also continue to govern cooperation by
international non-governmental organizations with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and are preventing the ability of such organizations to expand humanitarian
operations, including hindering the establishment of sub-offices and not allowing
them to work with national non-governmental organizations.
39. On 4 March, the Government communicated a new procedure for issuing visas
to United Nations personnel, reiterating that processing required 15 working days
for applications not from the Department of Safety and Security and 30 days for
applications from the Department. Heads of United Nations agencies are to be
issued renewable multiple-entry visas of one year’s duration, deputy heads of
agencies are to receive renewable multiple-entry visas for six months and
international United Nations officials who have contracts to work in United Nations
agency offices in the Syrian Arab Republic are to receive renewable multiple-entry
visas for three months. In the reporting period, 27 United Nations visa requests (new
and renewals) were submitted, of which 18 were approved, 8 remained pending and
1 was rejected. One visa request by the Department of Safety and Security was
granted, but six remained pending. Obtaining additional Department visas is
essential for the expansion of humanitarian operations. The new policy announced
on 4 March does not apply to international non-governmental organizations, which
continue primarily to receive three-month visas, often limited to a single entry. A
total of 17 visa applications by international non-governmental organizations remain
pending.
40. Given the regular telephone and Internet outages, and the impact of growing
fuel and power shortages on communications infrastructure in the Syrian Arab
Republic, access to emergency communications equipment for United Nations staff
is essential. On 16 March, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the United
Nations that there would be urgent follow-up on the required authorizations for
approval to import and license communications equipment, which have been
pending for many months.

VI. Free passage of medical personnel, equipment, transport
and supplies
41. Notwithstanding the demand by the Security Council that all parties respect
the principle of medical neutrality and facilitate free passage to all areas for medical
personnel, equipment, transport and supplies, including surgical items, the delivery
of medical supplies continues to have to be negotiated with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic on a case-by-case basis. Since the adoption of resolution
2139 (2014), medical supplies that would have assisted around 201,000 people have
been removed by government officials from inter-agency convoys to Houla (Homs

14-27034

9/13

S/2014/208

governorate) and Adra and Madamiyet Elsham (Rural Damascus governorate). In
addition, on 24 February, a World Health Organization shipment of medicines and
medical supplies destined for Ar-Raqqa and Deir-ez-Zor governorates was held up at
the government-controlled Sukhnah checkpoint in Palmyra. With the intervention of
the Ministry of Health, the shipment destined for Ar-Raqqa governorate was
released on 5 March and reached its destination on 8 March. The shipment for
Deir-ez-Zor governorate, 75 per cent of which was destined for Boukamal
(controlled by the opposition) and 25 per cent for Deir-ez-Zor city (controlled by the
Government), was released on 10 March and has since reached its destination.

VII. Safety and security of personnel engaged in humanitarian
relief activities
42. The operational environment remains extremely difficult and dangerous for
humanitarian workers. On 6 March, three mortars landed in the vicinity of
Damascus Community School in the Abu Rummanah neighbourhood of Damascus,
injuring two international non-governmental organization staff. On 3 March,
volunteers from the Aleppo branch of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent were beaten and
harassed by armed opposition groups while carrying out a mission near the prison.
On 12 March, the Palestine Red Crescent Society confirmed the death of one of its
pharmacists working in the Yarmouk camp, who had been shot dead outside the
hospital by unknown perpetrators. On 18 March, mortars landed near the Safir Hotel
in Homs, where the United Nations hub is based, damaging a United Nations
vehicle.

VIII. Observations
43. As the conflict enters its fourth year, indiscriminate and disproportionate
violence and brutality continues unabated. According to most observers and reports,
well in excess of 100,000 people have been killed since the beginning of the
conflict. Reports and estimates from United Nations agencies indicate that more
than 600,000 people have been injured since the onset of the crisis in March 2011.
More than 9.3 million people in the Syrian Arab Republic are in need of
humanitarian assistance, 6.5 million of whom are internally displaced. Nearly
2.6 million people have sought refuge in neighbouring countries and North Africa.
Approximately half of the 540,000 Palestine refugees registered in the Syrian Arab
Republic have been displaced within the country, with at least another 70,000
displaced abroad. Some 5.5 million Syrian children are in need of assistance.
44. Cities and villages have been reduced to rubble, communities are threatened
and attacked and millions have been forced to flee. Poverty is on the rise. Weapons
continue to flow into the country and are used indiscriminately against civilians.
Health facilities and schools and other civilian infrastructure continue to be used for
military purposes. Grave crimes go unpunished and thousands remain in captivity
without recourse to due process.
45. I am extremely concerned at the continuing violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law in the Syrian Arab Republic and the culture of
impunity that has developed. All sides in the conflict must adhere to international
humanitarian and human rights law. I strongly condemn the continued heavy

10/13

14-27034

S/2014/208

shelling, including the use of barrel bombs by government forces in residential
neighbourhoods, in addition to the terror acts committed by extremist groups who
are seeking to impose radical ideologies in some parts of the country. I remain
deeply concerned at the participation of foreign elements and groups in the fighting.
I reiterate my firm opposition to the transfer of arms and fighters from outside the
Syrian Arab Republic to either side inside the country and call upon all States,
organizations and groups to immediately cease supporting the violence and to use
their influence to promote a political solution instead.
46. One month since the adoption of Security Council resolution 2139 (2014),
humanitarian access in the Syrian Arab Republic remains extremely challenging for
humanitarian organizations. Delivering lifesaving items, in particular medicines,
remains difficult. The assistance reaching people continues to fall far short of what
is required to cover even their basic needs.
47. I strongly urge the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to streamline and
speed up convoy procedures, ensure the safe passage of humanitarian convoys at all
government-controlled checkpoints and ensure that security focal points comply
with approvals given at the Damascus level; facilitate the passage of medicines,
including surgical supplies, and desist from the removal of medical supplies from
convoys; and continue to speed up the approval of visas. I urge opposition forces to
facilitate safe and unhindered humanitarian access and grant safe passage to
convoys; strengthen control and command structures to enable the safe passage of
convoys at checkpoints that they control; and ensure the safety and security of
humanitarian staff.
48. While localized ceasefires have led to access in a limited number of locations,
the implementation of localized ceasefire agreements is hampered by the absence of
a neutral third party to monitor them, lack of trust between the Government,
opposition groups and local communities and the proliferation of armed groups and
pro-government militia. I strongly denounce the use of siege as a tactic of war and
ask all parties to immediately allow assistance to besieged areas and allow civilians
who wish to leave those areas to leave.
49. The Syrian Arab Republic is now the biggest humanitarian and peace and
security crisis facing the world. It requires an immediate end to the violence and a
negotiated political solution to the conflict.
50. The Joint Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States for Syria, Lakhdar Brahimi, has continued his tireless efforts to negotiate an
agreed transition. I deeply regret, however, that the process initiated through the
cooperation between the Russian Federation, the United States of America and the
United Nations has produced such poor results. I call upon the Syrian parties, the
regional players and the international community to refocus efforts to work with
stronger political will and greater unity to help the Syrian people to achieve their
legitimate aspirations through a revitalized political process. The United Nations
does not have the option of walking away from the Syrian Arab Republic.
51. Lastly, I wish to pay tribute to the United Nations staff on the ground for their
outstanding courage, dedication and commitment during this particularly difficult
time. I should also like to thank the United Nations Resident Coordinator and
Humanitarian Coordinator, Yacoub El Hillo, and the Head of the Office of the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States for
Syria in Damascus, Mokhtar Lamani, for their leadership and hard work.

14-27034

11/13

S/2014/208

12/13

14-27034

S/2014/208

14-27034

13/13
