VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

tegration of women into the development process and
the elimination of all forms of inequality between men
and women and will guarantee broad participation by
women in efforts to strengthen peace and security
throughout the world;
5. Affirms, in particular, that the implementation of
the Programme of Action and of the relevant recommendations, decisions and resolutions of the Conference will contribute to the effective attainment of the objectives of the Decade;
6. Urges Governments to take appropriate measures
to implement the Programme of Action and other relevant resolutions and decisions at the national, regional
and international levels;
7. Requests, in particular, Member States when
preparing and evaluating the execution of projects,
programmes and plans of action at national, regional
and international meetings to pay special attention to
measures for the involvement and benefit of women:
8. Calls upon all Governments, organizations of the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations to intensify, at regional
levels, the dissemination of information and the exchange of experiences on the participation of women in
all relevant programmes and information activities with
a view to achieving the objectives of the Decade:
9. Requests the regional commissions to consider the
Programme of Action with a view to formulating appropriate programmes for implementing the recommendations contained therein, including the organization of seminars, symposia and meetings which will
contribute towards furthering the integration of women
into the development process and the achievement of the
objectives of the Decade;
10. Urges the regional commissions to report in full
to the Economic and Social Council at its first regular
session of 1982 on the specific aspects of the situation
of women in all the sectors of their development
programmes, in order to strengthen and reorient the
reporting methods of those commissions so as to reflect
more adequately the regional concerns of women, and
thereafter to report on the same subject every two years;
11. Urges all the organizations of the United
Nations system to take the necessary measures to ensure
a concerted and sustained effort for the implementation of
the Programme of Action and of other relevant resolutions and decisions of the Conference in the course of
the second half of the Decade, with a view to achieving a
substantial improvement in the status of women and to
ensuring that all their programmes take into account the
need for the complete integration of women:
12. · Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 proposals for the implementation of the
Programme of Action, taking into account the need for
the speedy establishment of the new international
economic order and the implementation of the goals and
objectives of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
which are indispensable for the advancement of women:
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to consider
appropriate measures to enable the Commission on the
Status of Women to discharge the functions assigned to
it for the implementation of the World Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Objectives of the I nternational Women's Year and the Programme of Action for
the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for
Women, and also requests him to take immediate action

191

to strengthen the Centre for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat at Vienna;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General and international organizations to take all the necessary action to
establish, where they do not already exist, focal points in
all sectors of the organizations of the United Nations
system in order to co-ordinate questions relating to
women and integrate them into their work programmes;
15. Invites the Secretarv-General to circulate the
report of the Conference ani'ong Member States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
in order to ensure that it is publicized and disseminated
as widely as possible:
16. Also invites the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report
on the measures taken to implement the present resolution:
17. Decides to convene in 1985, at the conclusion of
the Decade, a World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women:
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth sessi'on the item entitled "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and
Peace··.

92nd plenary meeting
I I December 1980

35/137.

Voluntarv Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Worn.en

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31 / 133 of 16 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for management of the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women, and 34 / 156 of 17 December 1979
concerning the report of the Secretary-General on the
Fund,''
Noting Economic and Social Council resolutions
1980/37 and 1980/42 of 2 May 1980 on the Fund,
Welcoming the support expressed for the work of the
FW1d by the World Conference of the United Nations
Decade for Women in its Programme of Action for the
Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development, Peace" and in its resolution 42
of 30 July 1980,"
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women,"
I. N ates with satisfaction the decisions of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women during its seventh
and eighth sessions:''
2. Welcomes the new procedures and increased use
of the Fund in relation to projects at country level;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the relevant organs
of the United Nations system, in particular the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
"A/34/612.
,,, Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
/980 (United Nations publication, Sales No E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. A.
'· /hid., sect. B.
'' :\ 'J) 1:,23 and Corr I
.,, lhrd., sect. I L

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

192

-----

Nations Children's Fund, for their invaluable assistance
to the ongoing work of the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women;
4. Urges the regional commissions concerned that
have not already done so to strengthen their programmes for women from within regular budget
resources;
5. Requests all relevant organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system to review their financial and
technical support activities to assess both the involvement of and the impact on women, and to report to the
General Assembly every second year, beginning at the
thirty-sixth session, on the results of the reviews and, as
appropriate, corrective actions taken;
6. Expresses its appreciation for the voluntary
contributions pledged by Member States and appeals to
Member States that are in a position to do so to consider
giving or increasing their support to the Fund in order
to ensure the availability of resources sufficient to meet
rapidly multiplying demands in developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continue to rep0rt annually on the management of the Fund as well as on the progress in the implementation of its activities;
(b) To continue to include the Fund on an annual
basis as one of the programmes of the United Nations
Pledging Conference for Development Activities.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/138.

Expression of appreciation to the Government
and people of Denm11rk on the occasion of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women, held at Copenhagen from 14 to 30 July 1980,
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Denmark for acting as host to the World
Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980
35/139.

Channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations

---. ----- -

--

-

Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General, rn
Convinced of the need to improve the efforts of the
United Nations and the specialized agencies with regard
to the participation of youth in achieving the objectives
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Equally convinced of the valuable contribution that
youth can make in promoting co-operation among
States and in implementing the new international
economic order and the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade, 81
Bearing in mind the importance of the existence of
channels of communication for the proper information
of youth and youth organizations and their effective
participation in the work of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies at the national, regional and international levels,
Convinced that the existence and the proper functioning of channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations form a
basic prerequisite for the successful preparation, celebration and follow-up of the International Youth Year:
Participation, Development, Peace,
I. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to
implement fully, at the world-wide level, the adopted
guidelines for the improvement of the channels of communication between the United Nations and youth and
youth Organizations;
2. Requests !he Secretary-General to assist Governments and the regional commissions in the implementation of the adopted guidelines and to promote that implementation at the national and regional levels;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General, in cooperation with the relevant bodies of the United
Nations system, including the regional commissions, to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session
on the progress achieved in the implementation of the
adopted guidelines at the international, regional and
national levels;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, taking
into account the views expressed by Governments either
in their replies or in their statements before the General
Assembly, to submit to the Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session, for adoption, proposals for additional guidelines, consistent with the guidelines already adopted by
the Assembly in its resolution 32/ 135, and on the basis
of the draft additional guidelines contained in the annex
to its resolution 34/ 163, as well as the suggestions of the
Secretary-General in his reports to the Assembly at its
thirty-third/ 2 thirty-fourth 8 -' and thirty-fifth 8 ~ sessions.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/ I 35 of 16 December 1977,
in which it adopted guidelines for the improvement of
the channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations,

Recalling its resolutions 33 /6 of 3 November 1978 and
34/163 of 17 December 1979, in which it invited Member States, the regional commissions and regional and
international youth organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council to comment on
the guidelines and to offer additional suggestions
regarding the further development of those guidelines,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/25 of 2 May 1980 concerning co-ordination
and information in the field of youth,

35/140.

Status of the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women

The General Assembly,
Considering that one of the purposes of the United
Nations, as stated in Articles I and 55 of the Charter, is
to promote universal respect for human rights and fun'" A/35/503.
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.
"A/33/261.
"A/34/199
"A/35/503.
