S/PV.8053

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8053rd meeting

Thursday, 21 September 2017, 4.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Negewo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Selim
Mr. Lemoyne
Mr. Alfano
Mr. Kono
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Nebenzya
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Klimkin
Mr. Field
Mr. Tillerson
Mr. Loedel

Agenda
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-29573 (E)
*1729573*

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The meeting was called to order at 4.35 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Republic of Korea to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Korea.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on the agenda.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nakamitsu.
Ms. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Sir, for convening
this very important meeting today.
The Security Council has been directly engaged in
matters relating to weapons of mass destruction for 65
years. This long priority work by the Council has rested
on two mutually reinforcing pillars. One derives from
the Council’s responsibility for establishing a system
for the regulation of armaments, as enshrined in Article
26 of the Charter of the United Nations. This objective
is closely linked with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations, and aims to promote international peace
and security with the least diversion for armaments
of the world’s human and economic resources. The
other derives, of course, from the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Pursuant to this responsibility, the
Council has sought various aims, including respect for
the prohibition of the use of biological and chemical
weapons, ensuring compliance with international
norms and treaties, preventing non-State actors from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction, and addressing
specific cases of proliferation.
2/25

21/09/2017

The Council’s engagement on weapons of mass
destruction has always been grounded on a common
understanding that measures for disarmament and
non-proliferation are two sides of the same coin and
are mutually reinforcing. The need to pursue both
objectives while responding urgently to contemporary
proliferation challenges was evident when the Council
adopted the resolutions in support of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Similarly, when
the Council met for the first time at the level of Heads
of State and Government in 1992 (see S/PV.3046),
disarmament and arms control were a major focus,
and importantly determined that the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction constituted a threat to
international Peace and Security.
The disarmament and non-proliferation efforts
of the Council over the past 25 years have achieved
important and historic outcomes, even as the
international community continues to grapple with
isolated cases of proliferation and the unresolved
question of disarmament. The Council has made use
of a great variety of tools towards these ends. In this
regard, I will briefly highlight a number of countryspecific and general approaches.
In responding to the invasion of Kuwait in 1991,
the Council required Iraq to eliminate its weapons of
mass destruction programme and mandated on-site
inspections towards that end. It has since been
confirmed, of course, that those obligations were
carried out and the Council has effectively normalized
Iraq’s international non-proliferation obligations.
With respect to the Iranian nuclear issue, direct
engagement and a shared commitment to dialogue and
cooperation resulted in the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, which the Council endorsed in resolution
2231 (2015). Two years later, international inspectors
continue to verify the implementation of Iran’s nuclearrelated commitments. A sustained commitment on the
part of all participants remains essential to the longterm viability and success of that historic agreement.
In Libya, timely action by the Council enabled the
international inspectors to help the Government secure
and remove vulnerable stockpiles of chemical agents.
In the Syrian Arab Republic, successful engagement
by the Russian Federation and the United States resulted
in that country eliminating its declared chemical
weapons programme under United Nations supervision
and with unprecedented international cooperation.
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Regrettably, we continue to find evidence of the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons, which we determined
has been carried out by the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic and by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. In order to uphold our shared norms of
humanity, all those who have used those weapons must
be held to account. The unity and action of the Council
remain essential.
Finally, the provocative and dangerous nuclear and
ballistic missile activities by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continue to defy the decisions of the
Council and the will of the international community.
These acts have also undermined international norms
against nuclear proliferation and nuclear testing. The
Secretary-General has repeatedly and unequivocally
condemned those acts, and called on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to cease further testing,
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions,
and allow space for the resumption of sincere
dialogue on denuclearization. The steady escalation
of provocative acts must be immediately reversed.
The continued unity of the Council remains essential
to facilitate the resumption of diplomacy, leading to a
peaceful settlement.
Turning to general approaches on non-proliferation,
resolution 1540 (2004) continues to stand as a pioneering
achievement in cooperative action to prevent non-State
actors from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
related material by strengthening national capacities.
In maintaining the effectiveness of this instrument,
it remains imperative to keep pace with global trends
and emerging technologies that continuously lower
the threshold for the acquisition and use of chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear material.
In concluding this survey, it is apparent that the most
effective approaches to non-proliferation must involve
a mixture of active, robust and wise diplomacy, strong
international cooperation and a solid commitment
to fully implementing the decisions of the Council.
Addressing the threats and risks posed by weapons of
mass destruction will also require new and creative
efforts to complete unfinished business, including the
achievement of a world without nuclear weapons.
I end my remarks with the words of the SecretaryGeneral at the opening of the General Assembly general
debate two days ago:
“There is an urgent need to prevent proliferation,
to promote disarmament and to preserve the gains

S/PV. 8053

made in these directions. Those goals are linked:
progress on one will generate progress on the
other.” (A/72/PV.3, p. 2)
Mr. President: I thank Ms. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
I now invite Mr. Rex Tillerson, Secretary of State
of the United States of America, to take the floor.
Mr. Tillerson (United States of America): I appreciate
the opportunity to address the Security Council again,
and I thank this month’s presidency, Ethiopia.
Members of the Security Council often talk
of threats to global security. The focus of today’s
Security Council meeting is an issue with worldwide
implications — nuclear proliferation. At a time when
stabbings, crudely constructed bombs and trucks driven
into crowds of innocent men, women and children are
often our enemies’ weapons of choice to attack us, it
is easy to become complacent and see the threat of
nuclear attacks as a relic of the Cold War. The threat of
a nuclear attack remains a grim reality, and those who
would trigger such a horrific scenario pose a unique
threat to peace-loving nations.
The challenge for each of us is: How can we
decrease the threat posed by nuclear weapons, not just
to our own people, but people worldwide? Today I want
to put four points forward.
The first is to highlight the positive trajectory
of nations that have voluntarily relinquished nuclear
weapons. The second is to emphasize the moral burden
of possessing nuclear weapons, and the enormous
responsibility that accompanies stewardship of such
devastating weapons, as well as the technologies and
nuclear materials that go into them. The third is to
make clear that acquiring nuclear-weapons capability
does not provide security, prestige or other benefits,
but instead represents a path to isolation and intense
security scrutiny from the global community, as those
responsible nuclear Powers will check such uncertain
unpredictable threats. And lastly, all nations, but
most particularly the current nuclear Powers, must
recommit to sound nuclear-security practices and
robust and effective non-proliferation efforts in order
to keep nuclear weapons and associated materials and
technology out of the hands of irresponsible nations,
terrorists and non-State actors.

17-295733/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

There are historical precedents of nations
abandoning their nuclear-weapons programmes and
arsenals out of self-interest. Belarus, Kazakhstan,
South Africa and Ukraine all weighed the risk and
responsibility of nuclear weapons and made the
decision to eliminate their nuclear programmes or give
up their nuclear weapons. As the apartheid regime in
South Africa ended, the country’s leaders eliminated
its nuclear weapons and joined the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclearweapon State. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union,
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine willingly gave up the
nuclear weaponry that the Soviet collapse bequeathed
to their territories, and over the years several other
countries were willing to abandon clandestine nuclearweapons development efforts when reassured by the
United States and others that their relationships with us
and the global community enabled them to meet their
national security needs without such tools.
The Republic of Kazakhstan is a particularly
illustrative example of the wisdom of relinquishing
nuclear weapons. In partnership with the United States
and aided by the Cooperative Threat Reduction Act
spearheaded by United States Senators Sam Nunn and
Richard Lugar, Kazakhstan opted to remove from his
territory former Soviet weapons and related nuclear
technologies and joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty as
a non-nuclear-weapon State. This courageous decision
of the leaders of Kazakhstan greatly reduced the
prospect of nuclear weapons, components of nuclear
weapons, nuclear materials or dual-use technologies
from falling into the wrong hands. Nuclear weapons
introduce complexity into relations with other countries
and introduce the risk of miscalculation, accident
or escalation.
Kazakhstan’s actions represented a key step in that
country becoming part of the community of nations. As
a result of letting go of nuclear weapons, the world does
not look on Kazakhstan as a potential nuclear aggressor
or a rogue State. It did not make enemies of its nuclear
neighbours, Russia and China. Today, Kazakhstan has
overwhelmingly been at peace with his neighbours, and
its trade relations are robust. This year it hosted Expo
2017, an event in Astana that showcased the sources
of future energy and investment opportunities in
Kazakhstan for attendees from around the world.
Kazakhstan is a modern nation making a substantial
contribution to regional and international peace and
prosperity. It has only benefited from its early decision.
4/25

21/09/2017

In my previous career, I met President Nazarbayev on
many occasions and had the opportunity to ask him
about this decision. He is more at peace with his choice
than ever. He once remarked to me, “It was the best
thing I ever did for our young country”.
Ukraine made a similar courageous choice. Even
after Russia’s encouraging incursion into its territory
in Crimea in eastern Ukraine, in violation of Moscow’s
commitments under the Budapest Memorandum,
Ukraine’s leaders reaffirmed yet again the wisdom of
their decision to remove nuclear weapons. Their friends
and allies quickly came to their aid in response to this
violation of their sovereignty with a strong unified set
of sanctions on Russia and are steadfastly committed to
ending this conflict through full implementation of the
Minsk agreements.
By rejecting the power of nuclear weapons, both of
these two proud nations are in a better place than they
would have been otherwise. They reduced the danger
of nuclear conflict and help reduce the chances of such
capabilities falling into the hands of irresponsible
third parties.
As the only nation on Earth to have used nuclear
weapons in warfare, the United States bears a heavy
responsibility to exercise proper stewardship of nuclear
weapons and to lead in working with other nations
to reduce global nuclear dangers. It is a blessing and
perhaps in many ways a miracle that nuclear weapons
have never been used again. All the peoples of the world
pray that they will never be. Experience is a hard but
wise teacher and has taught everyone the grim moral
responsibility that accompanies nuclear weapons.
The United States is reliant upon nuclear deterrence
today for the purposes of safeguarding not only our
own security interests, but also those of our allies who
otherwise might feel the need to acquire such weapons
themselves. Such deterrence and such relationships
have contributed to the absence of war between the great
Powers since 1945 and, indeed, to the fact that nuclear
weapons themselves have never been used again.
We are all fortunate that John F. Kennedy and
Nikita Khrushchev, when they stood on the brink of
a nuclear holocaust during the Cold War, came to a
common understanding of the fearful and awesome
power of nuclear weapons. As potential human
extinction loomed over the Cuban missile crisis, the
dominant emotion was fear. Nuclear weapons brought
the most powerful men in the world no comfort, but it
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

did make clear the need to minimize the risk of ever
repeating this near-miss of a catastrophe by permitting
nuclear capabilities to spread further.
Just this week, the world learned of the passing of
a little-known but important figure in the history of
the cold war. His name was Stanislav Petrov and he
is sometimes referred to as “the man who saved the
world”. In 1983, Petrov was a Soviet military officer
on duty at a nuclear early-warning centre when his
computers detected a barrage of incoming American
nuclear missiles. He said, “I had all the data to suggest
that it was true”. He said, “If I had sent my report up
the chain of command, nobody would have said a word
against it”. He said, “All I had to do was to reach for the
phone to raise the direct line to our top commanders but
I could not move. I felt like I was sitting on a frying pan”.
Petrov had a hunch that the computer had made an
error, and fortunately he was right about a false alarm.
Instead of notifying his commanders to prepare an
immediate nuclear counter-attack, he instead called
army headquarters and reported a system malfunction.
This episode illustrates just how high the risk factor
is with nuclear weapons, especially when decisions
to use them are entrusted or could be entrusted to
sometimes unreliable technologies or fallible human
judgment. Countries that want nuclear weapons must
ask themselves, “Are we prepared to deal with this type
of scenario in our own country?”
The history of the Cuban missile crisis and the
Soviet early-warning malfunction illustrate how
challenging it can be even for the most experienced and
most sophisticated nuclear-weapon possessors to control
nuclear dangers. Rogue regimes fail to appreciate the
responsibilities inherent to nuclear weapons. They wish
to develop or expand their holdings of nuclear weapons
in what they claim to be a search for security, but in
fact they desire to use such tools to intimidate and
coerce their neighbours and destabilize their regions.
Such acquisitions risk creating an escalating spiral of
regional or global instability and conflict, not just as a
direct result of their own proliferation but by prompting
other nations to undertake their own nuclear-weapons
programmes in response.
In such circumstances, nuclear weapons are
not instruments of mutual deterrence and strategic
stability, but instead are tools of destabilization. Rogue
regimes may have persuaded themselves that they
pursue nuclear weapons to establish and enhance their

S/PV. 8053

security and prestige but in fact nuclear weapons are
more likely to undermine both. There is a very good
reason why almost every country in the world has
joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
All parties can know that they will not in the future
face the threat of nuclear catastrophe from any new
direction. If would-be proliferators seek security or to
improve their standing in the world or to enhance the
prosperity of their citizens and their peoples’ hope for
a brighter future, proliferation will not provide these
things. There are much better proven ways for nations to
establish and enhance their standing, such as deepening
their trade integration with the rest of the world,
adhering to international standards and agreements and
participating in humanitarian activities.
The Korean peninsula serves as a stark example of
these differing paths. While North Korea has shunned
the international community and let its people starve
while it relentlessly pursues nuclear weapons, South
Korea has opted not to pursue nuclear weapons and is
fully engaged with the international community. As a
result, South Korea has grown into one of the world’s
great economic Powers, with a gross domestic product
over 100 times larger that of its neighbour to the north.
By contract, though, North Korea may assume that
nuclear weapons will ensure the survival of its regime.
In truth, nuclear weapons are clearly only leading to
greater isolation, ignominy and deprivation. Continued
threats against us, the United States, and now the entire
global community will not create safety for the regime,
but will rather stiffen our collective resolve and our
commitment to deterring North Korean aggression.
North Korea is a case study in why nations must
work to preserve and strengthen global non-proliferation
norms. As we look to the future, the international
community’s record of enforcing compliance with
non-proliferation obligations and commitments is
not what we need it to be. It is partly for lack of such
accountability that we find ourselves in the situation
that we are in with North Korea at the moment.
Although it joined the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons in the mid-1980s, North Korea
never came into full compliance with the Treaty and
cheated on every subsequent arrangement designed to
remedy that non-compliance and rein in the nuclear
threat it now presents.
There are also lessons here for Iran, which was
on its own pathway to develop nuclear weapons, in

17-295735/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

violation of its Non-Proliferation Treaty, nuclear
safeguard obligations and multiple, legally binding
Security Council resolutions. Iran seems keen to
preserve for itself the option to resume such work in the
future, even while sponsoring international terrorism,
developing missile systems capabilities for delivering
nuclear weapons and destabilizing its neighbours in a
dangerous quest for regional hegemony.
The collective responsibilities of meeting such
proliferation challenges will require more from all of
us. As President Trump said in his speech on Tuesday,
“If we are to embrace the opportunities of the
future and overcome the present dangers together,
there can be no substitute for strong, sovereign and
independent nations” (A/72/PV.3, p. 14).
As strong, sovereign and independent nations, we must
work together bilaterally, regionally and globally to
stem the tide of proliferation. Sovereign States, acting
in unison, will produce a global good.
We especially urge Russia to examine how it can
better support global non-proliferation efforts. As the
world’s two most powerful nuclear States, Russia and
the United States share the greatest responsibility for
upholding non-proliferation norms and stopping the
further spread of nuclear weapons. We have cooperated
well before. The United States and the Soviet Union
worked together closely in drafting most of the texts
that became the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which helped
keep proliferation under control through the Cold War.
Washington, D.C., and Moscow did this, moreover,
notwithstanding their own Cold War rivalry and the
many problems in their bilateral relationship.
In the post-Cold War era, Russia worked hard
to improve accountability for its nuclear stockpile
dispersed across the former Soviet Union, and we
engaged closely in cooperative efforts, through the
Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program,
to reduce the risks of weapons or material falling into
the hands of proliferators or terrorists. Unfortunately,
in recent years Russia has often acted in ways that
weaken global norms and undercut efforts to hold
nations accountable. Examples include violating its
own obligations under the Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces Treaty, flouting the security assurances it made at
the end of the Cold War, impeding efforts to build on the
legacy of past international efforts on nuclear security,
and seeking to weaken the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s independence in investigating clandestine
6/25

21/09/2017

nuclear programmes. If Russia wants to restore its role
as a credible actor in resolving the situation with North
Korea, it can prove its good intentions by upholding its
commitments to establishing international efforts on
nuclear security and arms control.
Cooperation from China is also essential if the
international community is to bring North Korean
nuclear missile threats under control and prevent a
catastrophe spiralling towards instability and conflict
on the Korean peninsula. If China truly desires to
denuclearize the Korean peninsula to promote stability
and to avoid conflict in that sensitive region right on
its own border, now is the time to work with the rest of
us — the rest of the international community — to put
the kind of pressure on North Korea that can change its
strategic calculation before it is too late.
Lastly, we must be fully aware that there
are non-State actors who will never conform to
international norms governing nuclear weapons. Their
grand-scale terror attacks, beheadings, crucifixions,
burnings, rapes, torture and acts of enslavement
expose the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS),
Al-Qaida and other groups as those who seek to find
glory through death and destruction. Their eagerness
to commit atrocities makes it clear that if given the
chance, they would sow death and destruction on an
even larger scale — and there is no scale larger than a
nuclear attack on one of the world’s cities. Many jihadist
groups aspire to detonate a nuclear device in the heart
of a booming metropolis. Their mission is to kill our
people and send the world into a downward spiral. We
must never allow this.
We must continue to work to secure nuclear
technologies, blueprints and materials at their own
sources and disrupt proliferation networks. We must
deepen information-sharing between intelligence
agencies in order to identify actors and identify where
nuclear materials have been or may be diverted from
legitimate uses. We must revive the practice of creating
alternative career and job opportunities for nuclear
experts so they do not sell their skills on the black
market.
But ultimately, the best means to halt jihadists
in their quest for nuclear weapons is to destroy them
long before they can reach their goal. Whether on the
battlefield, in the streets or online, terrorism must
be given no quarter. We must remain ever vigilant
against the spread of ISIS and other Islamist groups
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

in new locations, whether in Africa, Asia, Europe or
elsewhere. One of the great successes of the campaign
of the Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS in Iraq and Syria
has been uprooting ISIS from formally safe havens in
which it could freely mastermind attacks against targets
the world over. These efforts must continue.
As a body committed to security, we must treat
nuclear proliferation with the seriousness it deserves.
For those of us on the Security Council, counteracting
nuclear threats begins with full enforcement of the
Security Council resolutions all Member States are
bound to implement. To make sure all nations are able to
play their part, we must continue to work for the full and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). But
signing treaties and adopting resolutions is not enough.
Stopping nuclear proliferation also entails exercising
other levers of power, whether diplomatic, economic,
digital, moral or, if necessary, military. Ultimately, we
each have a sovereign responsibility to ensure that we
keep the world safe from nuclear warfare, the aftermath
of which would transcend all borders.
The United States will continue to work to halt
the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We ask all
peace-loving nations to join us in this mission.
The President: I now invite the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kazakhstan to take the floor.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I thank the
Ethiopian presidency for providing this platform.
I also thank High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs Nakamitsu and the previous speaker,
Secretary Tillerson, for their very valuable reflections,
including on the contribution of my nation to nuclear
non-proliferation and disarmament.

S/PV. 8053

mechanisms to discourage nuclear-weapon-possessing
States that are party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) from withdrawing from
the Treaty. More specifically, it was proposed by my
President that a State’s request for withdrawal should
be subject to intensive inspection by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for possible violations,
as a review of the reasons for withdrawal by NPT
member States at an extraordinary conference, and, if
all attempts fail, an immediate transfer of the matter to
the Security Council under Chapter VII, Article 41, of
the Charter of the United Nations.
We recommend that a similar process be applied to
States that regularly violate WMD-related resolutions.
Certain fundamental questions need to be considered,
including the rationale for their actions and how
Member States can be motivated to not cooperate with
States under sanctions. We must try to foresee which
of the imposed sanctions are detrimental to the trade
and economic interests of other States and whether it
would be worthwhile considering the development
of compensatory and incentive-based mechanisms
to ensure that Member States fully adhere to their
obligations, or restrict or terminate cooperation with
States under sanctions.
Today, with regard to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the dilemma arises when the Council
is aware that a military solution is not an option, but
at the same time it is not easy to launch a negotiating
process. Kazakhstan strongly condemns Pyongyang’s
defiant, provocative actions. We consider the continued
sanctions pressure is a step in the right direction until
North Korea heeds the appeal of the world’s majority.

The effective implementation of resolutions, treaties
and conventions, together with sanctions regimes, are
mutually complementary instruments that prohibit the
use and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs). The effectiveness of sanctions resolutions
is measured by their ability to achieve the mandated
goals. We regret to note that the impact of sanctions
resolutions does not always meet our expectations.
This is often because of the deliberate non-compliance
of other States that undermine our collective efforts to
maintain peace and stability.

We therefore suggest that the parties involved
should reduce tensions and weigh the prospects of all
possible decisions. We believe that the joint proposals
of Russia and China are worthy of consideration. The
role of Secretary-General Guterres as a mediator cannot
be underestimated. Therefore, developing and adopting
a universal document within the United Nations on
negative guarantees and non-aggression by the five
permanent members of the Security Council and other
nuclear Powers would be most relevant and a significant
incentive for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to return to the NPT as a non-nuclear State.

Kazakhstan’s approach to this issue has been
conceived by President Nursultan Nazarbayev, who has
repeatedly underscored the need to develop concrete

Implementing the robust steps undertaken by
President Nursultan Nazarbayev — namely, in closing
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site and renouncing

17-295737/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the world’s fourth-largest nuclear arsenal — strongly
required the cooperative efforts of the Russian
Federation and the United States. Their cooperation in
assisting my nation to rid its nuclear legacy, as well as
the rehabilitation of the former Semipalatinsk nuclear
test site, was exemplary. I believe that the United
States and the Russian Federation could continue with
this very fruitful and mutually beneficial cooperation
in new circumstances with regard to the new threats
emerging in our contemporary world.
In order to ensure the effective implementation
of the Security Council’s resolution, Kazakhstan is
ready to offer practical assistance by hosting a regional
seminar for Central Asian countries. This would be in
conjunction with the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006). We also highly appreciate the
open briefing to be held on 9 October by the Chair of
the 1718 Committee for all Member States.
With regard to Iran, we would like to note that the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPoA) on the
Iranian nuclear programme was achieved as a result of
intense prolonged negotiations, and we were honoured
to host two rounds of those talks in our southern
capital, Almaty. It is necessary to acknowledge that this
agreement has put Iran on a nuclear-free path, with the
IAEA confirming that Iran is fulfilling all its nuclear
obligations. We should therefore convincingly show
Pyongyang the correct road map, with a legal solution
that also works pragmatically. It is worth pointing out
that it was due to the active efforts of the parties, through
their determined peace talks, that the JCPoA was
achieved against the backdrop of continuing sanctions.
Another glaring illustration of a weakened
non-proliferation regime is the case of the use WMD
in Syria. In general, Kazakhstan is firmly convinced
that the Security Council must be united at this critical
stage in its approach to finding a political solution to
the crisis in Syria. For our part, we will continue to
provide the Astana platform a complement in order to
facilitate the negotiation processes in Geneva. In turn,
an early resolution of the military and political crisis in
Syria would allow us to remove the vacuum that allows
chemical weapons be used with impunity.
The non-proliferation regime is greatly supported
by the cooperation mechanisms of resolution 1540
(2004), and every effort must be made to strengthen its
implementation. My country participates actively in its
work and continues to provide financial assistance. In
8/25

21/09/2017

this context, we acknowledge that the Nuclear Security
Summits, initiated by the United States and followed by
others, have significantly reduced the nuclear threat and
strengthened the global architecture of nuclear safety.
Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev
proposed, during the launch of the IAEA low-enriched
uranium bank facility in Kazakhstan, reviving the
process of Nuclear Security Summits and offered
Astana as a host for such a summit in the future. He
has also proposed to unite the efforts of all the States
from nuclear weapon-free zones, which have proven to
be one of the most effective means in the fight against
the spread of nuclear weapons.
All of us need to show responsibility, political
will and wisdom to take decisions of great historical
significance. We need to put the good of humankind
above national interests to solve one of the most
difficult global problems — keeping the world safe
from WMDs. I am confident that we will do so.
The President: I invite the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt to take the floor.
Mr. Selim (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President,
at the outset, I should like to express my sincere joy
at seeing you preside over the Security Council this
month. I would also like to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for her valuable briefing. We can conclude from
that briefing that a new and comprehensive approach is
needed to guarantee the adoption of effective measures
in an attempt to put an end to the threat of weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs).
We must also stress the centrality of disarmament
and
non-proliferation
efforts
in
maintaining
international peace and security. In light of the vital
importance that Egypt attaches to the disarmament and
non-proliferation of WMDs, and to seize this important
opportunity to discuss such a crucial issue in such an
important setting, I have decided, contrary to normal
practice, to deliver my statement today in English to
ensure the full clarity of my message.
(spoke in English)
Egypt has always been at the forefront of multilateral
efforts aimed at the disarmament and non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, which continue to
represent one of the most pressing threats to humankind
and to international peace and security. We highly
value the indispensable role of the Security Council
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

in addressing proliferation challenges and enforcing
the relevant Security Council resolutions and legal
framework governing the issue. However, we believe
that the Council’s working methods in this area require
significant improvement. We should examine more
efficient and inclusive methods that would improve
the sense of ownership of the measures adopted, seek
a stronger utilization of the Secretary-General’s good
offices, and always adopt decisions that reinforce the
concept that the ultimate aim of all measures adopted by
the Council is to achieve a peaceful political solution.
From a more comprehensive perspective, Egypt
reiterates its concern over the grave threat posed by the
continued existence of nuclear weapons, and we reaffirm
that the total, verifiable and irreversible elimination of
such weapons represents the ultimate guarantee against
their proliferation and the ultimate warranty against
their use by States or non-State actors. Attaining this
goal largely depends on the implementation by the
nuclear weapon States of their obligations under article
6 of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) and leading the efforts towards the
achievement of universal adherence to the Treaty, which
continues to represent the cornerstone of international
security and the core of today’s disarmament and
non-proliferation architecture.
In spite of the evident tangible progress achieved in
the area of non-proliferation, progress towards nuclear
disarmament continues to be held hostage to construed
conceptions pertaining to strategic stability. It is time
for us, States Members of the United Nations, to have
an honest and inclusive discussion on the validity
and consistency of those arguments that imply that
the possession of nuclear weapons and reliance on
nuclear deterrence contribute to international security
and stability. In fact, a closer look at contemporary
non-proliferation challenges, including country-specific
cases, would clearly reveal that, one way or another,
those challenges flow from the continued existence
of nuclear weapons and the discriminatory nature of
the non-proliferation regime, which undermines its
credibility and effectiveness.
There is no doubt that, in a world free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, the
United Nations and the Security Council would have
been much better positioned to address non-proliferation
threats and cases of non-compliance in a more credible
and non-discriminatory manner. Practice has shown
that it is quite illusive to address non-proliferation

S/PV. 8053

while disregarding disarmament, or selectively tackle
cases of non-compliance while deliberately ignoring
achieving the universality of the NPT.
Several recent remarkable developments, such
as the adoption of the Humanitarian Pledge, as well
as a landmark treaty prohibiting nuclear weapons,
are clear signs that the circumstances have changed
on the international stage — clear messages that the
non-nuclear-weapon States that have truly committed
themselves to the principles of disarmament and
non-proliferation are becoming increasingly impatient
with regard to the need to seriously address the gaps in
the prevailing regime and the discrimination embedded
therein, which was not intended to last forever at the
time of the NPT negotiations or at its entry into force.
Despite the extremely volatile nature of its region,
Egypt has proven its good intentions by becoming party
to the NPT and fully implementing its obligations, in
recognition of the vital role of the Treaty in international
security. We took those decisions in good faith because
we value human life and international security.
Furthermore, Egypt has always actively supported
and implemented all Security Council resolutions
aimed at addressing country-specific proliferation
concerns without discrimination, as well as combating
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors.
Egypt continues to fully support the Council’s role
in seeking a peaceful solution to address the nuclear
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
which violate Security Council resolutions and which
we strongly condemn. We also support the Council’s
supervision of Iran’s compliance with its obligations, as
well as establishing credible facts regarding the parties
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Nevertheless, the Middle East regrettably continues
to be one of the most evident examples of the threats
that the non-proliferation regime is facing, as well as
the selective manner in which the Security Council
has approached such threats. It is important to recall
that the Security Council has failed to implement the
stipulations of resolution 687 (1991), which contains an
explicit recognition of the objective of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East.
It is therefore unsurprising that the region is
experiencing an unprecedented level of frustration,
especially among the Arab countries, due to the repeated
failures in implementing the agreed undertaking to

17-295739/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction. This is reflected in the
resolution on the Middle East adopted at the 1995 NPT
Review and Extension Conference, which represents an
integral part of the decision on the indefinite extension
of the Treaty. We remain greatly disappointed by the
decision of three States parties to the NPT to block
consensus on the final document of the 2015 NPT
Review Conference, thereby further eroding the
credibility of the Treaty.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our principled
position that such thematic, cross-cutting issues
pertaining to the enforcement of disarmament and
non-proliferation commitments should also be
addressed in a more inclusive manner and with the
active involvement of all Member States in all the
relevant organs of the United Nations. Collective
security for all is a necessary requirement now more
than ever to achieve the kind of sustainable peace and
development that we owe to future generations.
The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to take the floor.
Mr. Klimkin (Ukraine): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting on this highly important
issue at the request of the United States delegation. I
also appreciate the substantive briefing by UnderSecretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu.
For years the international community has
been working persistently to establish a rules-based
international order “to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war” — a phrase we all know
too well. A whole range of international instruments
were elaborated to that end, especially in the area of
non-proliferation. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has become a key fundamental
element of the system of collective security. Was it a
major achievement? Definitely, yes. As of today, 191
States have adhered to the Treaty. Is it an ultimate
success? Here I am not so sure. Almost 50 years after
its entry into force, the possible use of nuclear weapons
remains a threat. Furthermore, some States still aspirte
to develope their own nuclear-weapon capabilities. In
addition, the Chemical Weapons Convention has been
blatantly trampled — in Syria — for the first time in
many years. I cannot fail to mention the growing risk of
the most dangerous materials falling into the hands of
non-State actors, whether intentionally or as a result of
neglect or oversight.
10/25

21/09/2017

The mere fact that today we must again discuss
how to enforce Security Council resolutions aimed at
preventing the spread of weapons of mass destructions
clearly proves that the existing system of established
norms and principles has been eroded. This is not just
about proliferation, but is an indication of the broader
problem of insufficient implementation of international
law and of systematic violations thereof. The current
state of affairs can suit only those who seek to undermine
the very foundations of the international order. A lack
of real accountability for defying international norms
only encourages further breaches.
North Korea is probably the most appalling case.
Despite numerous decisions by this organ, the regime
continues its nuclear and missile programme, keeping
the entire region and its own people hostage. It seems
that North Korea’s leaders are prepared to sacrifice
their own people, starving them to death, just to satisfy
their rampant ambitions. Unfortunately, we know how
it feels from our own history when Soviet rulers created
famine in Ukraine, selling grain for gold, using slave
labour in camps to build up military capacity, and
testing nuclear weapons on their own troops just to
see how they worked. The nuclear ambitions of North
Korea and its recent actions in defiance of Security
Council decisions is an open challenge to the entire
international community.
In the Middle East, the use of chemical
weapons — something that was considered unthinkable
less than a decade ago — now represents a very clear
danger. The task is therefore to reverse this precarious
trend and prevent the world from sliding into a state
of lawlessness. We must stand united to achieve a
universal adherence to rules that we ourselves created.
How do we ensure the implementation of Council
resolutions to prevent the spread of the most dangerous
and destructive weapons? Indeed, the unconditional
and faithful implementation of the relevant resolutions
is a key prerequisite to reduce the level of threat and to
prevent any kind of new provocation. Yet the Council
is not always united and staunch in taking necessary
measures for an effective, rather than formal, response.
Breaches of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, as
well as the use of other weapons of mass destruction,
such as chemical weapons, should be treated by the
international community as a clear danger. That is why
I urge Council members to put aside differences and
use every tool available to ensure full compliance with
the relevant decisions.
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

In the absence of the political will to do so, the
situation can spiral out of control. There should
be unavoidable accountability for each and every
violation. The risks in this area arise not only from
gaps in national legislation, but also from the rapid
developments in science and technology, as well as
e-commerce, along with the lack of awareness among
academia, industry and civil society. Strengthening
cooperation in preventing the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction is therefore fundamental and
absolutely essential.
No part of the globe is immune to the risk of
proliferation. In the 1990s, Ukraine voluntarily
dismantled the world’s third-largest nuclear arsenal. I
remember that time quite well, as my father was flying
Soviet nuclear bombers and I started my diplomatic
career on nuclear disarmament. We Ukrainians did
that being convinced of the supremacy of fundamental
international principles, such as the inviolability
of international borders, territorial integrity and
sovereignty. We believed that those principles were
sacred to everyone. Two decades later we still hold those
principles dear. Yet we came to realize, unfortunately all
too well, that they are not sacred to everyone. I want to
stress, in that regard, that violations of international law,
including in the sphere of non-proliferation, constitute
the single most significant threat to international peace
and security.
As members of the Council know, Ukraine is
confronting aggression by a nuclear-weapon State,
Russia. Brutal violations of international obligations,
including under the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, by
Russia, which acceded to assurances of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, undermine the
whole United Nations security system, based on the
principles of international law. One could also recall,
in that regard, the obligation of the nuclear-weapons
States set out in the final document of the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons:
“to fully respect their existing commitments with
regard to security assurances”.
More than three years ago, Russia not only
carried an act of military aggression against Ukraine
but, by violating the Budapest Memorandum, it also
demonstrated that the solemn promise of a nuclear
Power to respect the independence and sovereignty
of Ukraine, to refrain from the threat or use of force

S/PV. 8053

against the territorial integrity or political independence
of Ukraine and to ensure that none of their weapons
ever be used against Ukraine, except in self-defence or
otherwise in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, is now worth nothing.
The Russian narrative that it did not breach the
Budapest Memorandum since nuclear weapons were
not used against my country is yet another cynical
manipulation. Just think of the impression it made in
the eyes of States seeking to bolster their deterrent
potential. Just think of the impact to the global
non-proliferation infrastructure.
The recent drill on launching a massive nuclearmissile strike, which was conducted during the Zapad
2017 exercise, does not inspire any confidence in
Russia. It can hardly be considered as contributing
to strengthening international security in general,
or the non-proliferation regime in particular. That
is why we are convinced that the issue of providing
non-nuclear-weapon States with effective negative
security guarantees is not a platitude. The global
non-proliferation regime will benefit immensely
from enforceable security guarantees. Let us all be
absolutely frank on this issue: empty proclamations do
not convince anyone anymore.
The international community has a collective
responsibility to restore respect for international law
and find lasting solutions to the most urgent threats
to global peace and security. It is therefore ultimately
the responsibility of the Security Council to spare no
effort to achieve the overarching goal and prove that the
non-proliferation system works effectively. Otherwise,
the world map will be redrawn by newly emerged
nuclear-weapon actors. It is the Council that has to
remain determined and precise in preventing such a
scenario from becoming tomorrow’s reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): I thank you, Mr. President,
and the United States for arranging this timely and
important meeting. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Nakamitsu for the introduction to the subject.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction is
definitely a growing threat to international peace and
security. Having looked around the table — before I
begin my formal statement — I would like to say that
I cannot help but reflect on the composition of the

17-2957311/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

Security Council. We have Ukraine and Kazakhstan,
which have scrapped nuclear weapons; we have Bolivia
and Uruguay, from a continent free from such weapons;
we have the five countries that possess such weapons;
and Japan, the only country that has experienced their
destructive force and power. It therefore seems to me
that this ought to be the perfect group of countries to
move forward on this particular issue.
For close to half a century, Sweden has been a
champion of disarmament and the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. As so clearly articulated
by the Secretary-General in his opening address to the
General Assembly on Tuesday (see A/72/PV.3), those
goals are intrinsically linked. We have a moral and
humanitarian responsibility to make progress on both.
The Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
initiative is an expression of the widespread and wellfounded frustration that exists with the lack of progress
on nuclear disarmament. That will remain so until we
see real progress with nuclear-weapon States delivering
on their commitments.
Sweden is committed to the success of the current
review cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate the call in successive Security Council
resolutions to all States that have not yet done so, to sign
and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
without delay and without conditions. In addition to
providing analytical and forensic expertise, Sweden has
contributed financially in support of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) verification of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the regime established
by resolution 1540 (2004). Through the European
Union, we have contributed significantly to outreach
programmes designed to help countries strengthen
their export control systems.
Regrettably, since we joined the Council in
January, we have been called upon, time and again, to
address the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
illegal testing of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles,
and we have condemned those provocations in the
strongest terms. Likewise, we have been dealing with
numerous cases where horrific chemical weapons have
been used by the Syrian regime and by Da’esh. The
Council’s efforts to stop the spread of these deadly
weapons need the full support of all Member States
to succeed. For that reason, Sweden has called for
the universal and comprehensive implementation of
12/25

21/09/2017

existing sanctions regimes. This applies not least to the
non-proliferation-related sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We must all work together to
implement those sanctions fully, so as not to contribute
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal
nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles programmes.
Improved monitoring and targeted capacity-building
are important measures. I join the Secretary-General
in his call for unity in the Council and diplomatic
engagement to resolve the crisis.
Atrocities such as those perpetrated in the Idlib
province in April are unacceptable, and those responsible
must be brought to justice. Sweden applauds the way in
which the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the Joint Investigative Mechanism have
fulfilled their mandate by investigating cases of alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria and identifying
those responsible, with a high level of expertise
and professionalism. We must continue to give our
full and unambiguous support to these important
mechanisms. The Council must stand united to ensure
the accountability of perpetrators.
It would be remiss of me not to mention, in
that context, resolution 2231 (2016) and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action JCPOA. As stated by
Federica Mogherini last April,
“the JCPOA was a historic achievement for the
security of the region and of the whole world, a
success for multilateral diplomacy that has proven
to work and deliver”.
It is absolutely vital that all parties continue to
implement their JCPOA commitments meticulously
and unfailingly. Strict and effective verification by
the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Joint
Commission for addressing implementation matters are
vital components of the agreement.
Implementing the resolutions is just one side of
the coin. We must also nurture and defend the existing
multilateral instruments that we have established to
curtail the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Unity is key. That applies to the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, but also other important non-proliferation
tools, such as the resolution 1540 (2004) regime and
the IAEA-strengthened safeguards system, to mention
just two.
The spread of weapons of mass destruction
is one of the gravest challenges to international
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

peace and security, and a crucial responsibility of
the Council. Sweden will continue to do its part to
promote disarmament and non-proliferation, respect
for international law and accountability for those who
violate their international legal obligations.
The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan to take the floor.
Mr. Kono (Japan): Please allow me to begin
by emphasizing how timely it is for the Security
Council members to have this opportunity during the
high-level week of the General Assembly to discuss
non-proliferation, an issue that the international
community must tackle in unison.
Japan is deeply concerned by the serious
challenges facing the international non-proliferation
regime. It is critical for the Council, which has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, to resolutely and concretely address
the serious issues that are shaking the very foundation
of the non-proliferation regime.
Given the seriousness of the situation, it is urgent
that we achieve the early entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and commence
negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty without
further delay, in addition to strengthening the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons regime.
Japan calls upon the international community to work
closely on practical and concrete measures to that end.
North Korea has ignored the strong protests
and warnings of the international community by
going ahead with a ballistic missile launch that flew
over Japan last week. Earlier this month, it also
conducted its sixth nuclear test, which is suspected of
being a hydrogen-bomb test and which was on a far
greater scale than previous tests. This is an entirely
unacceptable provocation. North Korea’s provocative
actions, including its nuclear test and the series of
ballistic missile launches, pose grave challenges to the
international non-proliferation regime. It goes without
saying that North Korea’s actions clearly violate
relevant Security Council resolutions. They also pose
an unprecedented, grave and imminent threat to the
peace and security of the region, including Japan.
No bright future awaits North Korea if it continues
on its present path and its isolation from the world
continues. Japan strongly urges North Korea to fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,

S/PV. 8053

including the recently adopted resolution 2375 (2017),
and to immediately demonstrate seriousness and
concrete actions towards the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
Japan also calls for North Korea to return to compliance
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons and the International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards agreement as soon as possible.
The denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula
requires the international community to apply the
strongest possible pressure on North Korea. Current
efforts are insufficient, and further pressure is needed.
To that end, Japan strongly calls for all States Members
of the United Nations to fully and promptly implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions. No State
should be allowed to use a loophole in the North Korea
sanctions regime.
The non-proliferation of chemical weapons is
another important issue that needs to be addressed by
the international community. Japan, which experienced
a sarin chemical attack in its subway, cannot accept
the use of chemical weapons under any circumstances.
In that regard, Japan condemns in the strongest terms
the use of chemical weapons in the town of Khan
Shaykhun in Syria. The Organzation for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism are currently conducting
their investigation to identify the perpetrators of
chemical attacks. Japan supports the activities of the
Joint Investigative Mechanism. I would like to stress
that the Security Council must be united and hold
the perpetrators accountable in order to prevent a
recurrence of the use of chemical weapons.
Finally, I would like to address the issues surrounding
Iran. Japan supports the Iran nuclear deal, which will
contribute to the international non-proliferation regime
and the stability of the Middle East. It is extremely
important that the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) be continuously and steadily implemented.
In that regard, Japan supports the monitoring and
verification activities of the International Atomic
Energy Agency and again underlines the importance of
the steady implementation of the JCPOA and its spirit.
The ballistic missile launches by Iran are inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015). Japan strongly calls for
Iran to play a constructive role in the region.
I would like to conclude by calling for the
international community to make concerted efforts

17-2957313/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

against actions that threaten
non-proliferation regime.

the

21/09/2017

international

exacerbate regional instability and put the progress
made so far at risk.

The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Italy
to take the floor.

Unfortunately, we have seen no progress in Syria.
To the contrary, we have witnessed the repeated use
of chemical weapons against innocent people. That
constitutes a horrific war crime. Their use by the regime
and by Daesh must be stopped. Those found guilty of
such war crimes have to be sanctioned accordingly.
Therefore, we need to redouble our efforts to identify
anyone who has played a role in the use of chemical
weapons against the defenceless civilian population.

Mr. Alfano (Italy): I want to thank the United
States for calling for today’s meeting.
Almost 50 years ago, the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons entered into
force. Thanks to collective efforts, the Non-Proliferation
Treaty has become a pillar of our collective security.
Over the course of the Treaty’s existence, Italy has
been a champion of the Treaty. Non-proliferation
is a fundamental good that the international
community and the Security Council have to preserve.
Collective security cannot be guaranteed without
non-proliferation. It is important to have robust and
effective implementation of international law. There
should be accountability.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has caused one of the biggest crises of our times.
We have to stand firm and united in order to defend
non-proliferation, which is a common good for all of
us and a guarantee of peace, security, and stability.
Italy condemned Pyongyang’s launching of a ballistic
missile over Japan on 15 September, as well as all of
North Korea’s missile and nuclear tests. With resolution
2375 (2017), the Council sent a clear and strong
message: further attempts by the regime to defy the
United Nations will backfire. If North Korea wants to
step back from self-isolation, it must stop developing its
missile and nuclear programme.
A different story is that of Iran, which has moved
in a positive direction regarding its own nuclear
programme. The Iran nuclear deal has delivered gains
for global security by imposing strict limits on Tehran’s
nuclear programme. In return, we have lifted sanctions.
It serves as a good example of effective diplomacy and
smart sanctions. However, reaching the deal was just the
beginning. Now we must continue to ensure that Iran
does not stray off the path of nuclear non-proliferation.
As the facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015), Italy
will continue to foster the smooth implementation of
that crucial resolution. We are concerned by Iran’s
missile tests, which seem inconsistent with the spirit,
if not the letter, of resolution 2231 (2015). That can
14/25

I have a few more words on the use of sanctions.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), on North Korea, Italy has
focused on the concrete effectiveness of sanctions. It is
important to monitor their implementation in order to
get a precise picture of compliance by the sanctioned
party and address weaknesses in the enforcement
of sanctions. We have also placed emphasis on
strengthening technical assistance and capacitybuilding, providing Member States with the necessary
tools to implement the sanctions.
Moreover, we have worked to increase political
awareness of the sanctions framework. In order to
achieve that goal, the Committee has intensified
its outreach activities and has facilitated regular
exchanges of information among Member States,
the Committee and the Panel of Experts. So far, six
outreach meetings have taken place for each United
Nations regional group. We have already scheduled an
open briefing for the entire United Nations membership
on 9 October. Thanks to that outreach, an increasing
number of States are now reporting to the Committee
on the implementation of the sanctions. We are seeing
the results of our joint work.
At the same time, Italy is engaged with our partners
from the European Union to adopt resolution 2375
(2017), on North Korea, into our legal system as soon
as possible and identify more autonomous, restrictive
measures.
To conclude, we want to ensure that the sanctions
have an impact on the proliferation programmes of the
regime. However, we also want to avoid negatively
affecting the humanitarian situation because, as an
international community, we care about the fate of the
people of North Korea.
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the People’s Republic of China to
take the floor.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and their means of delivery constitutes a real threat
to international peace and threat, as well as a shared
challenge for the international community. Therefore, I
deem it extremely necessary and timely for the Security
Council to devote today’s meeting to that subject so as
to discuss how to address the proliferation challenges,
mobilize international consensus, enhance capacitybuilding and strengthen coordination and cooperation.
Thanks to the unremitting efforts of the
international community, the non-proliferation regime
has become increasingly refined and sophisticated. The
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the
Iranian nuclear issue serves as a useful lesson for the
diplomatic settlement of key non-proliferation issues.
With the continued and steady implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), international efforts have been
strengthened in order to deal with challenges posed by
non-State actors.
Meanwhile, we have to recognize that the current
international security situation is undergoing profound
changes. Non-proliferation still faces challenges and
risks. A few individual countries defying the consensus
of the international community have conducted several
nuclear tests. The risk of non-State actors, especially
terrorists, acquiring and using WMDs is on the rise. The
international non-proliferation regime must urgently
increase its authority, universality and effectiveness.
Non-proliferation is a matter of international
peace and security and makes up an important part of
communally building a shared future for humankind.
It requires coordinated, good-faith international
cooperation on many fronts.
First, it is necessary to address both symptoms
and root causes. Non-proliferation is basically a matter
of security. Security concerns may be the biggest
motivation behind proliferation. Countries must pursue
common cooperative, comprehensive and sustainable
security and pursue a new type of international relations
that feature win-win cooperation. Countries must
renounce the notion of their own absolute security and
opt for universal security for all. That is the effective
way to fundamentally resolve proliferation issues.

S/PV. 8053

Secondly, we need to adhere to the orientation
of diplomatic settlement. It is necessary to impose
sanctions and pressure as appropriate on countries
that blatantly violate international non-proliferation
rules, but Sanctions are not a panacea — dialogue
and negotiation present a fundamental solution.
Confrontation and sanctions alone only lead to the
escalation and spilloverof conflicts. We need to discard
the willful use of long-arm jurisdiction, as it is in the
interests of nobody.
Thirdly, we must uphold the international
non-proliferation regime. The Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) is customary international law in the field of
non-proliferation. The international non-proliferation
regime, with the NPT as its bedrock, is an essential
element of the international security order established
after the Second World War. It has prevented more
countries from accessing weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) while protecting global strategic balance and
stability. The practice of using international law when
it is suitable, but putting it aside when it is not, should
be discarded. Double standards or a selective approach
should also be discarded; otherwise, the dyke of the
international non-proliferation regime could collapse a
result of one small leak.
Fourthly, we need to strengthen the non-proliferation
capacity of various countries. The primary responsibility
rests with Governments. We must respect and support
countries in formulating their non-proliferation policies,
according to national circumstances, and help countries
bolster their laws and regulations on non-proliferation,
strengthen law enforcement capacities and carry out
exchanges, mutual learning and cooperation in the
field of non-proliferation, so as to jointly enhance
non-proliferation performance and capacity.
China firmly opposes the proliferation of WMDs
and their means of delivery. We have set up a complete
non-proliferation and export control system and have
ensured its effective implementation. At the same time,
China is also actively participating in international
non-proliferation processes, while comprehensively
and completely implementing relevant Security Council
resolutions, and has been dedicated to the political
settlement of hotspot non-proliferation issues.
China has played a contrustive part in negotiations
on the JCPOA and contributed its own proposals. China
has made tireless efforts for a negotiated settlement to the
Korean nuclear issue. We have raised a suspension-for-

17-2957315/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

suspension initiative and a dual-track approach, which
are feasible and practical solutions to the issue. China
believes that Security Council resolutions on the Korean
nuclear issue should be implemented in their entirety
entirety and in an effective way, while intensifying
sanctions. It is also important to promote the resumption
of talks and dialogue. Sanctions pressure needs to be
translated into the motivation for negotiations. China
also supports the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and United Nations agencies in
reaching comprehensive objectives and carrying out
comprehensive, objective and fair investigations into
the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
International non-proliferation efforts require
the participation of various countries, and vice versa.
China is ready to work with all parties to make a
greater contribution to maintaining and strengthening
the international non-proliferation regime, promoting
cooperation on global governance in the field of
non-proliferation and building a community of shared
future for humankind.
Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): On
behalf of France, I thank the Ethiopian presidency,
the United States and its Secretary of State, Mr. Rex
Tillerson, for convening this very timely and necessary
meeting. I also thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for her very
informative speech.
The General Assembly’s high-level week will be
marked by intense discussions on the acute threats
to our world. Our strategic environment and the
foundations of peace and security, as we know them,
are facing major challenges, particularly in the area of​​
non-proliferation. There is no doubt that the outlook
is bleak. With the barbaric use of toxic agents in
Syria, Iraq and Asia, we are witnessing the disastrous
reappearance of weapons that sow the seeds of fear and
death among people — ones that we thought we had
banished to the annals of history.
I also refer to the growing risks on the Korean
peninsula, which will have monopolized many of our
discussions this week. The threat has now risen to an
increasingly alarming and unprecedented level and is
of concern to us all. Far from reverting to reason, the
Pyongyang regime is continuing its military escalation
and continues to provide evidence of its irresponsible
attitude through its increasingly disturbing and
threatening actions.
16/25

21/09/2017

Beyond those worrying cases, we are facing
increasingly complex proliferation flows and increased
risks of diversion of sensitive goods and technologies,
which are more and more easily accessible. Finally,
proliferation is no longer the exclusive domain of
a single type of actor — the risk of non-State actors
getting their hands on sensitive materials is now a
dangerous reality. In the face of those extremely serious
challenges, only pragmatic and realistic multilateralism
can be the solution.
The Iranian case confirms that a proactive attitude
from the international community can open up solutions
to proliferation crises. The Vienna agreement, which
France has actively helped to build and improve, is a
major historic milestone. President Macron has said that
France is firmly committed to it. It would be a mistake
to denounce the agreement, as it would be irresponsible
to pursue an à la carte implementation of the provisions
of the resolution that endorsed it. We must respond to
the intensification of Iran’s ballistic activities, some
of which are not in conformity with resolution 2231
(2015). Such behaviour is destabilizing for regional
security and undermines mutual trust.
To put it another way, there can be no alternative to
the non-proliferation regime. That is a constant line from
which France has never deviated. That is particularly
true of the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, where
those responsible for the tragedy on 4 April and so
many other attacks will have to be held accountable.
That also applies to the ongoing crisis on the Korean
peninsula, which we must respond to with firmness
and unity. The only way out of the crisis is to chart
the way for a negotiated solution. While North Korea
refuses that option and chooses dangerous isolation,
only firmness can give us the leverage we seek to bring
the regime to the negotiating table.
Collective action to contain proliferation requires
dialogue and a direct discussion of crises. However, it
also involves concrete and operation action. To contain
and curb proliferation, we must, more than ever,
increase our mobilization. However, let us not neglect
the virtue of the regimes already in place — the current
non-proliferation regime is being severely tested but it
has also proved its worth.
The Security Council has long been committed to
strengthening the current non-proliferation regime. It can
count on the support of the international organizations
that are capable of verifying the compliance of States
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

with their commitments and establishing facts and
responsibilities. I would like to commend the work
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the International Atomic Energy Agency.
In addition, multilateralism, as part of
non-proliferation, strengthens cooperation and the
exchange of information. Mechanisms, such as
export control regimes and the Proliferation Security
Initiative, are part of a virtuous movement that enhances
our level of vigilance. We must work to strengthen
those mechanisms.
To conclude, I wish to recall one simple truth. What
is at stake is the weakening of the non-proliferation
regime. If that were to happen, the very existence and
authority of the rule of law would be threatened. We would
need to further sanction violations. Beyond our passing
political differences, as deep as they might seem, there
are fundamental rules from which we cannot waver.
Non-proliferation is at the forefront of those, because
it is a important concern to us all. France’s message is
simple — the fight against proliferation is a collective
responsibility. Everyone must contribute to shouldering
that responsibility as much as they can. There is no
room for impotence, fatalism or political exploitation.
We can and must do more. Our responsibility today,
our credibility in the future and our ability to protect
generations to come from the risk of an eroded or even
collapsed non-proliferation architecture are at stake. I
assure the Council that France is fully committed to
that endeavour.

S/PV. 8053

groups of concerned States. If we are to succeed, the
Council and strong multilateral institutions must be at
the heart of that approach and we must persist when
countries continue to defy the international rules-based
system. That is why it is right that we have collectively
developed a framework of sanctions against North
Korea and continued to strengthen those sanctions in
the face of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
dangerous provocations. I was in Seoul only last
month and was struck by the focus of President Moon
Jae-in’s Government in trying to resolve the situation,
recognizing that what has long been a regionalized
dispute now has truly global ramifications.
Secretary Tillerson has made it clear that the United
States does not regard it as desirable to work for regime
change or accelerated reunification of the peninsula,
to garrison its forces north of the thirty-eighth parallel
or indeed to harm the North Korean people. Yet the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has responded
with more missile tests and another nuclear test. While
the regime prioritizes its military programmes, the
people of North Korea suffer deprivation and hardship.
That is why we must all continue to press North Korea
to respect the Council’s resolutions and, even at this
late stage, to change its reckless course. We must
enforce the measures that we have adopted and be
prepared to expand them if North Korea continues on
that reckless path.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is one of the gravest regional and international security
concerns. This threat does not respect national borders,
and the proliferation of such weapons must end. We all
have a part to play in this.Our shared rules and norms
are designed to keep the world safe. The Council has
a responsibility to prevent proliferation, tackle threats
and respond when these weapons are used. Individual
nations also have a responsibility to implement the
measures imposed by the Council and indeed to be
ready to go further when the situation requires.

Turning to the very different case of Iran, we
now know that the multilateral system can and will
continue to deliver results. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) has succeeded in limiting
Iran’s nuclear capability. Iran has rolled back its nuclear
programme, and the International Atomic Energy
Agency has had unprecedented access. The British
Government will therefore continue to abide by its
commitments under that deal and urge the other parties
to do the same. Iran must also continue to do so if we
are all to have confidence in the peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. However, while the JCPOA has
dealt with one risk, others, as we all know, remain. Iran
continues to play a destabilizing role within its region
and its ballistic-missile testing is still inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015). Iran must respect the call of the
Council and cease such activities.

Individually and collectively we must enforce these
rules, working through bodies such as the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), or as

As other members have said, the situation in Syria
also poses the most serious proliferation challenges.
This year, sarin gas has again been used as weapon,
in a clear violation of the international prohibition

Mr. Field (United Kingdom): I thank Secretary
Tillerson for calling this important meeting of the
Security Council.

17-2957317/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

of the use of chemical weapons. There must be no
impunity for the perpetrators of such terrible crimes
against humanity. The United Kingdom Government
urges Council members to support the vital work of
the Council-mandated OPCW-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism and to renew its mandate, and
we must keep up the efforts to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction,
based on resolution 1540 (2004).
We all recognize that these proliferation challenges
are very complex. They require a persistent and united
approach in line with existing treaties and norms. That
is why the Government of the United Kingdom, for
one, does not believe that the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons, which was opened for signature
yesterday, is helpful. I believe that it will only create
unnecessary divisions and undermine the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which rightly
sits at the heart of all of our non-proliferation efforts.
The Security Council has a heavy responsibility
to protect international peace and security. Member
States share that responsibility and must play their part
in implementing the Council’s resolutions. We now
need to work tirelessly together to stop proliferation,
save lives and make the world a safer place.
Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) (spoke internationaln
Spanish): I would like to thank the delegation of the
United States for convening this meeting and for the
concept note that has been circulated. I am also grateful
to Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, for her statement.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
is a serious and real threat to international peace and
security. When we discuss the proliferation of such
weapons in the Security Council, we must remember
that all States have a duty to respect their obligations
under international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In 1968, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) was hailed as the most
significant international agreement on disarmament
ever achieved. Under the Treaty, non-nuclear-weapon
States committed to refraining from acquiring,
developing or producing such arms and to verification
by the international community, and recognized the
right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
Nuclear-weapon States committed to getting rid of
them. The NPT, which became the cornerstone of the
18/25

21/09/2017

disarmament and nuclear-non-proliferation regime,
requires a balanced implementation of its three
pillars — disarmament, non-proliferation and the
peaceful use of nuclear energy. It is the only Treaty
currently in force with regard to such weapons. Thirty
years after the NPT’s entry into force, two of the three
countries that were not signatories to it detonated
nuclear bombs and joined the category of nuclearweapon States. Much more recently, a third State,
which withdrew from the Treaty, has also entered that
category, and we cannot ignore that.
With the fiftieth anniversary of the NPT one year
away, it is clear that the goal of achieving general and
complete disarmament is a long way off. Disarmament
today is either at a standstill or, worse, sliding
backwards. To quote article VI of the NPT,
“Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes
to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective
measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and
on a treaty on general and complete disarmament
under strict and effective international control.”
The commitment undertaken by the nuclearweapon States is far from having been fully upheld.
A clear example of this is the absence of those States
from the negotiation process on the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which opened for
signature yesterday. Our country is proud to be a
signatory thereto.
The use and threat of use of nuclear weapons
represent a crime against humanity and a grave
violation of international law, including international
humanitarian law, and of the Charter of the United
Nations. The only guarantee against the use and threat
of use of these weapons is their express prohibition and
their total elimination.
At a time when tension on the Korean peninsula
continues to escalate and when the threat of the use of
nuclear weapons and of a military conflict is keeping
everyone on high alert, it is necessary to remain calm
and ensure that we protect global peace and security.
Nuclear weapons must never again be used by any actor,
under any circumstances. There is no military solution
to the North Korean problem. The solution must be a
political one.
The Security Council must remain united on this
issue and uphold its commitment to a peaceful and
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

diplomatic solution to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. Any other option would be an immense
failure for the Council and the Organization.
Uruguay sees no other solution to the North
Korean issue than one that is found through dialogue,
negotiation and political commitment between parties.
Regarding chemical weapons, Uruguay condemns
the use of toxic chemicals as weapons against civilians
in any armed conflict. Such actions constitute war
crimes, and those responsible must be held accountable
and brought to justice. In this connection, Uruguay
supports the work undertaken by the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and we commend the
work of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism (JIM) to clarify who was responsible for the
incidents in Syria. The JIM has identified the terrorist
group the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham-Da’esh
and the Government of Syria as responsible for some of
the chemical attacks in Syria.
Uruguay also wishes to underscore the importance
of halting the proliferation of conventional weapons to
areas of conflict. The trafficking and trading of arms
among the parties to armed conflict directly contributes
to the suffering and death of civilians. As was the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Uruguay stated in May
in the Council, quoting the Stockholm International
Peace Research Institute, the five permanent members
of the Security Council supplied 75 per cent of the
volume of the total arms exports for the 2011-2015
period (see S/PV.7951).
As a country resolutely committed to bolstering
the disarmament and non-proliferation regime,
Uruguay from this rostrum issues a strong appeal to
all States to urgently comply with all disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations, in line with the
international legal framework. In particular, we appeal
to those States that produce, possess and sell arms.
Disarmament and non-proliferation must be a priority
for all without exception.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin, Mr. President, by conveying to you the sincere
apologies of his Excellency Mr. Sidiki Kaba, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, who, because of a lastminute scheduling conflict, was not able to participate,
as he had planned to do.

S/PV. 8053

Our delegation would like to thank the United
States of America for having requested this meeting
and the Ethiopian presidency for having facilitated its
convening. We also thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, whose
very important statement has shed light on our work.
Our debate today is a topical one, given recent
events, which constantly remind us of the pressing
nature of the terrorist threat and the growing risk of
seeing non-State actors acquire nuclear, chemical
or biological weapons. Indeed, the rapid progress
of science and technology, as well as globalization,
facilitated by ongoing developments in the world of
business, all are new factors that non-State actors could
use to help them acquire weapons of mass destruction.
This is demonstrated on the one hand by the use of
chemical weapons in the Middle East and in Asia and,
on the other, by issues related to cybersecurity, whose
consequences could be even more serious if they were
to be attacks aimed at critical infrastructure such as
nuclear power plants.
Meanwhile, on the Korean peninsula, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is methodically pursuing
its military nuclear programme in deliberate violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions, with the
objective of developing nuclear weapons and their
means of delivery, which seriously undermines the
non-proliferation regime and exacerbates tension in the
region and beyond.
All of this clearly reflects the need to rigorously
implement the commitments contained in the various
relevant resolutions. Indeed, in the absence of genuine
political will to put a term to it, the risk of proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction will continue to grow.
In the light of all these factors, my country
condemned as firmly as is possible the launch, for the
second time in less than a month, of a North Korean
ballistic missile, which flew over the Japanese island of
Hokkaido before crashing into the Pacific. The launch
took place less than a week after the adoption by the
Council of resolution 2375 (2017), which condemned
North Korea’s sixth nuclear test, on 3 September.
The targeted measures rightly adopted in the
previous resolution of the Council against North Korea
must, in order to meet the challenge posed by the North
Korean ballistic and nuclear programme, be part of a
comprehensive political strategy that would prompt the
parties to engage, with the assistance of the international
community, in a frank dialogue whose ultimate

17-2957319/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

objective would be respect by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea of its international obligations and
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
That is why my country, in reiterating our
commitment to a peaceful and diplomatic settlement of
the Korean crisis, calls once again for a resumption of
a direct dialogue between the parties so as to create
conditions conducive to peaceful coexistence between
the countries and the peoples of the region.
Right now, the challenge to be met by all of
us — States, international organizations and the
business world — remains that of implementing the
current sanctions measures, because failure to do so
provides the North Korean authorities with sizable
loopholes that they are systematically using to mobilize
the resources necessary to pursue their illegal and
dangerous programme.
We must work to strengthen the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) by making
it universal and by promoting respect for previously
reached commitments. Senegal remains convinced
that working for the universalization of the NPT and
the implementation of its relevant provisions, as well
as acting in a resolute manner to secure the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty,
constitute decisive steps on the path towards general
and complete disarmament.
Furthermore, it is now more necessary than ever to
draw up a detailed inventory of all sources of weapons
of mass destruction throughout the world so as to ensure
that they are systematically placed under safeguards
or destroyed. Significant measures have already been
taken to this end, but a great deal remains to be done.
In an interdependent world, where our interests
are linked together, strengthening cooperation in the
areas of border controls, the monitoring of financial
flows and Internet activity and legal assistance is
more necessary than ever if we are to develop an
aggressive preventive strategy designed to ensure that
weapons of mass destruction do not fall into the wrong
hands. Of necessity, that involves not just sharing
experience but working to synergize the efforts of all
the stakeholders concerned.
Nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation are
interrelated and dialectically linked goals. It is therefore
meaningless to speak of general and complete
disarmament when, in addition to the nuclear-weapon
20/25

21/09/2017

States that already exist, there are others that are
circumventing the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons so as to acquire such weapons. Our
work on nuclear non-proliferation must therefore must
go hand in hand with the effective implementation of
disarmament, according to a verifiable and irreversible
timetable. To that end, our initiatives should focus on
the multilateral framework that the United Nations
system offers.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I will begin by stating frankly that we
were surprised by the inclusion of the issue of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) in the context of country-specific topics.
There are other, more inclusive, formats for that. In
our view, the most appropriate format for Security
Council meetings on non-proliferation is one involving
a discussion of general principles for solving the
problem rather than picking fights with States that have
had the misfortune to be designated so-called rogue
countries by individual members of the Council. That
is the approach in the concept note from the United
States delegation, which artificially links three country
situations that have nothing in common. To understand
the essence of what is happening, a brief history lesson
is in order.
Russia and the United States were at the forefront
of developing the concept of international cooperation
aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from
falling into the hands of non-State actors, as embodied
in resolution 1540 (2004). Our countries affirmed the
importance of setting up a judicial and law-enforcement
bulwark designed to prevent such evils through
intergovernmental cooperation. Thereafter, however,
the landscape began to change significantly, and the
concept was sacrificed to the geopolitical manoeuvres
of some of our partners, leading to acute destabilization
in a number of regions around the world. We are all well
aware of what the result of exploiting non-proliferation
mechanisms to put pressure unpopular regimes was.
The fate of Saddam Hussein, who, as we know, had
no weapons of mass destruction but was accused of
possessing them, and of Muammar Al-Qadhafi, who
voluntarily gave up his own programme, became a
pretext for certain States to accelerate their programmes
for developing weapons of mass destruction. While that
in no way justifies the nuclear-missile programme of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, it is short17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

sighted to ignore or fail to understand the reasons
behind it.
Taking advantage of the externally generated
chaos — and sometimes military interventions, such
as in Syria, Iraq and Libya — extremists of all stripes
have been granted a broad range of opportunities
for acquiring and making use of weapons of mass
destruction. What is that if not a gross violation of
resolution 1540 (2004)?
An unprecedented new challenge has emerged.
Attempts to get the Security Council to at least pay
attention to various glaring facts, let alone take action,
continue to be deliberately blocked without any serious
justification. Consider, for example, that resolution 2118
(2013) includes a provision obliging Governments that
are neighbours of Syria to inform the Security Council
immediately of any attempts by non-State actors to
acquire weapons of mass destruction or their means
of delivery. Judging from the lack of any such reports
to the Council, one might suppose that the problem
simply does not exist. However, our attempts to raise
that issue in the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) were firmly suppressed by our
Western partners. We have repeatedly heard about
the use of poisonous substances by combatants of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
groups. There are reports of their access to both the
technologies and infrastructure needed to manufacture
such weapons. Such problems should be thoroughly
investigated by the Security Council, but thanks to
the efforts of some of our partners, they continue to be
passed over in silence.
Let us speak frankly. Syria no longer has any
Government chemical-weapon programmes, and the
task of ensuring the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction in Syria is now limited to preventing
them from falling into the hands of non-State actors.
As far as we know, no one has presented convincing
evidence to the contrary to the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Moreover,
the Russian-Syrian proposals for conducting a
comprehensive investigation of the United States version
of the tragic events of April in Khan Shaykhun were
met with active opposition. The result is that so-called
reliable reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons
at Syria’s Al-Shayrat airbase, which was used to justify
an act of aggression against a State Member of the
United Nations, has still not been confirmed by OPCW
inspectors or experts from the OPCW-United Nations

S/PV. 8053

Joint Investigative Mechanism, despite the fact that the
facility has been open to them since April. We firmly
believe that it is the efforts by a number of our partners
to force the facts of these matters to fit the Procrustean
bed of their political purposes that constitute the main
reasons for the appearance in the Middle East and North
Africa of the chimera of chemical terrorism, which has
begun to abate only since the Syrian people have made
a major breakthrough in the fight against terrorism.
We believe that the key to an effective WMD
non-proliferation regime lies in renouncing interference
in the internal affairs of States and the policy of
overthrowing unpopular regimes, as well as in
establishing a unified and indivisible security system for
all countries, without exception. If the those issues are
not dealt with, the Security Council’s non-proliferation
sanctions will merely freeze the current issues without
helping to resolve them for good, especially at a time
when the Council’s primary role in the maintenance of
international peace and security is being undermined
by the introduction of illegitimate, unilateral measures.
We have seen the effectiveness of respect for
those principles in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which has
become a symbol of the triumph of multilateral diplomacy
and an affirmation of our ability to settle highly
complex problems through negotiation as long as the
requisite political will exists. The information-sharing,
verification and control mechanisms developed within
the framework of the JCPOA are enabling us to make
progress on a path to a broader conclusion by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as to the
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme. Based
on regular inspections, the Agency has confirmed
that Iran is fully complying with its obligations. We
were surprised today to learn from the United States
Secretary of State that Russia is apparently undermining
the IAEA. That is, of course, news to us. Unfortunately,
we have recently seen irresponsible, unilateral attempts
to torpedo that breakthrough collective agreement. We
hope that common sense will prevail in the end, and that
the Plan will be allowed to become fully operational,
thereby allowing it to reach its full potential. In that
regard, implementation of their voluntary commitments
in good faith by all States Parties to the JCPOA is key.
At the beginning of my statement, I said that
these country situations are not linked to one
another, but I would like to correct myself. Iran and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea became

17-2957321/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

linked today, because a withdrawal from the JCPOA
by the United States would be the worst possible
signal we could send to North Korea. Similar and
even more intensive diplomatic efforts are now needed
on the Korean peninsula. We need to start now so
as not to waste any more time or wait for the logic
of confrontation to prevail. We are convinced that
the reasons for the tensions on the peninsula are not
just Pyongyang’s nuclear-missile programme and the
pretext it creates for heightened military activity in the
region but are also the result of the lack of mechanisms
providing a single and indivisible security system
for every country in North-East Asia. It is clear that
without such mechanisms, a political and diplomatic
settlement of the problems on the Korean peninsula is
impossible. We do see a solution in the implementation
of the Russian-Chinese initiative, which at present is
the only plan of action on the table. It would be a step
in the right direction if the Security Council endorsed
the well-known “four nos” concept, spelled out by
Secretary of State Tillerson, who is present here today.
In conclusion, I would once again like to stress
that the future prospects for non-proliferation cannot
be considered in isolation from the overall strategic
context. Realpolitik presupposes that all factors with a
bearing on strategic stability and international security
must be considered. Among others, they include the
continuing establishment by the United States of global
missile defence systems and NATO’s joint nuclear
missions, which it carries out in violation of articles
I and II of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
Strengthening the WMD non-proliferation regime
is important to Russia, and we will do our utmost in
support of that goal, with a focus on active cooperation
with our regional and international partners.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her
briefing. We would also like to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Korea, to the Security Council.
The immeasurable destructive power of nuclear
weapons means that it is now imperative that the legal
ban on nuclear war be strictly adhered to in practice if we
are to ensure the survival of civilization and humankind
itself. Because of their permanent radioactivity, nuclear
22/25

21/09/2017

weapons, whose terrible and indiscriminate effects are
inevitably felt by military personnel and civilians alike,
represent a threat to humankind’s very survival and
could ultimately render the entire Earth uninhabitable,
as is stated in the preamble of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, otherwise known as the Treaty
of Tlatelolco.
I am from that region, the first in the world to
declare itself a zone of peace. Bolivia, a constitutionally
pacifist State, promotes a culture of dialogue and
the right to peace, as well as cooperation among the
peoples of the world, with full respect for sovereignty,
through diplomacy among peoples. Our Constitution
prohibits the manufacture or use of chemical, biological
and nuclear weapons on Bolivian soil. We once again
urge all States, in particular the nuclear-weapon States,
to stop including nuclear weapons in their doctrines,
security policies, military strategies, political discourse
and arsenals.
During its presidency of the Security Council in
June, Bolivia convened an open debate entitled “The
global effort to prevent the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors” (see S/PV.7985),
with the goal of determining how to strengthen the
preventive system so as to avoid the humanitarian,
political, economic and environmental catastrophes
that could result from the use of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons by non-State actors, particularly
terrorist groups. We firmly believe that resolution
1540 (2004) is a platform for providing assistance
and fostering cooperation among States to prevent
non-State actors from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction, whether chemical, biological or
nuclear. However, we completely disagree with that fact
that it is very often used as a mechanism to put pressure
or impose sanctions on States.
Once again, Bolivia firmly condemns the ballisticmissile launches and nuclear tests carried out by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and we call on it
to abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme
in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible manner,
in line with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We reject any act of provocation,
unilateral measure or any measure not sanctioned by
international law or that flouts the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, which could pose a
threat to international peace and security, especially
on the Korean peninsula. That is why we encourage all
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

the parties concerned to avoid escalating tensions and
rhetoric. We call for an end to the downward spiral of
confrontation, the threat of the use of force or war, of
nuclear retaliation or of the complete destruction of one
or other of the parties.
It must be understood that there can be no military
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula. We
echo the words of the Secretary-General, who said,
based on resolution 2375 (2017),
“[t]he solution must be political... We must not
sleepwalk our way into war. More broadly, all
countries must show greater commitment to the
universal goal of a world without nuclear weapons.”
(A/72/PV.3, p. 1)
So far this year, the Security Council has adopted
three resolutions with increasingly stringent sanctions,
which may have various distinct consequences. As the
resolutions stipulate, we believe that not only must we
work to implement the sanctions, we must also work to
bring the parties to the negotiating table and resume
the Six-Party Talks. In that regard, Bolivia reiterates
its support for the Chinese “suspension-for-suspension”
initiative, which would allow for a simultaneous
cessation of hostilities on the Korean peninsula, as well
as the Chinese-Russian proposal and road map, which,
to date, is the only concrete proposal that has been put
forward to resolve the situation.
It is important to highlight the major achievements
that have been made in the area of non-proliferation
through dialogue and peaceful means. The most
poignant example is the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, which
was negotiated by the five permanent members of
the Security Council, the European Union and the
International Atomic Energy Agency. It highlighted
the willingness of the parties to achieve the goal of
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. All reports,
including from international organizations, indicate
that Iran is honouring its commitment. That is why
we want to draw attention to the fact that one of the
parties is threatening to renege on that commitment
and cause more instability in the region. It is critical
to ensure that we learn from the past and do not use
the putative presence or absence of weapons of mass
destruction as a pretext for effecting regime change or
destroying States.
I would like to conclude by reading two of
the preambular paragraphs of the Treaty on the

S/PV. 8053

Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which was opened for
signature yesterday.
“Mindful of the unacceptable suffering of and
harm caused to the victims of the use of nuclear
weapons (hibakusha), as well as of those affected
by the testing of nuclear weapons ...
“Recalling that, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, States must refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State, or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations,
and that the establishment and maintenance of
international peace and security are to be promoted
with the least diversion for armaments of the
world’s human and economic resources”.
Article I of the Treaty states that each State party
to it undertakes never under any circumstances to
develop, test, produce, manufacture, otherwise acquire,
possess or stockpile nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.
Only two days ago, Secretary-General António
Guterres, in his remarks at the opening of the General
Assembly, told us that “global anxieties about nuclear
weapons are at the highest level since the end of the Cold
War” (A/72/PV.3, p. 1). It is impossible to disagree with
that assessment. Indeed, the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction is posing serious threat to global peace
and security. Nowhere has this danger become more
pressing than in the current situation surrounding the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In this context,
I should like to underline the following three points.
First, it is important to comprehensively address
risks of proliferation through political and diplomatic
means aimed at finding a negotiated solution. The
modality through which the States participating in the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) managed
to address the Iranian nuclear issue is indeed a significant
achievement for multilateralism. The JCPOA and the
follow-up mechanism of the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), as well as
the progress registered so far in the implementation
of the JCPOA, have taught us a very important lesson.
By that, I mean that what was achieved amounted to
being an example for how pressing issues of peace

17-2957323/25

S/PV.8053

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

and security can be addressed through diplomatic
means. Of course, we recognize that much more needs
to be done by the participating States in clearing up
misunderstandings and avoiding any possible obstacles
to the full implementation of the JCPOA.
Secondly, based on the lessons learned from the
JCPOA and the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), the Security Council and the international
community might have to explore mechanisms to
address the serious and imminent threat posed by
the nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction
programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. The continued provocative activities of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should not be
a cause for weakening the unity within the Council,
which is so critical to effectively pursuing our broader
objective of addressing the risk of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.
This brings me to my third point on the broader
threat posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. This has to do with the now very possible
scenario of weapons of mass destruction falling into
the hands of non-State actors and the real and present
danger this poses to international peace and security
and to humanind. Multilateral agreements, such as the
Biological Weapons Convention, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, continue to contribute immensely to
the prevention and elimination of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. They need to be adhered
to in a scrupulous manner. But still, much more needs
to be done to ensure universal accession to and the full
implementation of such agreements. Regional nuclearfree zones, such as the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, also remain central to the global and regional
non-proliferation regime and the creation of a world
free of nuclear weapons.
The Security Council plays a critical role in
addressing the serious threat posed by the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by using all the
available tools at its disposal, including through
sanctions. However, all of us should be able to fully
implement Council measures if they are to meet their
intended objectives. I would therefore like to conclude
my remarks by affirming Ethiopia’s commitment to
working towards that objective.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
24/25

21/09/2017

I give the floor to the Her Excellency Ms. Kang
Kyun-wha, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Korea.
Ms. Kang (Republic of Korea): I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to speak to the
Council. I also thank Secretary Tillerson for calling for
the meeting and Under-Secretary-General Namamitsu
for her briefing.
It is a great honour for me to return to the Council,
although under very different circumstances and with
very different responsibilities. I shall be brief, as it is
late in the day.
Let me start by reaffirming my Government’s
strong commitment to strengthening the global
non-proliferation regime. As outgoing Chair of both the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile Technology
Control Regime, we have led the strengthening of the
multilateral export control regime. We have also been
a strong advocate of countering the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) to non-State
actors by supporting efforts to build an enduring
nuclear security architecture and implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions. Not least, we
continue to work with the international community to
make meaningful progress in the run-up to the 2020
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Although I could elaborate futher on my Government’s
efforts in field of the non-proliferation of WMDs, I
am compelled on this occasion to focus on the single
topic that poses the most urgent and grave threat to the
international non-proliferation regime — that is, North
Korea’s nuclear and missiles threat.
Last year, North Korea conducted two nuclear tests
and launched 24 ballistic missiles. This year, during a
period of less than nine months, North Korea conducted
another nuclear test and launched 19 ballistic missiles.
On average, since 2016 North Korea has launched two
ballistic missiles every month. The most recent, sixth
nuclear test, on 3 September, was especially alarming,
with its explosive yield far exceeding the sum of all five
previous tests and North Korea claiming it as a hydrogen
bomb to be mounted on an intercontinental ballistic
missile. The Security Council quickly responded
with the strongest ever resolution — resolution 2375
(2017) — but the ink was barely dry on that new
resolution when North Korea launched yet another
17-29573

21/09/2017

Non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction

ballistic missile launch, which flew a distance of 3,700
kilometres over Japan into the Pacific.
The international community has reacted firmly
and rapidly to the latest provocations by North
Korea. In addition to the quick adoption of the new
Security Council resolution, numerous countries and
international organizations have strongly condemned
North Korea and taken unilateral measures. The
Republic of Korea appreciates and welcomes the
firm actions taken by the international community.
North Korea must be stopped. North Korea must be
made to understand that continued provocations will
only deepen its diplomatic isolation and intensify the
economic pressure that will lead the regime to ruin.
Denuclearization is the only path to a secure and stable
future for the North.
Since the first nuclear test by North Korea in
2006, nine Security Council resolutions have been
adopted. With repeated provocations and resolutions,
it is perhaps easy to lose the sense of urgency around
the issue. Perhaps it has become routine. But we must
not let that happen. Indeed, the urgency of the issue
is heightened by the day and by the week. We may be
rapidly approaching a point of no return. The North
Korean leader is quoted as saying that North Korea
is indeed in the final stages of nuclear weaponization
and that it will clearly demonstrate to the world that
this goal will be achieved despite endless sanctions.
Further troubling is the potential for the proliferation
of North Korea’s nuclear weapons and missiles, which
would deal a crippling blow to the international
non-proliferation regimes.
Thus, with a renewed sense of urgency, we must
ensure now more than ever the full implementation
of the Security Council’s resolutions, which include
sanctions on North Korean coal, iron, fisheries,

S/PV. 8053

textiles and overseas labourers, as well as a steep cut in
refined petroleum products going into the North. Fully
implemented, these sanctions will have a significant
impact and force a change of course on the North
Korean regime.
Let me reiterate, however, that the sanctions are not
an end in themselves or to bring North Korea down, but
to bring it to the negotiating table for denuclearization.
In that regard, we deeply appreciate the active efforts of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and its Chair.
Even now, North Korea is continuing its reckless
drive towards nuclear weaponization, testing the resolve
of the international community. We can only go as fast
and as effectively as the slowest link among us. North
Korea will try to take advantage of the weakest link
among us to defeat the Council’s resolve and decisions.
Therefore, the Council members and the international
community must stand together in implementing the
sanctions and in sending the unequivocal message to
North Korea that it will pay painfully and dearly for its
provocations, and its nuclear weapons programme will
never be accepted.
Let me emphasize that our common goal is to achieve
the complete, verifiable, and irreversible dismantlement
of North Korean nuclear programme in a peaceful
manner. The Republic of Korea will work assiduously
and tirelessly to achieve the denuclearization of North
Korea and the establishment of permanent peace on
the Korean peninsula. We will work closely with all to
that end.
I would like to conclude with a message to North
Korea, which I am sure is shared by the Council as a
whole: “Come to the right side of history.”
The meeting rose at 7 p.m.

17-2957325/25
