A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/35
17 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 24 (b)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.28 and Add.1)]
51/35.

Agreement for the Implementation of the
Provisions of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982
relating to the Conservation and Management
of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly
Migratory Fish Stocks

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 47/192 of 22 December 1992, concerning the
United Nations Conference on Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks, and 50/24 of 5 December 1995, concerning the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks,1
Recalling also resolutions I and II adopted by the Conference,2
Noting the opening for signature of the Agreement on 4 December 1995,
Recognizing the importance of the Agreement for the conservation and
management of straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks and the
need for the regular consideration and review of developments relating
thereto,
Recognizing also the importance of artisanal and subsistence fishers,

1

A/CONF.164/37; see also A/50/550, annex I.

2

A/CONF.164/38, annex; see also A/50/550, annex II.

97-76183

/...

A/RES/51/35
Page 2

Noting with appreciation the information provided by States, relevant
specialized agencies, international organizations, intergovernmental bodies
and non-governmental organizations in accordance with resolution 50/24,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General,3
1.
Recognizes the significance of the Agreement for the
Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks1 as an important
contribution to ensuring the conservation and management of straddling fish
stocks and highly migratory fish stocks;
2.
Emphasizes the importance of the early entry into force and
effective implementation of the Agreement;
3.
Calls upon all States and other entities referred to in article 1,
paragraph 2 (b), of the Agreement that have not done so to ratify or accede to
it and to consider applying it provisionally;
4.
Takes note with concern that many commercially important
straddling fish stocks and highly migratory fish stocks have been subject to
heavy and little-regulated fishing efforts and that some stocks continue to be
overfished;
5.
Welcomes the fact that a growing number of States and other
entities, as well as regional and subregional fishery management organizations
and arrangements, have adopted legislation, established regulations or taken
other measures to implement the provisions in the Agreement, and urges them to
enforce those measures fully;
6.
Calls upon States and other entities and regional and subregional
fishery management organizations and arrangements that have not done so to
consider taking measures to implement the provisions of the Agreement;
7.
Urges States, relevant specialized agencies, international
organizations, intergovernmental bodies and non-governmental organizations
that have not yet done so to provide information to the Secretary-General to
ensure as comprehensive a report as possible;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
at its fifty-second session and biennially thereafter on further developments
relating to the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and
highly migratory fish stocks, including the status and implementation of the
Agreement, taking into account information provided by States, relevant
specialized agencies, in particular the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, and other appropriate organs, organizations and programmes
of the United Nations system, regional and subregional organizations and
arrangements for the conservation and management of straddling fish stocks and
highly migratory fish stocks, as well as other relevant intergovernmental
bodies and non-governmental organizations;

3

A/51/383.
/...

A/RES/51/35
Page 3

9.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that reporting on
all major fishery-related activities and instruments is effectively
coordinated and duplication of activities and reporting minimized, and that
relevant scientific and technical studies are disseminated to the
international community, and invites the relevant specialized agencies,
including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, as well
as regional and subregional fishery organizations and arrangements, to
cooperate with the Secretary-General to that end;
10.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session, under an item entitled "Oceans and law of the sea", the sub-item
entitled "Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the
Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory
Fish Stocks".
77th plenary meeting
9 December 1996
