16

General Assembly-Thirteenth Session

siderable portion of the available resources should be
devoted to programmes which make possible the training of high-level national personnel capable of replacing
international technical assistance as soon as possible,

Noting further that a number of Governments have
expressed their desire to obtain temporary assistance
from or through the United Nations to fill executive or
operational posts in their administrative machinery,

Bearing in mind that the Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 699 (XXVI) of 31 July 1958,
noted with regret that there had been a certain decrease
in technical assistance activities in connexion with fellowships in 1956 and again in 1957,

1. Takes note with satisfaction of the results already
achieved by the United Nations technical assistance
programmes in the field of public administration;

Recognizing that, under the country-programming
procedure, the decisions of the recipient Governments
determine the distribution of funds by types of assistance,
Recalling the advantages which Governments benefiting by the United Nations technical assistance programmes could obtain by making wider use of the
fellowship facilities afforded them under those programmes,
Believing that the training of high-level national personnel would be greatly facilitated if the countries in
the process of development could, with the help of international co-operation, have at their disposal a greater
number of national or regional centres for the training
in the country or region concerned of the qualified
specialists needed in economic development,
1. Expresses its conviction that the award of fellowships is one of the most effective means of training
high-level national personnel capable, inf.er alia, of continuing and developing the work accomplished by experts;
2. Draws the attention of Governments to the desirability, for countries in the process of development,
of establisliing or developing national or regional centres
for the training of the qualified specialists needed in
economic development;

3. Requests the various services responsible for the
administration of technical assistance programmes to
give due attention to requests for prcjects relating to
fellowships and to the establishment or development of
such national or regional centres.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1256 (XIII). United Nations technical assistance
in public administration

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the important role ot public administration in the implementation of programmes of economic
and social development,
Noting the memorandum of the Secretary-General3
an<J the report of the Economic and Social Council on
the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations/' as well as Council resolution 681 (XXVI) of
16 July 1958,
"Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 29, docu-

ment A/C.2/200.

'Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/3848),

chap. III, part B.

2. Authorizes the Secretary-General to supplement
these programmes with a view to :
(a) Assisting Governments participating in these
programmes, at their request, to secure on a temporary
basis the services of well qualified persons to perform
duties of an executive or operational character as may
be defined by the requesting Governments, and as servants of such Governments, it being understood that
such duties shall normally include the training of nationals to assume as early as possible the responsibilities
temporarily assigned to these internationally recruited
experts;
( b) Assisting the interested Governments, as necessary, to meet the expenses which the employment of
these experts will involve ;

3. Decides that any Government requesting such assistance should contribute towards the total cost of employment of each expert an amount not less than the
total emoluments of one of its nationals performing
similar duties;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to negotiate
agreements defining the relationship to be established
between the United Nations, the experts and the Governments concerned, including the terms and conditions
of employment of the experts ;
5. Recommends further that, whenever requests for
assistance fall within the competence of a specialized
agency, no action shall be taken without prior consultation and agreement with that agency ;
6. Decides that this assistance shall be provided on
a modest scale and on an experimental basis, using the
existing machinery of the United Nations Secretariat
and without any increase in administrative costs ;

7. Invites the Secretary-General to report in detail,
to the Economic and Social Council at its twenty-eighth
session and to the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session, on the progress of this experiment.
780th plenary meeting,
14 November 1958.
1303 (XIII). Question of assistance to Libya

The General Assembly,
Recalling the part played by the United Nations in
the creation of the independent State of the United
Kingdom of Libya, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 289 A (IV) of 21 November 1949 recommending that Libya should be constituted as an independent and sovereign State, and recalling that this
independence was achieved on 24 December 1951, in
accordance with that resolution,
Recalling its resolution 515 (VI) of 1 February 1952,
by which it requested the Economic and Social Council

Resolutions adopted on the reporh of the Second Committee

to study, in consultation with the Government of the
United Kingdom of Libya, ways and means by which
the United Nations, with the co-operation of all Governments and the competent specialized agencies, and upon
the request of the Government of Libya, could furnish
additional assistance to the United Kingdom of Libya
with a view to financing its fundamental and urgent
-programmes of economic and social development, giving
consideration to the possibility of opening a special account of voluntary contributions to that end, and to
report thereon to the General Assembly at its seventh
session,
Recalling further its resolution 529 (VI) of 29 January 1952 on the problem of war damages in Libya,
RecaJ,ling its resolution 398 (V) of 17 November
1950 which recognizes the special responsibility assumed
by the United Nations for the future of Libya, and its
resolution 924 (X) of 9 December 1955,
Having noted the communication dated 17 September
1958 from the Prime Minister of Libya5 addressed to
the Secretary-General,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General6
on the question of assistance to Libya,
Noting with satisfaction the technical assistance given
to Libya under the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, in accordance with General Assembly resolutions 726 (VIII) of 8 December 1953 and 924 (X)
of 9 December 1955,

1. Invites anew all Governments willing and in a
position to do so to provide financial assistance to the
United Kingdom of Libya through the appropriate
mechanisms available within the United Nations for
receiving voluntary contributions, in order to assist
Libya in the financing of its fundamental and urgent
programmes of reconstruction and of economic and
social development ;
2. Recommends that, if and when further means become available for assisting in the financing of the development of under-developed areas and for expanding
technical assistance to them, the United Nations and the
specialized agencies should give due consideration to
the specific development needs of Libya;
3. Request-s the Secretary-General, the Technical Assistance Board, and the specialized agencies concerned
to continue to waive local costs and to give all possible
favourable consideration to the requests of Libya for
technical assistance, taking into account the special
needs of Libya and the principles of the technical assistance programmes of the United Nations and of the
specialized agencies enumerated in Economic and Social
Council resolution 222 (IX) of 15 August 1949;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to draw the attention of the Managing Director of the Special Fund to
the communication of the Prime Minister of Libya dated
17 September 1958 and to the recommendations contained in paragraph 2 above ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the Governments of
• Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 30, document A/3961.
• Ibid., document A/3960.

17

Member States and to take the necessary measures to
facilitate the implementation of paragraph 1 above;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to make a special
report on the question of United Nations assistance to
Libya in time for the report to be placed on the provisional agenda of the fifteenth session of the General
Assembly.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
1304 (XIII). Report of the Agent General of the
United Nations Korean Reconstruction
Agency and progress report of the Administrator for Residual Atlairs of the Agency
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 410 (V) of 1 December
1950, 701 (VII) of 11 March 1953, 725 (VIII) of 7
December 1953, 828 (IX) of 14 December 1954, 920
(X) of 25 October 1955, 1020 (XI) of 7 December
1956 and 1159 (XII) of 26 November 1957,
Taking note of:
(a) The report of the Agent General of the United
Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency on the work of
the Agency for the period 1 July 1957 to 30 June 1958,7
and of the comments thereon by the United Nations
Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of
Korea, 8
( b) The progress report of the Administrator for
Residual Affairs of the Agency covering the period from
1 July to 30 September 1958,9
Recognizing the especial importance of the Agency's
programme for the relief and rehabilitation of the Republic of Korea,

1. Commends the Agent General of the United Nations Korean Reconstruction Agency for the excellent
work performed by the Agency in pursuing its mission
of assisting the Korean people to relieve the sufferings
and repair the devastation caused by aggression ;
2. Expresses its conviction that the work of the
Agency will have long-lasting and significant effects
upon the economy of Korea and upon the well-being of
the Korean people ;
3. Expresses its appreciation for the valuable assistance given to the Agency by specialized agencies of
the United Nations and by voluntary non-governmental
organizations ;
4. Decides that any funds remaining in residual accounts when the Administrator for Residual Affairs of
the Agency has completed his task should be used in
conformity with General Assembly resolution 410 (V)
entitled "Relief and rehabilitation of Korea";
5. Reaffirms the action taken at its twelfth session
regarding the arrangements and procedures for the completion of the residual responsibilities of the Agency
and the liquidation of its accounts.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
• Ibid., Thirteenth Sessio11,, Supplement No. 16 (A/3907).
• Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item '27, document A/3946.
• Ibid., document A/3953.
