S/PV.8787

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8787th meeting

Monday, 7 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tirumurti
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Roscoe
Mr. Hunter
Mr. Pham

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2021/517)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-14202 (E)
*2114202*

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

demonstrated, individually and collectively, in their
efforts to promote socioeconomic recovery, maintain
political stability and promote regional integration
despite the constraints posed by the pandemic.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2021/517)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/517, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall: It is a pleasure to brief the Security
Council today on the situation in Central Africa and
the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA). During the reporting
period, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
continued to impact our activities, although the situation
is gradually improving thanks to a combination of
immunization and prevention programmes implemented
by the Governments in the subregion. To date, Central
Africa remains the subregion on the African continent
with the lowest number of infections and deaths due
to COVID-19. As of 15 May, official data show that
222,882 cases have been reported regionally and 3,635
people have lost their lives since the beginning of
the pandemic.
In that context, the Government of Burundi
convened the fifty-first meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa in person in Bujumbura on 28 May,
while fully observing existing prevention measures. The
successful organization of the meeting was a testament
to the resilience that Central African States have
2/17

07/06/2021

As countries of Central Africa pursue their efforts
to combat COVID-19, it is essential that they further
coordinate their national responses and harmonize
policies, guided by the regional strategy adopted last
year by the Heads of State and Government of the
Economic Community of Central African States. In
Bujumbura, the Committee focused primarily on the
situation in Chad and the Central African Republic,
while also addressing the issue of electoral processes in
Central Africa. The ministerial segment recommended
the development of a subregional protocol on electoral
governance and democratic elections in Central Africa.
UNOCA will actively support the subregion to this end,
while emphasizing the importance of strengthening the
participation of women and youth in the consolidation
of democratic processes in the subregion.
To illustrate the timeline of this UNSAC
recommendation on electoral governance, I would
like to recall that since my last briefing in December
(S/2020/1188, annex I), elections took place in four
countries, namely, the Central African Republic, Chad,
Gabon and the Republic of the Congo. As the subregion
prepares for upcoming elections, notably in Sao Tome
and Principe on 18 July, I would like to encourage
national authorities and all political stakeholders to
promote continued dialogue and consensus on the
conditions governing the elections. I will pursue good
offices on behalf of the Secretary-General, wherever
require, to encourage inclusive and meaningful political
dialogue in the countries preparing for elections.
Since my last briefing to the Council, the ECCAS
Commission has continued to demonstrate its
commitment to promoting peace and stability in the
subregion. Important regional initiatives to address the
situation in the Central African Republic and Chad have
been undertaken. The convening of two extraordinary
summits of Heads of State and Government, on the
situation in the Central African Republic and on
Chad, on 26 December 2020 and on 4 June 2020,
respectively, is further evidence that regional leaders
are very determined to bring a regional response to the
challenges and crises facing the subregion.
In that regard, I welcome the statement issued
on 1 June by the ECCAS Chair, the President of the
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

Republic of the Congo, following the armed attack
within Chadian territory and near the border with the
Central African Republic on 30 May. The ECCAS
Chair recalled the principles of non-aggression, respect
for sovereignty and territorial integrity as well as both
countries’ mutual obligations on peace and security. I
also commend the authorities of the Central African
Republic and Chad for their collective diplomatic
efforts aimed at resolving their differences through
dialogue. We have taken note of their joint communiqué
dated 1 June communicating their decision to establish
an independent international commission of inquiry,
as well as their proposal that the United Nations, the
African Union (AU) and ECCAS assist those efforts, to
investigate the situation and identify those responsible.
The situation in Chad following the demise of the late
President Idriss Deby Itno has underlined the challenges
facing the subregion in addressing the consequences of
unexpected changes of government. Consistent with
the position adopted by the African Union Peace and
Security Council and the summit of ECCAS Heads of
State and Government held last Friday and further to
the appointment of Mr. Ibrahima Fall as the AU High
Representative for the transition in Chad and Mr. Basile
Ikouébé as the AU Special Representative in the
country, the United Nations priority will be to support
the efforts of the African Union and ECCAS to assist
in the transition in Chad. UNOCA will mobilize the
United Nations system and work with relevant partners
to support inclusive dialogue aimed at ensuring a rapid
transition to democratic and constitutional rule in the
country. Coherent external support to the transition
within the coordination framework being put in place
by the AU will be important.
My consultations with national authorities and
international partners in Burundi, at the margin
of the UNSAC meeting, highlighted the country’s
efforts to address its fragilities and move forward.
Burundi assumed the six-month rotating presidency
of UNSAC and is currently sharing the AU Peace
and Security Council for the month of June. I believe
that the assistance of the international community
will be necessary to support national efforts aimed
at resuming cooperation with international partners,
promoting national reconciliation and unity, addressing
COVID-19, achieving the Sustainable Development
goals, promoting human rights, tackling the illicit
circulation of small arms and light weapons and
addressing climate-security challenges.

S/PV. 8787

The recent developments in Chad have underlined
the interlinkages between the security situation in that
country and the security situation in the subregion.
The security dynamics in countries bordering Chad,
including Libya, the Sudan and the Central African
Republic, as well as developments related to the
activities of terrorist groups in the Lake Chad basin,
could negatively affect the internal dynamics in Chad.
The United Nations and the international community
should continue to engage these neighbouring countries,
in close consultation with national authorities and
regional institutions.
The increased and compounding threat posed by
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin remains a great
concern. Moreover, according to reports, Islamic State
West Africa Province and Boko Haram combatants
have been fighting over control of the region. The
recent joint technical mission to the four countries
affected by Boko Haram undertaken by UNOCA and
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) found that, as the security situation in the
region has been deteriorating, coordination between the
four countries needs to be strengthened. In addition,
humanitarian needs have increased against declining
resources, whereas the already precarious living
conditions of vulnerable groups, especially refugees,
internally displaced person, women and youth, have
been worsening.
In Cameroon, violence in the north-west and southwest regions has not abated. Further escalation of
the crisis is leading to more suffering for the civilian
population and widespread violations of human rights,
compounded by the aggravated impact of COVID-19.
I will continue to engage with key actors in Cameroon
and within the diaspora on the need to advance further
in a meaningful dialogue complementing the major
national dialogue recommendations, for a peaceful and
lasting resolution of the crisis in the two regions. In the
meantime, I call upon all parties to demonstrate their
commitment to dialogue through concrete actions on
the ground, including the cessation of hostilities.
Non-State armed groups continue to represent
a regionwide threat to peace and security, with a
horrendous impact on civilian populations. The Lord’s
Resistance Army remains a threat to the stability of
Central African States, in view of its alliances with
other armed groups in the subregion and its operations
in an area with very little State presence. I will work
closely with the AU and ECCAS to further consult

21-142023/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

and agree on a common vision to facilitate a smooth
transfer of responsibility from the AU Regional Task
Force to ECCAS.
(spoke in French)
In the Gulf of Guinea, maritime crime remains a
serious threat to Central and West African States and
remained high on the agenda of the last two meetings
of UNSAC. Indeed, in the first quarter of this year,
the Central African maritime region recorded more
incidents than the West African region, despite the
bilateral mechanisms in place to address maritime
insecurity. UNOCA and UNOWAS will continue
to prioritize maritime security in their joint actions
and cooperation.
Central Africa is strongly affected by the negative
impact of climate change. This trend is likely to worsen
over the next few decades and is expected to result in an
increase in natural disasters hampering socioeconomic
progress and exacerbating political and security
tensions in the subregion. It is expected that severe
climatic consequences will put increasing pressure
on the capacities of governments and communities
to cope with multiple challenges, with potentially
significant impacts for peace and security. During my
recent visit to Bujumbura, I witnessed first-hand the
impact of climate security on human security, as the
dramatic rise in water levels in Lake Tanganyika has
caused large-scale flooding and the displacement of
an estimated 30,000 people since January. Similarly,
the ongoing humanitarian crisis due to the eruption
of the Nyiragongo volcano on the outskirts of Goma
has displaced an estimated 230,000 people, including
in neighbouring Rwanda. UNOCA will continue to
pay attention to this important global priority and its
links with peace and security, in partnership with the
African Union, ECCAS, relevant governments and
United Nations entities, as well as with other actors in
the subregion.
I would like to conclude by saying that this is my last
briefing to the Security Council before the extension of
the UNOCA mandate comes to an end. In his report
(S/2021/517), the Secretary-General recommends
that the mandate be extended for three years, from
1 September 2021 to 31 August 2024.
At a time when Central Africa is facing a fragile
political and security context, I strongly believe that
UNOCA can build on its past achievements and help
the subregion to address its multiple challenges. Recent
4/17

07/06/2021

developments, in particular the transition in Chad, have
highlighted several obstacles to peace and security that
could have negative consequences for regional peace
and stability. The extension of UNOCA’s mandate
would enable the Office to strengthen its partnership
with the reformed ECCAS, with a view to preventing
conflicts and preserving peace, strengthening good
governance and regional integration, addressing crossborder security challenges, promoting the participation
of women, young people and civil society organizations
in early-warning mechanisms, peacebuilding and
democratic governance processes and overcoming the
challenges with regard to climate security.
The President: I thank Mr. Fall for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): On behalf of the
United Kingdom, I want to begin by expressing our
thanks to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Fall for his continuing efforts to support and
promote peace, stability and security in Central Africa,
particularly amid the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic and its impacts.
We welcome the recent progress in the region,
particularly the establishment of the new Economic
Community of Central African States Commission.
But, as Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Fall set out, Central Africa continues to face serious
political, economic and security challenges, which have
been exacerbated by COVID-19.
We commend the ongoing efforts of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa to coordinate
with United Nations country teams across the subregion
and to deploy the good offices of the United Nations to
prevent, mediate and resolve conflicts across Central
Africa. I would like to focus on the next steps needed
in that respect in three of the country situations about
which we heard today.
First, let me turn to Chad. The United Kingdom
deplores the violence and repression of protesters in
Chad in April. We support the recommendation of the
African Union that the Transitional Military Council
should respect human rights, provide an inclusive
constitutional framework and conduct free and fair
elections within 18 months. A stable Chad is pivotal for
the Chadian people, as well as the wider Sahel region.
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

Secondly, turning to the Central African Republic,
I understand that we will have an opportunity in closed
consultations to discuss the recent very troubling
clashes across the border between Chad and the
Central African Republic. The last thing that the region
needs are increased instability and mistrust between
neighbouring countries. All actors should therefore
encourage de-escalation of those tensions.
Within the Central African Republic itself, following
the recent presidential and parliamentary elections
there is an opportunity to build on that democratic
trajectory towards peace and reconciliation. We urge all
stakeholders to redouble efforts to strengthen political
inclusivity, protect and promote human rights and meet
the needs of the population, including with respect to
basic security and humanitarian needs.
Thirdly, the United Kingdom also remains deeply
concerned by the ongoing crisis in the North-West
and South-West regions of Cameroon. In March, the
United Kingdom Minister for Africa visited Cameroon
and met President Biya and Prime Minister Ngute. We
encourage them to renew efforts to achieve a peaceful
resolution to the crisis.
On his visit, our Minister saw first-hand the
profound impact of the crisis on civilians in that region.
More than 1 million people have been displaced due to
the conflict, and more than 2 million are in dire need of
humanitarian support. Unimpeded humanitarian access
is desperately needed. At the same time, we continue
to receive deeply concerning reports of human rights
violations and abuses committed by both sides in the
North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon.
Accountability for perpetrators is essential to bringing
about long-term peace. In the short term, armed actors
should heed the Secretary-General’s call and cease
attacks against civilians.
We welcome the steps taken by the Government of
Cameroon to grant a special status to the Anglophone
regions and to convene the inaugural regional elections
in 2020. However, all parties should do more to end the
protracted conflict in Cameroon. The United Kingdom
stands ready to support parties to engage in good-faith
dialogue and peacebuilding efforts. We are supporting
efforts to alleviate the suffering of vulnerable civilians
through funding, currently totalling $19 million, for
vital assistance, food, sanitation and medical supplies.
Finally, I want to acknowledge the very real threat
that Cameroon and its neighbours continue to face in

S/PV. 8787

terms of terrorist attacks on civilians across the Lake
Chad basin region. The recent attack in Yagha province
in Burkina Faso, where more than 100 civilians were
reportedly killed, is a stark reminder of the grave
threats facing civilians across the region. We strongly
condemn all such attacks, and we continue to support
the efforts of the Multinational Joint Task Force to
tackle Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West
Africa Province. We urge the Governments of the Lake
Chad basin countries, with the support of international
partners, to improve governance, demobilize and
reintegrate former combatants and mitigate the impact
of climate change on regional security.
If I may, I will end as I began, by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Fall for his
extraordinary efforts across this region. We know
that his personal interventions across the region with
countries, Governments and Heads of State have a
serious and significant impact of the trajectory of the
region, and we are very grateful to him.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Fall for his briefing, based on which, together
with the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/517), I
would like to make the following comments.
First, we must support the countries of the region
in maintaining peace and stability. In general, Central
Africa has maintained peace and stability, and the
efforts of countries of the region to fight effectively
against the pandemic and to sustain the momentum for
development are indeed worthy of acknowledgement.
The international community should continue to respect
the sovereignty and leadership of the countries of the
region, support the people of the region in seeking
peace and development and encourage the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and other regional and subregional organizations
in playing a greater role.
China commends the Government of Cameroon
for finding a solution to the issues in its South-West
and North-West regions. We believe that such matters
fall within the internal affairs of Cameroon, and we are
confident that the country has the ability to address
them properly.
China supports the Chadian authorities in their
efforts to maintain national stability and promoting
the transition process. We encourage the country to

21-142025/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

07/06/2021

play a greater role with regard to counter-terrorism in
the region.

the most urgent need among the African parties, so as
to eliminate the root causes of conflict.

The security situation in the Central African
Republic has improved. The parties should continue to
implement the peace agreement and maintain long-term
peace and stability. In turn, the Security Council should
remove without delay its arms embargo on the country.

China, together with African countries, launched
the Initiative on Partnership for Africa’s Development,
which has garnered a positive response and support
from many African countries, including those of Central
Africa. We invite more countries and international
organizations to join the initiative so as to forge synergy
in support of African development.

Secondly, we should support countries of the region
in strengthening unity and cooperation. Boko Haram
and the Lord’s Resistance Army are still active, which
poses a grave threat to the political, economic and
humanitarian situations of the countries of the region.
In addition, Central Africa must also deal with other
challenges, including piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
climate change and food security.
China supports the process of regional integration
and the Economic Community of Central African
States in enhancing its collective security mechanism
and encourages regional countries to strengthen
good-neighbourly relations, unity and cooperation
and to resolve their differences through consultation
and dialogue.
Climate change is in essence a matter of
development. The international community, especially
developed countries, should provide financial and
technical support to regional countries to help them
enhance their adaptation and mitigation capabilities.
Thirdly, we must support regional countries in
speeding up post-pandemic recovery and eliminating
the root causes of conflict. At present, the world has
entered a new stage where fighting the pandemic
and addressing post-pandemic recovery require
equal attention.
Regional countries, especially those affected by
conflict, are facing greater medium- to long-term
impacts from the pandemic and difficulty in gaining
access to vaccines, and thus a more daunting postrecovery challenge. The Security Council held a highlevel open debate on the theme of addressing the root
causes of conflict while promoting post-pandemic
recovery (S/2021/490) and adopted a presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2021/10).
The
international
community should, in accordance with the consensus
reached at that meeting, step up its support for
fighting the pandemic, post-pandemic recovery, trade,
investment, food security and poverty reduction, and
ensure that resources are channelled to where there is
6/17

China commends the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the good offices and mediation
and will continue to support his work. China, in
principle, supports the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and will participate constructively in relevant
consultations. We hope that UNOCA will continue to
support regional countries and regional organizations
and work in close consultation with United Nations
agencies, so as to play a bigger part in the achievement
of regional peace and stability.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): Allow me to begin by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral François Fall for his briefing on the recent
developments concerning the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the situation
in the Lake Chad basin region. We deeply appreciate
his contribution.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/517)
and today’s briefing have detailed the progress made
by countries of the region on the political, security and
humanitarian fronts. My remarks today broadly cover
these three points.
The holding of elections in the Central African
Republic, Cameroon, Chad, Gabon and the Republic of
Congo reflects the positive trend of democracy taking
root in the region. We are cognizant of the complex
challenges that the African countries face in holding
elections. While there may be reservations in some
quarters about the way elections were conducted,
we believe that the holding of timely elections is
fundamental to democracy. India welcomes these
positive developments and congratulates the people
and the leadership of these countries on reaffirming
their faith in democracy and on their commitment to
sustainable peace and development.
At the same time, we recognize that there exist forces
inimical to this positive trend and that reconciliation
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

and national dialogue may be required in some cases.
There is a need to ensure greater political legitimacy
and inclusivity in governance and decision-making. We
remain hopeful that political stakeholders will continue
to respect due process and that the decisions of the
constitutional bodies and institutions will be honoured.
We take note of the expectations expressed by
the African Union Peace and Security Council in its
communiqué of 20 May on developments in Chad. We
hope that the transition to democratic rule will take place
within the 18-month period, and that the transitional
military council will adhere to the commitments
made. We welcome the efforts of the African Union in
supporting the transition process in Chad.
The Council will be deliberating on the situation
in the Central African Republic in detail next week.
Therefore, I will restrict my comments to underscore
the urgent need for concrete action on the part of all
stakeholders, including the Government, towards
implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
security situation in the Central African Republic
remains fragile, as is evident from last week’s clashes
at a check post near the Chadian border, which resulted
in the tragic killings of nine security personnel. We
hope that both sides will work towards de-escalation.
Recent incidents, including the restriction of movement,
search, arrest, attempted assault and the intimidation
of personnel of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic and United Nations personnel in
the Central African Republic are of serious concern.
These incidents have put the safety and security of the
peacekeepers in jeopardy. It is also important to ensure
strict compliance with the status of forces agreement.
The worsening security situation, due to increasing
terror activities of Boko Haram in Cameroon and
Chad, remains a cause for serious concern. We strongly
condemn these attacks and the killing of innocent
civilians by Boko Haram. There is an urgent need to
ensure an integrated and multi-country approach to
addressing the terrorist threat presented by Boko Haram.
The countries of the region need to urgently finalize
the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience
Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad Basin Region and to start implementing
territorial action plans. Needless to add, the countries
in the region should continue to keep the pressure on
the Lord’s Resistance Army.

S/PV. 8787

Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is a matter of concern.
The International Maritime Bureau recorded a rise in
piracy and armed robbery in 2020, with approximately
95 per cent of global kidnappings reported from within
Gulf of Guinea waters, compared to 90 per cent in the
same period in 2019. In recent years, acts of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea have increased and Indian sailors have
been most affected. There is an urgent need to increase
surveillance for maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea, through increased international collaboration.
Several countries of the region are facing a
difficult humanitarian situation owing to the ongoing
conflicts. The economic impact of the pandemic has
also added an additional burden on the economies.
We hope the international community will continue
to support the efforts of the countries to alleviate the
humanitarian situation.
We commend the positive and proactive role played
by the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) in addressing the challenges faced by the
region. We also welcome the adoption of the UNOCAECCAS joint strategic plan for 2021-2025 and look
forward to its implementation.
India has excellent bilateral relations with countries
in Central Africa. In recent years, India has opened
diplomatic missions in the Congo, Equatorial Guinea,
Cameroon, Sao Tomé and Principe and will very
shortly do so in Chad. India has extended development
cooperation by way of soft loans of $2 billion for
projects in agriculture, transport, power and water
supply. India has also extended relief under the Debt
Service Suspension Initiative of the Group of 20 to
Central African countries. We will continue to engage
closely with Central Africa and be steadfast in our
support for lasting peace and prosperity in the region.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of
the three African States members of the Security
Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — and Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Central
Africa, for his comprehensive and very informative
briefing. We commend the work done by the Special
Representative to promote peace in the region through
mediation and preventive diplomacy and to support
electoral processes, conflict resolution, post-conflict

21-142027/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

reconstruction, peacebuilding and capacity-building in
several areas.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our condolences
to the people of Chad following the passing of President
Idriss Deby Itno, as well as to the Multinational Joint
Task Force of the Lake Chad basin and the families of
all the soldiers who have fallen victim to Boko Haram.
Our statement will focus on socioeconomic,
political, security and humanitarian developments.
On the socioeconomic front, the region has been
severely affected in recent months by the effects of the
coronavirus disease pandemic, as noted by the Special
Representative, and the economic hardship it imposes.
We commend the efforts of the States of the region,
which have committed significant resources to stop the
spread of the virus through the launching of vaccination
campaigns. We hope that those efforts will quickly
pave the way for the revival of socioeconomic activity,
on which the fate of the most vulnerable segments
of society depend. In that regard, we are encouraged
by the International Monetary Fund’s forecast for
economic growth in the region. It serves as a strong
signal of Africa’s resilience. With additional support
in the context of the Building Back Better initiative,
Africa can expect a complete economic recovery. We
cannot stress enough the importance of jobs and shared
growth for peace.
With regard to the political situation, we welcome
the efforts of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) to facilitate dialogue,
cooperation and confidence-building initiatives so as to
overcome regional challenges and national challenges,
such as those in Cameroon, the Central African
Republic and Chad.
With respect to Chad and the communiqué adopted
on 14 May by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, we encourage transition authorities to
do their utmost to promote inclusive dialogue, ensure
that the timetable for the transition is respected and
guarantee a return to constitutional order by installing
a democratic Government based on free, credible and
peaceful elections.
Regarding Cameroon, while we welcome the efforts
made by the authorities to advance the decentralization
process, in line with the recommendations arising from
the major national dialogue, we call on the parties to
prioritize dialogue as the only way to restore peace in
8/17

07/06/2021

the North-West and South-West regions of the country.
We deplore the incessant violence in north-western
and south-western Cameroon, which has led to the
displacement of some 4,200 people, as a result of attacks
by separatist armed groups, employing improvised
explosive devices, and attacks on schools and teachers.
We are concerned about the increase in the number
of attacks perpetrated by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad
basin, which led to 145 civilian casualties in Cameroon
and 199 in Chad between 1 December 2020 and
30 April this year. We call for resolute action against
the group. We also support the Secretary-General’s
recommendation that coordination be strengthened
between States and partners of the Lake Chad basin in
order to address the threats posed by Boko Haram by
focusing on their root causes and impact. We believe
that the joint efforts of UNOCA, the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel and United
Nations agencies, supported by analysis, advocacy
and joint programmes, remain key to curbing the
impact of Boko Haram in the region. The uptick in
activities of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), which
continues to perpetrate attacks against civilians, in
particular women and children, and engage in clashes
with military forces in some countries, is also another
major source of concern. We therefore welcome the fact
that, on 6 May, the International Criminal Court (ICC)
sentenced an LRA commander to 25 years in prison
for crimes against humanity and war crimes. The case
was brought to trial in 2015. The sentencing by the
ICC, which is the first for a member of the group, is
a significant step forward in the quest for justice for
the victims. It is also a watershed for international
justice, as it was the first-ever successful prosecution
of forced pregnancy and forced marriage. We therefore
support the call for international support against the
LRA, in response to the violence in Central Africa
and the ongoing atrocities in several countries. We
must accelerate the implementation of the UNOCAEconomic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) joint strategic plan for the period 2021-2025
to bring about peace and stability.
Still on the issue of security, we are also concerned
about the increase in the number attacks and threats to
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. We welcome the
virtual ministerial meeting on 4 May of the Council for
Peace and Security in Central Africa on strengthening
mechanisms to combat maritime insecurity.
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

The A3+1 is also concerned about the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the region as a result
of ongoing conflict, epidemics and natural disasters.
According to United Nations statistics, more than
4.4 million people are in need of humanitarian aid in
Cameroon. The humanitarian response plan for the
current year requires funding of $362 million, of which,
to date, only 18 per cent have been mobilized.
The situation is even less encouraging in Chad,
where more than 5.5 million people are in urgent
need of humanitarian aid. In addition, the number of
displaced persons continues to increase across Central
Africa and the Republic of Congo. Cholera, measles
and polio, combined with the effects of climate change,
also have a considerable impact on the Lake Chad
basin region, where more than 1.2 million people are
in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. The recent
eruption of the Nyiragongo volcano in the Democratic
Republic of Congo has compounded an already grim
situation. We therefore call on the United Nations, the
African Union, UNOCA, ECCAS and all international
partners to remobilize so as to provide funding for the
humanitarian response plan.
We are also deeply concerned about reports of
continuing human rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law, including sexual and
gender-based violence committed by armed groups and
other actors alike.
In spite of the region’s challenges, we welcome
the development of regional cooperation and the
diplomatic efforts of leaders of the region. We are also
encouraged by efforts to normalize relations between
Gabon and Equatorial Guinea for a peaceful and
jurisdictional settlement of their border dispute through
the International Court of Justice at The Hague. We
also welcome the fact that Burundi has resumed its
place in the region and plays a positive role in regional
dynamics. We welcome the efforts of the African Union
and UNOCA in supporting regional cooperation. We
also call for support for the ECCAS Commission in its
partnership efforts with the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region.
We thank the Peacebuilding Commission for
its support for regional efforts towards economic
cooperation, development and peacebuilding.
In conclusion, the A3+1 welcomes the continued
commitment and tireless efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General as he works

S/PV. 8787

with States and partners in the region. That is why we
support the renewal of the UNOCA mandate for three
years, starting 1 September, so as to allow it to continue
its integration efforts and address continuing fragilities
in the region
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I too
thank Special Representative Fall for his briefing today
and for his tireless efforts across the region during a
tumultuous time.
Today I would like to talk about the situations
in Chad, Cameroon, the Central African Republic
and Burundi.
First, the United States would like to express its
gratitude to the African Union Peace and Security
Council for its work in Chad, as the country finds a
way forward following the death of President Deby. We
join the African Union and our international partners in
calling for a peaceful, timely and civilian-led transition
of power to a democratically elected Government
before October 2022. The Chadian people deserve an
inclusive national dialogue — one where everyone
comes together to decide the future of their country.
Specifically, that means laying out a concrete plan and
a timeline for elections and drafting a new national
constitution. It means setting up strong institutions, such
as a representative National Assembly, an independent
judicial system and a reformed national independent
electoral commission. For Chad, democracy is finally
within reach. We urge the people of Chad to seize
this moment.
Secondly, the United States continues to be
concerned about the situation in the anglophone regions
of Cameroon. We condemn everyone contributing to
the violence, including both security forces and armed
separatists. We call on the Government and armed
groups to end the violence and participate in dialogue
without preconditions.
I again thank Special Representative Fall for
continuing to engage with key actors, both in Cameroon
and abroad, as he did in March of this year. Everyone
has a role to play in supporting dialogue and peace to
end the senseless killings and violence. The United
States fully supports the role of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa in promoting
inclusive political dialogue in Cameroon. We also
support the Swiss-led and United Nations-supported
mediation of the anglophone crisis. However, we
are concerned about the viability of the Cameroon

21-142029/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

Government’s Presidential Plan for Reconstruction
and Development of the North-West and South-West
regions, which is supported by the United Nations
Development Programme. Unfortunately, the current
security environment on the ground is not conducive to
implementing that kind of initiative.
Looking outside Cameroon’s borders, we believe
that the Cameroonian diaspora has a powerful tool at
its disposal — the voices of its people. We therefore ask
them and everyone with influence in the region to use
their voices to promote peace and meaningful change,
rather than retaliatory violence, which will only lead to
more suffering. It is time to get children back to school
safely, it is time to support humanitarian workers and it
is time to end the fighting.
We also remain concerned about the ongoing
situation in the Central African Republic and welcome
the joint communiqué. We encourage the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to use its good offices to support a meaningful dialogue
that is fully inclusive and addresses the need to improve
governance. UNOCA has an important role to play in
encouraging constructive engagement by neighbouring
countries to reduce the violence and secure the
shared borders.
We are outraged by reports that Russian instructors
led military offensives characterized by confrontations
with United Nations peacekeepers, threats against
United Nations personnel, violations of international
humanitarian law, extensive sexual violence and
widespread looting, including of humanitarian
organizations. Those violations must stop now. We
urge all security actors to coordinate their operations
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and ensure that their activities do not harm civilians.
In fact, any security actor must provide justification
for how their so-called assistance supports security
sector reform.
Fourth and finally, the United States welcomes
progress in Burundi, as was mentioned earlier. Burundi
has improved diplomatic and economic relationships
with its neighbours and returned to international
forums. We recognize initial improvements in respect
for media freedoms and encourage continued progress
on human rights, which we believe would result in
significant economic and political benefits for the
people of Burundi. The United States celebrates the
10/17

07/06/2021

efforts of the Government of Burundi, the United
Nations, the African Union and many regional and
international actors in supporting those changes,
and we encourage Burundi to keep making progress
towards a lasting peace.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I too thank Mr. Fall,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his commitment and his briefing this morning.
We commend the preventive diplomacy of United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
including around elections. It is key that the Office
get sufficient resources to carry out its mandate. The
Norwegian Refugee Council’s recent list of the most
neglected displacement crises in the world was topped
by three Central African countries. That illustrates the
challenges UNOCA faces.
Let me touch upon three issues that will guide our
approach to the upcoming mandate renewal — peace
diplomacy, maritime security and climate change and
natural resources.
First, on peace diplomacy and peacebuilding,
we know that some of the country situations under
UNOCA’s purview are not formally on the Security
Council’s agenda. That should not prevent us,
however, from having conversations on how conflicts
can be prevented, including through cross-border
cooperation. Persistent armed violence in the Lake
Chad region continues to increase human suffering and
humanitarian needs. We need to address the root causes
of that violence, including through political dialogue
and conversations with the affected communities. The
joint efforts of UNOCA, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and other
United Nations entities in the region are a positive step
forward and should be strengthened.
The situation in Cameroon is a cause for concern. We
condemn attacks against schools, civilians, the United
Nations and humanitarian actors, as well as high rates
of sexual and gender-based violence. We urge both the
Government and armed groups to respect international
law, including international humanitarian law and
human rights law. We call on all actors, including in the
diaspora, to participate in constructive dialogue and we
support the Swiss-led efforts in that regard. In Chad,
we welcome the call of the African Union (AU) for an
inclusive transition culminating in the restoration of
constitutional order through the holding of elections, in
accordance with the AU timelines.
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

The death of late President Deby also highlights
cross-border linkages to Libya.
Last week’s clashes of soldiers around the ChadCentral African Republic border is another reason for
concern. Recalling the recent Security Council meeting
on the Great Lakes region (see S/2021/351) and the
Peacebuilding Commission meeting on Burundi, we
underline the need for updates on Burundi, including
in UNOCA reports.
Secondly, on maritime security, we welcome the
increased cooperation of UNOCA and UNOWAS
in the Gulf of Guinea, in line with Security Council
resolutions. Out of the 135 crew members kidnapped
globally last year, 130 were kidnapped in the Gulf of
Guinea. This worrying trend has damaging effects
on security and development in the region, as well
as on international navigation. Building on regional
institutions and initiatives, we should also take a fresh
look at what the Council can do to support the region.
Finally, on the effects of climate change and natural
resources on security, we welcome UNOCA’s twoyear project to strengthen knowledge on interlinkages
between climate change and security in Central Africa.
While we are awaiting further findings, the report
(S/2021/517) already tells a story of severe droughts
and flooding, leading to food insecurity, forced
displacement, natural resource scarcity, land conflicts
and farmer-herder conflicts —with women and girls
often most affected. Add to that conflicts over scarce
natural resources, including minerals, and it all points
to the need to address climate change and natural
resources as a security issue.
In conclusion, amid often complex and interconnected
developments in the region, we are encouraged by the
increasing engagement of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS). We also believe
that there is untapped potential for even stronger
cooperation between UNOCA and the AU. When actors
like ECCAS, UNOCA and the AU work closely together
on key issues, we know that progress can happen.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. François Louncény
Fall, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, for his update on the situation in the Central
African subregion.
Russia has always supported the activity of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa as

S/PV. 8787

an important instrument of preventive diplomacy. We
believe that the good offices of Special Representative
Fall are extremely useful. In that connection, we support
the recommendation of the Secretary-General to extend
the mandate of the mission for three years.
The situation in Central Africa remains very
complex and is characterized by an increase in terrorism
and political tensions, as well as ongoing conflict. The
coronavirus disease continues to be present in the
region, which has compounded the already difficult
socioeconomic situation for the people living there.
We are particularly concerned about the fragile
and unstable security situation in Chad. On 20 April,
President Deby was killed there. We believe that this
tragic event will have far-reaching consequences for
peace and stability in the region and on the continent,
as a whole.
That said, I think it is important to remember that it
is precisely the Western intervention into neighbouring
Libya in 2011 and the bloody conflict that ensued for
many years that led to the current tragic situation in the
region. Our views on this are confirmed by the outcome
of the extraordinary summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Lake Chad Basin Commission, which
took place in Abuja on 25 May under the chairmanship
of the President of Nigeria, Muhammadu Buhari. We
support the efforts of the African Union to normalize
the situation in Chad, including the recommendation to
organize a national dialogue and reconciliation, as well
as the timely holding of democratic elections.
One characteristic of the region is its porous
borders, through which goods and peaceful civilians,
but also insurgents and contraband, move freely. On
30 May, for example, on the border between Chad and
the Central African Republic, as a result of provocation
by insurgents from the Coalition des patriotes pour le
changement, which opposes the Government of Bangui.
As a result, a clash occurred between the soldiers of the
Central African Republic and Chad, which led to loss
of life.
In this regard, we call on all sides to demonstrate
maximum restraint and peacefully resolve any issues
that arise. We note the readiness of the authorities of the
Central African Republic to ensure the security of their
borders together with N’Djamena. To prevent any kind
of misunderstanding in future, Chad and the Central
African Republic must create a joint commission and
conduct a demarcation of their border. We know that

21-1420211/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

this kind of initiative has been proposed by Bangui, and
we hope that N’Djamena will agree to it.
Unfortunately, we have to note the expansion
of the area of activity of terrorist groups in Central
Africa. Boko Haram and the Islamic State West
Africa Province are the main sources of instability
in Cameroon, Nigeria, the Niger and Chad. Jihadists
are also intent on consolidating their position in the
Central African Republic. We believe that uncontrolled
jihadist propaganda leads to radicalization of the local
populations and weakens the central authorities in
the peripheral areas of certain countries. In addition,
socioeconomic problems and easy access to firearms
make it very realistic to see the establishment of a
Caliphate 2.0 in Africa.
Accordingly, we think it is very important to
increase countries’ efforts to quickly identify and block
channels through which terrorists are supplied with
ideological material and financial and human resources.
Furthermore, we believe that a more active use of the
instruments of the subsidiary specialized bodies of the
Security Council — first and foremost, the Counter
Terrorism Committee and the sanctions committee
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al‑Qaida — will contribute to effective prevention
and countering of the terrorist threat on the African
continent, including the threat from Boko Haram.
We are extremely concerned about the situation
with regard to the security of maritime navigation in
the Gulf of Guinea. There are many cases of maritime
piracy against commercial vessels, abduction of crew
members by pirates and demands for ransom. We note
the activity of the Global Maritime Crime Programme
that is overseen by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. In 2020, the Russian Federation decided
to allocate a special contribution to the fund for this
programme. These resources are used to provide
technical assistance to coast guard services of the
coastal States of the Gulf of Guinea. We intend to
continue providing financial assistance to regional
partners through the United Nations. We also believe
that it would be a good idea to involve United Nations
mechanisms more actively in order to counter piracy and
maritime crime. As we see it, the positive experience of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
could be used to deal with similar problems in the Gulf
of Guinea.

12/17

07/06/2021

Unfortunately, I cannot conclude without reacting
to the statement made by my colleague from the United
States. There is nothing principally new or unexpected
in what we heard in his statement. Instead, the
United States delegation continues to make the same
unfounded accusations against us. In addition, we refer
to the campaign that has been launched in the media.
We believe that this is simply a coordinated action to
give Russia a bad name and, in particular, to undermine
our effective efforts aimed at stabilizing the situation
in the Central African Republic, which has indeed
been effective, particularly compared to other bilateral
assistance efforts.
We believe that the investigation of possible
cases of violations of international humanitarian law
must be conducted by the relevant authorities of the
Central African Republic, once convincing evidence is
transmitted to them and once they are apprised of the
facts. This is what should be done, rather than launching
baseless accusations and biased media investigations.
We also note that we believe that it is unacceptable
to blackmail countries that find themselves in very
difficult situations, including the Central African
Republic, by threatening to cut off bilateral assistance
including financial assistance. Blackmailing such
countries because of their so-called inappropriate
behaviour or owing to the fact that they are cooperating
with the wrong partners is wrong. This kind of tactic
is widely used by our colleagues, who, in their own
worlds, insist they are worried about the well-being of
ordinary people.
As for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA), we will continue our
coordination and cooperation with the Mission, both
here in New York and on the ground.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Special Representative François Fall for
his always very substantial briefing.
I would like to return to three points. First of all,
let me stress the importance of regional cooperation
for the stability of Central Africa. We welcome United
Nations cooperation with the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) in supporting regional
stability, crisis prevention and peacebuilding in the
region. As Lord’s Resistance Army attacks persist in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Central African
Republic, and Boko Haram terrorist actions increase

21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

around the Lake Chad basin, regional coordination is
essential to address transnational threats and to protect
populations.
Also essential is regional advocacy for the respect
of human rights, international humanitarian law and
the rule of law, the promotion of inclusive electoral
processes and the protection of fundamental freedoms.
In the context of the political transition in Chad, ECCAS
has taken the initiative to rapidly deploy an assistance
mission in conjunction with the African Union. We
welcome this.
The appointment of an inclusive civilian
Government is a positive step forward that should
lead to a political transition based on dialogue with all
political actors and civil society. The objective must be
a rapid return to democratically elected institutions.
We welcome the efforts of ECCAS and the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
working in conjunction with the African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations, in favour of
stabilizing the Central African Republic and initiating
a truly inclusive political dialogue. We count on the
Central African authorities to fulfil their commitments
quickly.
Threats and attacks against United Nations
personnel as well as violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law are unacceptable.
The events of 30 May are serious. We will have
the opportunity to return to this point during the
consultations.
In Cameroon, France is continuing its exchanges
with the Cameroonian authorities to support the path of
dialogue and find a political solution to the crisis in the
north-west and south-west regions of the country. We also
welcome Cameroon’s contribution to regional stability,
which was illustrated by Cameroonian contingents’
actions within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. We also support Cameroon in its fight against
Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin.
Secondly, we must focus our attention on the fate
of the civilian population. Humanitarian needs have
increased, particularly with regard to food insecurity.
Instability is exacerbating the situation of displaced
people and refugees, especially women. Attacks
on humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as
teachers and schools, as was the case in Cameroon

S/PV. 8787

recently, are inacceptable. They are crimes that must
not go unpunished.
Thirdly, and this is my last point, the support of
international partners remains essential to help Central
Africa to overcome the health crisis and continue its
development. In the context of the Access to COVID-19
Tools Accelerator initiative, the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access Facility, funded to the tune of more than
€2.4 billion by the European Union and its member
States, has already made it possible to distribute nearly
20 million doses of vaccine to 43 African States.
including in Central Africa.
International partners must also remain committed
to mitigating the socioeconomic consequences of the
pandemic in Central Africa. That was the objective
of the Summit on Financing African Economies, held
in Paris last month. It agreed on concrete measures to
break the cycle of excessive debt and to support a sound
economic recovery.
We reaffirm the important role of the Peacebuilding
Commission and welcome its work in connection with
the countries of the region, particularly Burundi.
The role of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) is indispensable in
preventing conflicts and building peace. Synergies
among the United Nations regional offices and the
Special Representatives and Envoys of the SecretaryGeneral must be further developed, and we welcome
the work of Special Representative Fall in that regard.
We support the renewal of the UNOCA mandate for the
next three years, like several mentioned earlier.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) François Louncény Fall for his
comprehensive briefing.
We share the concerns over the persistent security
and socioeconomic challenges that countries and people
of the region continue to face in the reporting period,
which, sadly, are also aggravated by the impact of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
My delegation is troubled by the continued violence
perpetrated by armed groups and terrorists in certain
parts of the region, including in the Far North, NorthWest and South-West regions of Cameroon, areas
affected by Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance

21-1420213/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

Army. The maritime security situation in the Gulf of
Guinea remains troubling.
We strongly condemn the continued violence
against civilians, civilian infrastructure and United
Nations and humanitarian personnel in several parts of
the region.
The insecurity situation continues to adversely
affect stability and development in the region. Violence,
epidemics, floods and climate change also pose serious
challenges to the humanitarian situation of millions of
people, especially women and children.
In addressing those challenges, we would first
like to highlight the importance of dealing with the
root causes of instability in the region. That should
be done in a pragmatic and comprehensive manner by
supporting the ongoing diplomatic and political efforts,
enhancing reconciliation efforts at the national and
regional levels, addressing the threats posed by armed
groups and terrorists, strengthening the governance of
natural resources and providing equitable development
opportunities for countries.
Secondly, regional and subregional cooperation
significantly contributes to achieving peace, stability
and development. We are genuinely pleased to see
the efforts of regional countries in response to the
pandemic, as well as the continued commitment among
them to addressing peace and security issues. Notably,
we commend the initiatives to assist the Central African
Republic taken by the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region. We support the cooperation
efforts between the Central African Republic and Chad
in settling the recent security incident at the border.
The role of regional and subregional organizations,
as well as the United Nations, could be greatly beneficial
in supporting efforts towards peace and prosperity in
the region. We therefore warmly welcome the joint
strategic plan of the Economic Community of Central
African States and UNOCA for the period from 2021
to 2025.
Thirdly, the efforts of Central African countries
should always be coupled with international support.
My delegation calls on international partners and the
relevant United Nations entities to provide sustained
technical and financial assistance to countries in the
region. Given the heavy tolls that the region is paying
due to the impact of the pandemic, it is important to
14/17

07/06/2021

provide resources to address emergency humanitarian
needs and to ensure equitable access to COVID-19
vaccines for all people of the region.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our full support for
the work of UNOCA, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Fall and the other United Nations
entities in the region, especially during this challenging
time. Viet Nam will continue its strong support for
peace, stability, prosperity and development for the
people of Central Africa.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Mr. Fall for his briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) and the situation in
Central Africa.
In a context marked by diverse and complex
challenges to peace and security in Central Africa,
Mexico believes it a priority that UNOCA should
continue to exercise its good offices to contribute to the
peaceful resolution of conflicts. Preventive diplomacy
is particularly needed to address the situation in the
North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon,
where the civilian population is the most affected by the
violence. As in other parts of the region, particularly
Chad and the Central African Republic, an inclusive
political dialogue is indispensable in Cameroon to
identify and address the legitimate demands of the
local population and isolate extremist elements that
take advantage of the marginalized conditions in
which some communities live in order to further their
extremist agenda.
One of the most serious security challenges facing
the region is the activities of extremist groups, such as
Boko Haram, in the Lake Chad area and Cameroon,
as well as the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of Congo. Those organizations remain a challenge to
State institutions, an ongoing threat to the civilian
population and a source of instability for the region.
My country, Mexico, therefore underlines the
importance of implementing the Regional Stabilization,
Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected
by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region by
finalizing and implementing the territorial action plans.
Furthermore, we recognize as an important step
forward the recent sentence issued by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) against Dominic Ongwen for
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

S/PV. 8787

war crimes and crimes against humanity in order that
victims of the LRA can obtain justice. We call on all
countries of the region to continue to cooperate with
the ICC in cases under its jurisdiction.

I will focus my comments today on a number
of country-specific areas of concern, as well as on a
number of thematic considerations raised by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

In view of the security challenges facing the
region, Mexico strongly condemns the attacks noted
in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/517) against
humanitarian personnel and schools. The work of
humanitarian teams is essential and requires the full
support of the national authorities, especially in view
of the increase in cases of forced displacement, the
consequences of extreme natural phenomena and
the coronavirus disease pandemic. In that regard, we
reaffirm the importance of respecting and enforcing
the rules of international humanitarian law.

I want to again express our condolences to the
people of Chad on the passing away of the late President
Deby. We urge all stakeholders in Chad to work together
to ensure a swift, peaceful and inclusive transition that
respects human rights and fundamental freedoms, and a
return to constitutional order and civilian rule through
free and fair elections within 18 months. We welcome
the nomination of Mr. Ibrahima Fall as the African
Union High Representative for the transition in Chad.

In terms of inter-agency coordination, I would
like to acknowledge UNOCA’s work with other
regional organizations, including the African Union
and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS). I welcome in particular the greater
involvement of the latter organization in matters of
peace and security, thanks to its institutional reform.
The joint work between UNOCA and ECCAS in favour
of mediation and preventive diplomacy during the recent
elections in countries of the region is an example of the
potential for coordination between both organizations.
Furthermore, we know that conflicts in the region
are exacerbated by the activities of transnational
networks involving illicit trafficking in arms and natural
resources, as is evident in the case of the Central African
Republic. These activities are a source of financing for
armed groups and contribute to perpetuating the cycle
of violence. That is why we believe that UNOCA could
play a key role, in coordination with ECCAS, to develop
regional responses to those challenges.

We are deeply concerned by the deteriorating
situation in the Central African Republic. The recent
joint African Union-European Union-United Nationsthe Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) working visit to the Central African Republic
illustrates the regional and international commitment
to supporting the people and the Government. We
urge the Central African Republic authorities to
engage constructively with regional organizations
and neighbouring States, which have a vital role to
play. Furthermore, we appeal to the Central African
Republic authorities and all parties on the ground to
coordinate and engage fully with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and to end impediments
to the work of the Mission and to investigate those that
have occurred. The safety and security of peacekeepers
and United Nations personnel is not optional; it is
a necessity.

In conclusion, as co-Chair of the Informal Expert
Group on Women and Peace and Security, Mexico
welcomes the support that UNOCA provided to Chad,
Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe in
preparing their national plans of action in compliance
with the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000).

The continuing and escalating levels of violence
in both the Central African Republic and Cameroon
are deeply concerning. Attacks and abuses against
civilians must end, and those responsible must be held
to account. Those allegedly perpetrated by Government
forces are particularly disturbing. Governments bear
the primary responsibility for the protection of their
citizens. The essential social contract between State
and citizen, vital to securing peace, requires trust in
the State’s institutions and its actions.

Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): I would like to begin,
like others, by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Fall for his briefing and for the
relevant and necessary work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
the subregion.

The humanitarian situation in Cameroon is dire,
as we have heard, exacerbated by attacks against
humanitarian facilities. Violence against civilians,
schools and humanitarian personnel is unacceptable,
and the attack against a United Nations convoy, reported
by the Secretary-General, is deeply concerning. We call

21-1420215/17

S/PV.8787

Central African Region

on all groups to facilitate humanitarian access and urge
all parties to pursue inclusive political dialogue to solve
the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions.
Let me also take this opportunity to acknowledge
Cameroon for hosting significant numbers of refugees
displaced from within the region.
Parties to conflict must comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. The sentencing last month by the International
Criminal Court (ICC) of the Lord’s Resistance Army
commander, Dominic Ongwen, is significant, showing
that those who commit crimes against humanity or
war crimes will answer for their actions. We welcome
the ICC’s efforts in holding perpetrators to account,
since countering impunity is essential to preventing
further violations.
Like the Ambassador of the Niger and our
colleagues in the three African States members of the
Security Council — Kenya, the Niger and Tunisia — as
well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, we believe
that the fact that the Court in its verdict and sentencing
addressed the crimes of forced pregnancy and forced
marriage for the first time is important. We must
demand the prosecution of the crime of conflict-related
sexual violence on an equal basis with other war crimes
and crimes against humanity.
We welcome the fact that the links between climate
change and peace and security have been addressed so
directly in the Secretary General’s report (S/2021/517).
We have seen in the Sahel, particularly in the countries
around Lake Chad, how conflict and climate combine
to diminish access to natural resources. The multiple
and repeated shocks of drought and flooding undermine
community resilience and livelihoods, creating drivers
which armed groups exploit. Ireland will continue to
work across the Security Council to recognize and
act on climate-related security risks, which will only
become more pressing in the years to come.
The work undertaken by UNOCA in supporting
the development and implementation of national action
plans on women and peace and security must also be
commended. As Ireland noted at last week’s Arria
Formula meeting on women and peace and security in
the Sahel, the women and peace and security agenda
beats with an African heart.
Finally, regional coherence and cooperation
are key to the region being able to recover strongly
16/17

07/06/2021

and sustainably from the coronavirus disease, but
it is also essential to strengthening national and
regional governance systems, protecting human rights
and addressing transnational security challenges.
Cooperation between UNOCA and ECCAS is critical,
and the joint strategic plan for the period 2021 to 2025
can be a significant framework for progress in the
coming years.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I would like to start by thanking Special
Representative Fall for today’s informative briefing
and expressing my appreciation for the work the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
is undertaking across the Central African region.
Countries across Central Africa continue to face
serious political, economic and security challenges
that continue to be exacerbated by the pandemic. It
is regrettable to witness that these challenges have
worsened in the past six months. The flare-up of
violence in the Central African Republic has been
most worrisome. Particularly concerning has been the
rise in human rights violations in the conflict, most
notably those perpetrated by Government forces and
their partners. Estonia strongly condemns threats made
against United Nations personnel and any hampering
of the delivery of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic or humanitarian access
in the country.
In Cameroon, violence and human rights violations
and abuses have continued. Particularly tragic have
been attacks against schools and schoolchildren and the
targeting of humanitarian workers. Estonia condemns
such attacks in the strongest terms. There is no excuse
for targeting civilians or firing at humanitarian aid
providers. Accountability for these violations and
abuses must be established in order to fight the
establishment of a culture of impunity, which would
only breed more violence. We welcome steps made
in advancing a political dialogue, which is the only
path to finding a peaceful and lasting resolution to the
conflict. The role of UNOCA in supporting mediation
and political momentum towards reconciliation in
Cameroon is most welcome.
It has been encouraging to witness active regional
cooperation in meeting these challenges, and we see
great value in all regional initiatives that contribute
21-14202

07/06/2021

Central African Region

to silencing guns, promoting civil rights and ensuring
constitutional order. On the latter, we continue to
monitor closely the return to civilian-led democratic
governance in Chad. Neighbourly cooperation is
essential for maintaining regional peace and security,
ensuring safe and secure borders and mitigating the
effects of the pandemic.
I would like to conclude by noting that the complex
and fragile situation in Central Africa continues to
be adversely impacted by the destructive effects of
climate change. There is no denying that climate
change is affecting, and will continue to have effects

S/PV. 8787

on, international peace and security, and this threat will
continue to grow without focused action to tackle it.
We commend UNOCA for addressing this issue in the
report (S/2021/517).
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.30 a.m.

21-1420217/17
