S/2005/662

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 October 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 20 October 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith the report of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission prepared pursuant to resolution
1595 (2005), by which the Commission was established to assist the Lebanese
authorities in their investigation of the bombing on 14 February 2005 that killed
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others.
The report details progress made in the investigation of the crime and sets out
the conclusions reached by the Commission at this stage of the investigation. It is
important to note that the criminal investigation is yet to be completed. To that end,
the report points out in some detail the steps necessary to advance further the
investigation as it is taken up by the Lebanese authorities, including the need for
greater cooperation from all States, in particular the Syrian Arab Republic.
I wish to thank Detlev Mehlis, Head of the Commission, and the members of
his team for their excellent work under difficult circumstances. They have carried
out their task in an impartial, independent and professional manner. The attached
report, by necessity, is only the essence of their meticulous efforts. The Commission
has transferred to the Lebanese authorities the full product of its work. This consists
of more than 16,000 pages of documents, including the transcripts of interviews of
450 witnesses and suspects.
I would also thank the Government of the Lebanese Republic for its support
for, and cooperation with, the Commission.
It is my intention to extend the mandate of the Commission until 15 December
2005 in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution 1595 (2005). During this period
the Commission would continue its investigation of the crime and assist the
Lebanese authorities to further the investigation. This extension was also requested
by Fouad Siniora, the President of the Council of Ministers of the Lebanese
Republic, in a letter to me dated 13 October (S/2005/651).
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Council. Meanwhile, I am transmitting the report to the Government
of Lebanon.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

05-56367 (E) 241005

*0556367*

S/2005/662

Report of the International Independent Investigation
Commission established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1595 (2005)

Detlev Mehlis, Commissioner
Beirut, 19 October 2005

3

S/2005/662

Summary
The Security Council, by its resolution 1595 (2005) of 7 April 2005, decided to
establish an International Independent Investigation Commission based in Lebanon
to assist the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of all aspects of the terrorist
attack which took place on 14 February 2005 in Beirut that killed former Lebanese
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and others, including to help identify its perpetrators,
sponsors, organizers and accomplices.
The Secretary-General notified the Council that the Commission began its full
operations with effect from 16 June 2005. The Commission was granted an extension
to the initial period of investigation mandated by the Council, until 26 October 2005.
During the course of its investigation, the Commission received extensive
support from the Government of Lebanon and benefited from expert inputs from a
number of national and international entities.
The main lines of investigation of the Commission focused on the crime scene,
technical aspects of the crime, analysis of telephone intercepts, the testimony of
more than 500 witnesses and sources, as well as the institutional context in which the
crime was committed.
The full case file of the investigation was transmitted to the Lebanese
authorities during October 2005.
The present report sets out the main lines of enquiry of the investigation
conducted by the Commission, its observations thereon, and its conclusions, for the
consideration of the Security Council. It also identifies those matters on which
further investigation may be necessary.
It is the Commission’s view that the assassination of 14 February 2005 was
carried out by a group with an extensive organization and considerable resources and
capabilities. The crime had been prepared over the course of several months. For this
purpose, the timing and location of Mr. Rafik Hariri’s movements had been
monitored and the itineraries of his convoy recorded in detail.
Building on the findings of the Commission and Lebanese investigations to
date and on the basis of the material and documentary evidence collected, and the
leads pursued until now, there is converging evidence pointing at both Lebanese and
Syrian involvement in this terrorist act. It is a well known fact that Syrian Military
Intelligence had a pervasive presence in Lebanon at the least until the withdrawal of
the Syrian forces pursuant to resolution 1559 (2004). The former senior security
officials of Lebanon were their appointees. Given the infiltration of Lebanese
institutions and society by the Syrian and Lebanese intelligence services working in
tandem, it would be difficult to envisage a scenario whereby such a complex
assassination plot could have been carried out without their knowledge.
It is the Commission’s conclusion that the continuing investigation should be
carried forward by the appropriate Lebanese judicial and security authorities, who
have proved during the investigation that, with international assistance and support,
they can move ahead and at times take the lead in an effective and professional
manner. At the same time, the Lebanese authorities should look into all the case’s
ramifications including bank transactions. The 14 February explosion needs to be
assessed clearly against the sequence of explosions which preceded and followed it,
since there could be links between some, if not all, of them.

5

S/2005/662

The Commission is therefore of the view that a sustained effort on the part of
the international community to establish an assistance and cooperation platform
together with the Lebanese authorities in the field of security and justice is essential.
This will considerably boost the trust of the Lebanese people in their security system,
while building self-confidence in their capabilities.

Contents

6

Paragraphs

Page

Chronology of events, mid-2004-September 2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

I.

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1–22

11

II.

Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23–35

14

III.

The crime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

36–38

20

IV.

The Lebanese investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39–86

20

V.

The Commission’s investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

87–214

36

VI.

Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

215–223

61

S/2005/662

Chronology of events, mid-2004-September 2005
2004
• 26 August 2004, Rafik Hariri meets in Damascus with Syrian President Bashar
Al-Assad to discuss the extension of the term of President Lahoud.
• 2 September 2004, the United Nations Security Council adopts resolution 1559
(2004) concerning the situation in the Middle East, calling for the withdrawal
of all foreign forces from Lebanon.
• 3 September 2004, the Rafik Hariri bloc approves the extension law for
President Lahoud.
• 3 September 2004, the Lebanese Parliament adopts the extension law for
President Lahoud and forwards it to the Lebanese Government for execution.
• 7 September 2004, Economy Minister Marwan Hamadeh, Culture Minister
Ghazi Aridi, Minister of Refugee Affairs Abdullah Farhat and Environment
Minister Fares Boueiz resigned from the Cabinet in protest at the
constitutional amendment.
• 9 September 2004, Prime Minister Rafik Hariri indicates to journalists that he
will resign.
• 1 October 2004, assassination attempt on Marwan Hamadeh, in Beirut,
Lebanon.
• 4 October 2004, Rafik Hariri resigns as prime minister.
• 11 October 2004, Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad delivers a speech
condemning his critics within Lebanon and the United Nations.
• 19 October 2004, United Nations Security Council expresses concern that
resolution 1559 (2004) has not been implemented.
• 20 October 2004, President Lahoud accepts Hariri’s resignation and names
Omar Karame to form the new government.
2005
• 14 February 2005, Rafik Hariri and 22 other individuals are killed in a massive
blast in a seafront area of central Beirut.
• 25 February 2005, the United Nations Fact-finding Mission arrives in
Lebanon.
• 8 March 2005, Hezbollah organizes a one million strong “pro-Syrian” march.
• 14 March 2005, a Christian/Sunni-led counter-demonstration demands the
withdrawal of Syrian troops and the arrest of the chief of the security and
intelligence services.
• 19 March 2005, a bomb explodes in Jdeideh, a northern suburb of Beirut,
wounding 11 people.
• 23 March 2005, three people are killed and three others wounded in an
explosion in the Kaslik shopping centre, north of Beirut.

7

S/2005/662

• 25 March 2005, the United Nations Fact-finding Mission issues its report in
New York.
• 26 March 2005, a suitcase bomb explodes in an industrial zone in north-east
Beirut, injuring six.
• 1 April 2005, nine people are injured in an underground garage in an empty
commercial and residential building in Broumana.
• 7 April 2005, the Security Council forms the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission into the assassination of Rafik Hariri
and 22 others on 14 February 2005.
• 19 April 2005, Lebanon’s Prime Minister Najib Mikati announces that
parliamentary elections will be held on 30 May 2005.
• 22 April 2005, General Jamil Al-Sayyed, head of the Internal Security Forces,
and General Ali Al-Hajj, head of the Sûreté générale, decide to put their
functions at the disposal of Prime Minister Najib Mikati.
• 26 April 2005, the last Syrian troops leave Lebanon ending a 29-year military
presence.
• 26 April 2005, the United Nations Verification Mission starts its mission to
verify the complete withdrawal of Syrian military and intelligence agents from
Lebanon and its full compliance with resolution 1559 (2004).
• 6 May 2005, a bomb explodes in Jounieh north of Beirut injuring 29 people.
• 7 May 2005, Parliament convenes to adopt the proposed changes to the
electoral law of 2000.
• 30 May 2005, the first round of the elections was held. The Rafik Hariri
Martyr List, a coalition of Saad Hariri’s Future Movement, the Progressive
Socialist Party and the Qornet Shehwan Gathering, won the majority of the
seats in Parliament.
• 2 June 2005, journalist Samir Kassir is killed when his car explodes in east
Beirut.
• 21 June 2005, former Lebanese Communist Party leader George Hawi is killed
when his car explodes close to his home in Wata Musaytbeh.
• 30 June 2005, Fouad Siniora, former finance minister under Rafik Hariri,
forms the new government composed of 23 ministers.
• 12 July 2005, Defence Minister Elias Murr is wounded and two other people
are killed in a car bomb attack in Beirut.
• 22 July 2005, at least three people are wounded near rue Monot when a bomb
explodes in the Ashrafieh quarter.
• 22 August 2005, three persons are injured in an explosion in a garage near the
Promenade Hotel in the Al-Zalqa area north of Beirut.
• 16 September 2005, one person is killed and 10 others wounded by a bomb
near a bank in Ashrafieh.

8

S/2005/662

• 19 September 2005, one person is killed and two wounded in a small explosion
at the Kuwaiti information office in Beirut.
• 25 September 2005, a car bomb injures prominent news anchor, May Chidiac,
in north Beirut.

9

S/2005/662

I. Preface
1.
The present report details progress made in the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1595 (2005). In that resolution, adopted on 7 April 2005, the
Security Council, condemning the 14 February 2005 terrorist attack in Beirut,
Lebanon, that killed former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and 22 others, reiterating its
call for the strict respect of Lebanon’s independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity, and noting the conclusions reached by an earlier fact-finding
mission (S/2005/203), decided to establish an International Independent
Investigation Commission to assist the Lebanese authorities in their investigation of
all aspects of this terrorist act, in order to, among other things, help identify its
perpetrators, sponsors, organizers and accomplices.
2.
Prior to the adoption of resolution 1595 (2005), the Security Council had
examined the report of the fact-finding mission to Lebanon on the same subject,
submitted on 24 March 2005. The report reflected the outcome of a three-week
enquiry, including a set of recommendations. The fact-finding mission was of the
opinion that, since the credibility of the Lebanese authorities conducting the
investigation was questioned, an international independent investigation should be
set up to establish the truth. For this purpose, a team with executive authority
needed to be created, covering all the fields of expertise needed for such an
investigation. Notwithstanding the limited time and manpower the fact-finding
mission was granted, its conclusions and recommendations have been of
considerable value to the Commission.
3.
In a letter dated 29 March 2005 (S/2005/208), the Government of Lebanon
expressed its approval of the Security Council’s decision to establish an
international commission of inquiry as well as its readiness to cooperate with the
commission within the framework of Lebanese sovereignty and of its legal system.
4.
Following the adoption of resolution 1595 (2005), intensive consultations took
place regarding the establishment of the Commission, its staffing and its logistical
support. On 26 May 2005, a small advance team headed by Commissioner Detlev
Mehlis arrived in Beirut. Mindful of the urgency of the matter, from a temporary
headquarters, the team endeavoured to create the support platform for its future
work.
5.
On 13 June 2005, after extensive discussions with the Lebanese judicial
authorities, a memorandum of understanding was signed between the Government
of Lebanon and the Commission. The memorandum of understanding detailed the
modalities of cooperation between the two parties. Of particular importance to the
Commission was the agreement that “the Government of Lebanon shall guarantee
that the Commission is free from interference in the conduct of its investigation, and
is provided with all necessary assistance to fulfil its mandate”. The Commission was
to determine its own procedures, collect evidence, both documentary and physical,
meet and interview any civilians and/or officials it deemed necessary and have
unrestricted access to all premises throughout the Lebanese territory, taking into
account Lebanese law and judicial procedures. The Lebanese authorities, for their
part, were to assist the Commission in its work by providing all documentary and
material evidence in their possession and by locating witnesses as requested by the
Commission.

11

S/2005/662

6.
On 16 June 2005, the Secretary-General declared the Commission operational.
On 17 June 2005, a press conference was held by the Commissioner to solicit
publicly the assistance of the Lebanese authorities and to invite the Lebanese people
to help the Commission by relaying any information which might be of interest to
the investigation. Two hotlines were set up for this purpose, operated by the
Lebanese authorities.
7.
Shortly after the signing of the memorandum of understanding, the Lebanese
authorities transmitted to the Commission an 8,000-page case docket containing all
the information and evidence collected since 14 February 2005. Thenceforth, the
Commission conducted a thorough criminal and judicial investigation in close
cooperation with the relevant Lebanese judicial (State General Prosecutor of the
Republic of Lebanon) and police (Internal Security Forces) authorities, in order to
avoid duplication, overlapping or contradictory measures.
8.
The Commission established close links with the Lebanese security and
judicial authorities. Regular discussions were held, particularly with the judicial
authorities, to exchange updated information and files, share results and plan for the
emerging phases of the investigation. Most of the witnesses interviewed by the
Commission were summoned through the Lebanese judicial and security authorities.
A case in point was the 30 August 2005 operation, in which Lebanese security
forces and Commission investigators closely coordinated the house raid and search
of former senior security officials, prior to their transfer under close escort to the
Commission’s main operating base for interviewing.
9.
The Lebanese authorities were of great assistance in establishing the main
operating base, as well as a forward operating base for the work of the Commission.
Lebanese security teams (police and military) worked hand in hand with the
Commission’s security team to ensure the safety and security of the staff and
premises.
10. Although resolution 1595 (2005) gave the Commission executive authority, the
Commission to a large extent was supported by the Lebanese judicial and security
authorities during search and raid operations. Moreover, although the Commission
was qualified to make proposals to the Lebanese authorities regarding the arrest of
persons allegedly involved in the assassination, it remained the autonomous
decision of the Lebanese authorities to proceed with such actions.
11. From a two-track investigation, one Lebanese, one United Nations, has
emerged a complementary and unified investigation carried forward in tandem by
the Commission and the Lebanese authorities. The Lebanese authorities have
steadily shown the capacity to take increasing responsibility in pursuing the case.
This was demonstrated by the fact that they took the initiative of arresting suspects,
organizing raids and searches.
12. Given a deep mistrust that has prevailed among the Lebanese people towards
their security and judicial authorities, the Commission has become a source of great
expectation and hope for change, as well as an “interface” between the Lebanese
people and their authorities. The two press conferences, particularly the first one, in
addition to the interview of the first suspect, and the arrest of the former senior
security officials at the Commission’s suggestion, had a catalytic effect. All of this
was proof that, in the eyes of the Commission, no one was above the law. This
boosted Lebanese confidence. More witnesses came forward as the work of the

12

S/2005/662

Commission progressed. However, a number of people insisted that their identity
not be disclosed to the Lebanese authorities.
13. There are other points worth highlighting. First, a number of witnesses were
fearful that they would be harmed if it were known publicly that they were
cooperating with the Commission. For this reason, the Commission took great care
to ensure that witness interviews were conducted in a confidential manner. Because
the Commission credits the concern that these individuals have for their safety, this
report will not reveal the identity of those interviewed. Second, as is true in any
investigation, witnesses often provide information beyond the scope of the
investigation being conducted. The Commission has and will continue to forward to
Lebanese authorities all information related to any criminal matter beyond the scope
of the Commission’s investigation. Finally, the Commission interviewed people
whose agenda was to point the Commission not in the direction to where the
evidence would lead it, but in the direction the particular individual(s) wanted the
Commission to go. The Commission dealt with these individuals and situations by
remaining focused on its single mission — to follow the evidence wherever it might
lead and not to follow the agenda of any particular person or entity.
14. Lebanese public opinion reflects a widespread view that, once the Commission
has delivered its report and closed down, Lebanon will be “left alone”. A prevailing
fear is that, in the aftermath of the completion of the Commission’s work, and
sooner rather than later, the Syrian security and intelligence services will be back,
orchestrating a “revenge campaign” in a society which remains “infiltrated” by proSyrian elements. Recent bombings, assassinations, and assassination attempts have
been carried out with impunity; deliberate rumours and prophetic media analyses
have sustained this state of mind and have deterred potential witnesses from
contacting the Commission.
15. Notwithstanding fears and reluctance to volunteer information as the
Commission’s completion of its work seemed imminent (25 October), it is fair to
say that the Lebanese people in general terms have been eager to come forward to
help the Commission carry out its work.
16. The Commission could not operate in a media vacuum, particularly in
Lebanon. It has been the Commission’s steadfast policy not to be drawn directly into
a dialogue in the Lebanese media, avoiding any escalation and staying above any
challenging or provocative statements. Both press conferences were aimed at
countering such speculation and clarifying the status of the investigation. Inevitably,
their effect was short-lived.
17. To enhance transparency and broader cooperation, working with the judicial
authorities entailed keeping the highest political authorities abreast of developments
in the investigation, to the extent that such action did not call into question the
independent nature of the Commission or have a direct impact on the course of the
investigation per se.
18. During the course of its investigation, the Commission had to face major
logistical challenges. In this regard, the extensive support and assistance of sister
organizations of the United Nations system and Interpol were invaluable in the daily
work of the Commission.
19. The international community, for its part, was always prompt, when asked, in
coming forward with expertise. This assistance greatly facilitated the work of the

13

S/2005/662

Commission and gave added value to its work. However, although the Council in
resolution 1595 (2005) called on all States to provide the Commission with any
relevant information pertaining to the Hariri case, it is to be regretted that no
Member State relayed useable information to the Commission. A number of contacts
led to mere exchanges of views and/or statements of fact. It is the Commission’s
reading of the resolution that the pertinent information envisaged by the Security
Council would have included, among other things, intelligence information that
could have been submitted without any prior request from the Commission.
20. Despite the human, technical and financial capacities mobilized for the
purpose of the investigation, and although considerable progress has been made and
significant results achieved in the time allotted, the investigation of such a terrorist
act with multi-faceted international dimensions and their ramifications normally
needs months (if not years) to be completed so as to be able to establish firm ground
for a potential trial of any accused individuals. It is of the utmost importance to
continue to pursue the trail both within and outside Lebanon. The Commission’s
work is only part of a broader process. Even as this report is being written a
significant arrest was made just a few days ago; witness interviews are continuing
and complex evidence continues to be reviewed.
21. The Commission has established facts and identified suspects on the basis of
evidence gathered or available to it. The Commission has checked and examined
this evidence to the best of its knowledge. Until the investigation is completed, all
new leads and evidence are fully analysed, and an independent and impartial
prosecution mechanism is set up, one cannot know the complete story of what
happened, how it happened and who is responsible for the assassination of Rafik
Hariri and the murder of 22 other innocent people. Therefore, the presumption of
innocence stands.
22. In producing this report the Commission has endeavoured to ensure that
nothing it does or says undermines the ongoing criminal investigation and any trials
that may follow. The Commission at this juncture cannot disclose all the detailed
elements and facts it has in its possession, beyond sharing them with the Lebanese
authorities. The Commission has tried to set forth the facts and to present the
analysis of those facts in a way that most accurately explains what happened, how it
happened and who is responsible.

II. Background
23. The Syrian Arab Republic has long had a powerful influence in Lebanon.
During the Ottoman Empire, the area that became Lebanon was part of an overall
administrative territory governed from Damascus. When the countries were
established in the aftermath of the First World War, Lebanon was created from what
many Arab nationalists considered to be rightfully part of Syria. Indeed, since the
countries became independent, they have never had formal diplomatic relations.
24. Syrian troops were invited into Lebanon by Lebanese President Suleiman
Franjieh in May 1976 in the early stages of the latter’s civil war. In the Taif
Agreement, reached among members of the Lebanese Parliament, that ended the
civil war in 1989, inter alia, Lebanon thanked the Syrian Arab Republic for its
assistance in deploying its forces in Lebanon. A provision of the agreement called
for Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic to determine jointly the future

14

S/2005/662

redeployment of those forces. A later agreement reached between the two countries
in May 1991 regarding cooperation restated that provision. Syrian forces withdrew
in May 2005 in compliance with Security Council resolution 1559 (2004).

Relations between Mr. Hariri and the Syrian Arab Republic
25. The Commission’s investigation has confirmed what many in Lebanon have
long asserted, that senior Syrian intelligence officials had a powerful day-to-day and
overall strategic influence on the governance of Lebanon. The apparent growing
conflict between Mr. Hariri and senior Syrian officials, including Syrian President
Bashar Al-Assad, was a central aspect of the information provided to the
Commission through interviews and documents. A meeting in Damascus between
Mr. Hariri and President Al-Assad on 26 August 2004 appeared to bring the conflict
to a head. At that meeting, which allegedly lasted for 10 to 15 minutes, President
Al-Assad informed Mr. Hariri, who was then Prime Minister, that President
Al-Assad intended that Lebanon would extend the term in office of Lebanese
President Emile Lahoud, which Mr. Hariri opposed.
26. Lebanese and Syrian witnesses, and the transcript of a meeting between
Mr. Hariri and Syrian Deputy Foreign Minister Walid Al-Moallem, provided the
Commission with sharply differing versions of what was said at that meeting. A
number of Lebanese witnesses — including then former ministers Marwan
Hamadeh and Ghazi Aridi, Druze leader and head of the Progressive Socialist Party
Walid Jumblat, Member of Parliament Bassem Sabaa, and Mr. Hariri’s son, Saad —
reported that Mr. Hariri told them that President Al-Assad brusquely informed him
of the decision to extend President Lahoud’s term and threatened to “break Lebanon
over your [Mr. Hariri’s] head and Walid Jumblat’s” if Mr. Hariri (and presumably
Mr. Jumblat) did not agree to support the extension of President Lahoud’s term.
Syrian officials characterized the meeting differently. Syrian Foreign Minister
Farouk Al-Shara’ and General Rustum Ghazali, head of Syrian intelligence in
Lebanon, described the meeting in positive terms. General Ghazali told the
Commission that Mr. Hariri told him that President Al-Assad referred to Mr. Hariri
as a “friend”, and described a cordial, respectful meeting in which President
Al-Assad consulted Mr. Hariri on the matter.
27. Following are excerpts of interviews conducted by the Commission regarding
the 26 August 2005 meeting, relevant parts of a letter to the Commission from
Mr. Al-Shara’, and a portion of the transcript of a taped conversation between
Mr. Hariri and Mr. Al-Moallem:
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, letter to the
Commission of 17 August 2005
A meeting took place between President Bashar Assad and late Prime
Minister Rafik Al-Hariri in Damascus on 26 August 2004 within the
framework of the ongoing political consultation between the Syrian and
Lebanese leaders. (…) A general review was made of the local and regional
developments, including the possible extension of the mandate of Emile
Lahoud, the President of Lebanon, in view of the troubled regional conditions
and based on the mutual interest in maintaining stability in Lebanon. Mr. AlHariri requested that in case a consensus regarding the mandate extension is

15

S/2005/662

reached in the Council of Ministers, Syria should make endeavours to get
President Lahoud to better cooperate in the forthcoming period. The President
requested Mr. Hariri to consult with his group and with whom he deems
suitable and to take the appropriate position.
Rustum Ghazali, undated written statement, submitted to the Commission
by letter of 17 August 2005
I had two meetings at Anjar on that date [26 August 2004] with Prime
Minister Hariri. The first was in the morning of 26 August 2004, on his way to
Damascus to meet President Bashar Assad in Damascus, and the second was
on his return trip from Damascus to Beirut after meeting with President Bashar
Assad in Damascus. The latter meeting was also held in our office at Anjar.
(…)
We discussed his meeting with President Bashar Assad. He [Hariri]
looked relaxed. Prime Minister Hariri said that his meeting with President
Bashar Assad was cordial and brief. According to Prime Minister Hariri,
President Assad told him: “Abu Bahaa, we in Syria have always been dealing
with you as a friend and as the Prime Minister of Lebanon. Today, I am also
dealing with you as a friend and as the Prime Minister of Lebanon. Under the
difficult circumstances currently witnessed by this region, with Lebanon in the
midst, we are of the view that it is in the interest of Lebanon to maintain the
continuity of the regime by extending the term of office of President Lahoud.
As a friend, we would like you to clarify your position regarding this matter.
We are in no hurry to know the answer, and you may wish to think about it at
your convenience.”
Marwan Hamadeh, witness statement of 27 June 2005
On Wednesday 24 or 25 August, Mr. Hariri, Mr. Jumblat and Mr. Berri
were all invited to go to Damascus in order to be informed about the decision
to extend Mr. Lahoud’s mandate. Mr. Jumblat informed R. Ghazali that he
would need to discuss it with President Assad. R. Ghazali insisted that the
answer should be “yes” before setting up any appointment. He actually advised
Mr. Jumblat to respond positively because this was a strategic matter for
President Assad. Mr. Jumblat’s answer was negative. One hour later,
Mr. Jumblat called me and told me that the Syrian Intelligence had cancelled
his appointment.
In the evening, Mr. Jumblat and myself went to visit Mr. Hariri. He said
that R. Ghazali insisted that as long as his answer was not positive, he would
not confirm his appointment either. He was asked to go to Damascus, stay in
his house (…) until further notice. The following day, he was called in for a
short meeting.
(…)
The day Mr. Hariri met with President Assad, I was meeting at
Mr. Jumblat’s residence in Beirut, with Bassem Sabaa and Ghazi Aridi. We
saw that Mr. Hariri’s motorcade was back by 1 p.m. which meant that the
meeting in Damascus was pretty short. We saw Mr. Hariri who looked tired.
He was sweating. He told the four of us that President Lahoud was to be re-

16

S/2005/662

elected or “he will have to pay a high price”. (…) He reported President Assad
saying to him: “I will break Lebanon on your head and Jumblat’s head.”
Ghazi Aridi, witness statement of 1 July 2005
Mr. Hariri reported to us that President Assad told him: “If Jacques
Chirac puts me out of Lebanon, I will consider different options and will let
you know. Either you are with us or against us. My choice is Emile Lahoud for
President. I will make sure he is the President. I will wait for your answer. (…)
Tell Walid Jumblat that if he has Druze people in Lebanon, I also have a Druze
community in Syria. I am ready to do anything.”
Walid Jumblat, witness statement of 28 June 2005
According to Mr. Hariri, Assad told him: “Lahoud is me. I want to renew
his mandate. (…) If Chirac wants me out of Lebanon, I will break Lebanon”.
(…) During his visit to my house, Mr. Hariri was extremely tense and
disappointed. He was in a very bad position.
Jubran Tueni, witness statement of 25 June 2005
Later on, in 2004, when the issue of President Lahoud’s extension came
up, Mr. Hariri also told me that President Assad had threatened him directly
and told him that voting against the extension would be considered as being
directed against Syria. According to Mr. Hariri, President Assad added that in
that case they, the Syrians, would “blow him up” and any of his family
members and that they would find them anywhere in the world.
Bassem Sabaa, witness statement of 30 June 2005
When Mr. Hariri came back from his meeting with President Assad, I met
him at Walid Jumblat’s house.
(…)
He reported to us President Assad’s words who has put it bluntly: “I am
personally interested in this matter. It is not about Emile Lahoud but about
Bashar Assad”.
We asked him if he had had a chance to discuss the matter with President
Assad. He said that President Assad told him that the matter was not open for
discussion, that it was bound to happen or else “I will break Lebanon” (…). He
was extremely aggravated. He told me that for the sake of Lebanon and its
interests, he must think about what he will do, that we are dealing with a group
of lunatics who could do anything.
Saad Hariri, witness statement of 9 July 2005
I discussed with my father, the late Rafik Hariri, the extension of
President Lahoud’s term. He told me that President Bashar Assad threatened
him telling him: “This is what I want. If you think that President Chirac and
you are going to run Lebanon, you are mistaken. It is not going to happen.
President Lahoud is me. Whatever I tell him, he follows suit. This extension is
to happen or else I will break Lebanon over your head and Walid Jumblat’s.

17

S/2005/662

(…) So, you either do as you are told or we will get you and your family
wherever you are.”
Rafik Hariri, taped conversation with Walid Al-Moallem on 1 February 2005
In connection with the extension episode, he [President Al-Assad] sent
for me and met me for 10 to 15 minutes.
(…)
He sent for me and told me: “You always say that you are with Syria.
Now the time has come for you to prove whether you meant what you said or
otherwise.” (…) He did not ask my opinion. He said: “I have decided.” He did
not address me as Prime Minister or as Rafik or anything of that kind. He just
said: “I have decided.” I was totally flustered, at a loss. That was the worst day
of my life.
(…)
He did not tell me that he wished to extend Lahoud’s mandate. All he
said was “I have decided to do this, don’t answer me, think and come back to
me.”
(…)
I was not treated as a friend or an acquaintance. No. I was asked: “Are
you with us or against us?” That was it. When I finished my meeting with him,
I swear to you, my bodyguard looked at me and asked why I was pale-faced.
28. At the meeting with Mr. Al-Moallem, Mr. Hariri complained that he believed
that President Al-Assad was being deliberately misinformed by the Syrian security
services and Mr. Al-Shara’ about the actions of Mr. Hariri. Translated excerpts of
the meeting include the following statements by Mr. Hariri:
• “I cannot live under a security regime that is specialized in interfering with
Hariri and spreading disinformation about Rafik Hariri and writing reports to
Bashar Assad.”
• “But Lebanon will never be ruled from Syria. This will no longer happen.”
29. During this discussion, Mr. Al-Moallem told Mr. Hariri that “we and the
[security] services here have put you into a corner”. He continued, “Please do not
take things lightly”.
30. The recorded interview clearly contradicts Mr. Al-Moallem’s witness
interview of 20 September 2005 in which he falsely described the 1 February
meeting as “friendly and constructive” and avoided giving direct answers to the
questions put to him.

Syrian cooperation with the Commission
31. The information set forth above, and the evidence collected by the
Commission as described in the section below entitled “Planning of the
assassination”, point to the possibility that Syrian officials were involved in the
assassination of Mr. Hariri. When the Commission attempted to get the cooperation

18

S/2005/662

of the Syrian Government in pursuing these lines of the investigation, the
Commission was met with cooperation in form, not substance.
32. The initial contact between the Commission and the Syrian authorities took
place on 11 June 2005 when the Commissioner sent a letter to the Syrian Foreign
Minister, requesting a meeting with representatives of the Syrian Government.
Mr. Al-Shara’ replied on 11 July, pledging the Syrian Government’s support for the
investigation in general terms. On 19 July, the Commission asked to interview
several witnesses including the President of the Syrian Arab Republic. On
26 August, at the request of the Syrian Government, a meeting took place between
the Commissioner and a representative of the Syrian Foreign Ministry, at Geneva.
At that meeting, the Commissioner was given a letter containing written statements
of four witnesses. It was indicated that President Al-Assad would not be available
for any interview. The Commissioner repeated his request for direct witness
interviews and was told that the request was under consideration but that President
Al-Assad would not be available to be interviewed.
33. On 30 August the Commission sent another request to the Syrian Foreign
Minister, requesting interviews of several additional witnesses and suspects in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The letter requested the support of the Syrian Government to
search the premises of the suspects. On 7 September Foreign Minister Al-Shara’
informed the Commission in writing that, while the Commission’s evidence was
based on false testimony, his Government agreed that the persons listed in the
Commission’s requests of 19 July and 30 August, except for President Al-Assad,
could be interviewed.
34. On 12 September details of the upcoming interviews were discussed between
the Commission and a representative of the Syrian Foreign Ministry. The
Commission expressed its wish that the interviews should be held in a third country,
neither Lebanon nor the Syrian Arab Republic, which was refused. The Syrian
authorities insisted that the interviews take place in Syria with the participation of
Syrian officials. The interviews were held between 20 and 23 September. Each
interview was conducted in the presence of the Legal Adviser to the Syrian Foreign
Affairs Ministry or another representative of the Foreign Ministry, one interpreter,
two note takers and, at times, an additional person whose affiliation was not
identified. At the end of the interview process, it was apparent that the interviewees
had given uniform answers to questions. Many of those answers were contradicted
by the weight of evidence collected by the Commission from a variety of other
sources. The Commission has not had the opportunity to follow up on these
interviews or pursue its investigation regarding a possible Syrian involvement in the
crime.
35. The Commission has concluded that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic’s lack of substantive cooperation with the Commission has impeded the
investigation and made it difficult to follow leads established by the evidence
collected from a variety of sources. If the investigation is to be completed, it is
essential that the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic fully cooperate with the
investigating authorities, including by allowing for interviews to be held outside
Syria and for interviewees not to be accompanied by Syrian officials.

19

S/2005/662

III. The crime
36. On 14 February 2005 at approximately 1250 hours, the former Lebanese Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri left Nejmeh Square in Beirut going back to the Kuraytem
Palace. He travelled in a motorcade comprising six cars, together with his security
detail and a Member of Parliament, Bassel Fleyhan.
37. When the motorcade passed the St. George Hotel at Minae Al-Hosn Street a
huge explosion occurred and resulted in the death of Mr. Hariri and others.
38. Shortly after the blast, the Director of Al-Jazeera Television in Beirut received
a telephone call from a man who stated that the Nasra and Jihad Group in Greater
Syria claimed responsibility for the assassination of Mr. Hariri. This message was
broadcast shortly thereafter.

IV. The Lebanese investigation
Initial measures
39. To resolve a crime of this magnitude requires strong management capacity,
clear roles, coordination and access to sufficient competency, manpower, equipment
and means of assistance. The following brief outline reviews measures taken by the
Lebanese authorities in the period from the execution of the crime until the
Commission was established.
Investigative judge
40. Primary Military Investigative Judge Rasheed Mezher was responsible for the
crime investigation during the period from 14 to 21 February 2005. On the latter
date, a decision was taken by the Lebanese Government that the crime was a
terrorist act targeting the Republic, which led to the case being transferred to a new
competent court of jurisdiction, the highest Criminal Court in Lebanon, the Justice
Council. A consequence of this decision was that a new investigative judge was
appointed to lead the investigation, Judge Michel Abou Arraj, the representative of
the Prosecutor General’s Office.
41. Judge Mezher arrived at the crime scene less than an hour after the blast,
accompanied by Judge Jean Fahd from the Prosecutor General’s Office. He has
described the situation at the crime scene as chaos. His first decisions were to
appoint the Assistant Chief of Beirut Police, General Naji Mulaeb, as the person in
charge of the scene and to assign him the task of removing all dead bodies and
wounded people from the scene, extinguish fires and, thereafter, to withdraw all
people from the scene and close it off [witness statement].
42. At 1700 hours, Judge Mezher summoned a meeting with all the involved
bodies, both the Internal Security Forces and the military, comprising in total
10 officers. During the meeting Judge Mezher distributed tasks for the different
bodies and gave further directions for the course of the investigation [witness
statement].
43. The representatives of the Internal Security Forces during the meeting were:
General Hisham Aouar as the acting Commander of the Judicial Police and Head of

20

S/2005/662

the Forensic Unit, General Mulaeb as acting Commander of the Beirut Police Force,
General Salah Eid as the responsible person for the blast site and Lieutenant Colonel
Fouad Othman in the capacity of the Head of the Information Division [witness
statement].
44. After the meeting, at approximately 1900 hours, Judge Mezher returned to the
crime scene for a second time. He was not satisfied with his observations at the
crime scene, but hoped it would be better the next day since responsibilities had
been distributed at the earlier meeting. The shortcomings consisted mainly of lack
of equipment, means of assistance and experience. In addition, there was a lack of
communication between the various bodies involved, the directions from the
Investigative Judge were not followed and he did not receive proper feedback
concerning the progress of the investigation [witness statement].
45. During the period of his functions as Investigative Judge, Judge Mezher
summoned approximately 10 people to his office for interrogations, comprising staff
from the St. George Hotel, Mr. Hariri’s close protection officers, the father and
mother of Mr. Ahmad Abu Adass and some eyewitnesses. He also, in consultation
with Judge Jean Fahd, took the decision to request assistance from Switzerland
regarding a forensic expert team to assist the Lebanese authorities in the
investigation. When Judge Mezher left the function of Investigative Judge,
21 February 2005, no sustainable results had been achieved in the investigation.
46. The file was handed over to the new Investigative Judge, Judge Abou Arraj.
Judge Abou Arraj was Investigative Judge for the investigation from 22 February to
23 March 2005. He was appointed by First Judge Tanios Khoury, at the Supreme
Council, and the file was registered at Abou Arraj’s office on 22 February 2005
[witness statement]. His first opinions when reviewing the file were that the crime
had been a terrorist attack that would require a long period of time and extensive
investigative measures to be taken, in addition to the application of substantial
resources. In his opinion, all the initial investigative measures had been performed
in a professional and accurate way. He was surprised at the removal of the
motorcade cars. He did not meet with Judge Mezher, but telephoned him whenever
clarifications were needed [witness statement].
47. During the period of Judge Abou Arraj’s tenure as the Investigative Judge, the
following measures were taken [compiled notes case file].
Date (2005)

Measures

22 February

•

Recording of the lawsuit

24 February

•

Second Beirut regional detachment
record

•

Inspection of St. George Hotel

•

Summary of all military writs

•

Signing writs: Sûreté générale,
Internal Security Forces, State
Security, Intelligence

Affected persons

21

S/2005/662

Date (2005)

Measures

25 February

•

Writ of the Special Criminal
Investigation Section

•

Investigations about the diggings in
the area of the St. George Hotel

•

Writ of the Special Criminal
Investigation Section: notifications

26 February

•

Several reports were received,
among them the inspection report
and the report about moving the
cars to Helou barracks and
interrogating the guards

28 February

•

Interrogation

• Tayssir Abu Adass

•

Statements of witnesses

• Maher Daouk, Hassan
Mohamed Ajuz and Amer
Khaled Shehadeh

•

Subpoenaing

• Rashid Hammud (at the
hospital), Mohamed
Queiny (former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri’s
bodyguards) and Tamer
Lahib

•

Forensic Evidence Department:
asking for the assistance of foreign
experts

1 March

•

Giving the Head of the Fact-finding
Mission to Lebanon, Peter
FitzGerald, permission to look into
the investigations

2 March

•

Interrogation of two witnesses

3 March

•

The reports of Mitsubishi Company
were received, together with the
catalogue of the Mitsubishi pickups; a list of the names of the parts
and pieces found at the explosion
site; and a map showing (unclear)

•

Report of Doctor Kawas regarding
the examination of the body of
Abdel-Hameed Ghalayini

28 February

22

Affected persons

• Tayssir Abu Adass and
First Adjutant Maher
Daouk

• Tamer Lahib and
Mohamed Queiny

S/2005/662

Date (2005)

Measures

Affected persons

•

A report was received from Army
Intelligence about interrogations

• Hussam Ali Mohsen,
Ahmad Ammoura and
Nabil Ghsoub (unclear)
regarding their relations
with suspect Ahmad Abu
Adass (Note: they were
not arrested)

•

Report of Doctor Hussein Chahrour
regarding the examination of the
body of Abdel-Hameed Ghalayini

5 March

•

Subpoenaing witnesses (the first
three were to be interrogated on
8 March 2005, the others on
9 March)

7 March

•

Inspection of the contents of the
cardboard boxes (Dalal Dargham)

•

Brigadier General Imad Kakour
came and informed us about the
investigations and took a copy of
the investigation report; Ziad
Ramadan was with him

8 March

•

We received the DNA results and
the maps of the crime scene

10 March

•

Report of Al-Burj squad regarding
the search for the body of
Abdel-Hameed Ghalayini

11 March

•

The discussion of Lieutenant
General Ziad Nasr and Captain
Mitri Namar

•

Convocation of Hussam Mohsen

•

Convocation of the Palestinian
Marwan Abdel-Wahhab Kattan
(unclear), 14 March

•

Urging the heads of the services not
to remove rubble

14 March

• Engineer Makram Aouar,
Hamad Mulaeb, Hussam
Ali Mohsen, Mahmoud
Baydoun (officer in the
Sûreté générale), Afifi
Abdallah Al-Hershi
(unclear), Ghassan Ben
Jeddou (Al-Jazeera
Channel)

23

S/2005/662

Date (2005)

Measures

Affected persons

•

Statements of witnesses

•

•

Letter of the international mission
regarding the completion of its
work

Jack Chalitta, Ali Amhaz
and Marwan Koubtan

48. On 23 March 2005, Judge Abou Arraj stepped down from the post of
Investigative Judge. The reason for this was the tense political atmosphere at this
particular time: a lot of mistrust was being directed towards the Lebanese judiciary
and criticism being levelled at the manner of the investigation. In addition, while in
charge of the Hariri investigation, he also had to discharge his normal functions.
The case was contaminated with political issues and, during demonstrations in
Beirut on 14 March 2005, he heard people mentioning his name in a critical manner
[witness statement].
49. At the time he left the post of Investigative Judge, the only achievement in the
investigation was the Abu Adass lead, despite attempts to focus on the modus
operandi of the explosion and to get all experts involved to come up with one
consensus opinion [witness statement].
50. Judge Abou Arraj was replaced by Investigative Judge Elias Eid who, as at
October 2005, is still in charge of the investigation.
Internal security forces
51. On 14 February 2005, General Ali Al-Hajj was the Head of the Internal
Security Forces (ISF). He was promoted to the post in November 2004, allegedly
appointed by the Syrians, and he stepped down from the post during spring 2005 in
the aftermath of the blast that killed Mr. Hariri. According to his statement, he was
at his office when he was alerted about the blast. He immediately went to the crime
scene by car. During the ride he called General Shahid Al-Khoury, Chief of the
Services and Operations Division within ISF, who told him that it was a huge blast.
General Al-Hajj then ordered General Al-Khoury to send all responsible units to the
scene. The units comprised the Forensic Unit under the command of General
Hisham Aouar, the Explosives Unit under the command of General Abdel-Badie AlSoussi and the Investigation Unit under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Fouad
Othman. This was his only responsibility, to provide sufficient resources. After the
arrival of the Investigative Judge, all ISF staff was under the command of the Judge
and General Ali Al-Hajj could not interfere in the investigation [witness statement].
52. In his opinion, the problems at the scene were related to the presence of too
many different agencies, such as the Army, ISF, State Security and Public Security.
53. Later that afternoon, General Al-Hajj joined a meeting with the Higher
Defence Council at the Presidential Palace. The meeting was chaired by the
President. Other participants were the Minister of the Interior, the Minister of
Defence, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Justice, the Minister of
the Economy, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister of Public Works, the
Governor of Beirut and commanders from the various security agencies. The

24

S/2005/662

meeting discussed the subject matter of the crime, its referral to the Judicial
Council, and the ramifications of the crime.
54. After the meeting General Al-Hajj returned to his office: soon thereafter the
Al-Jazeera television channel broadcast a videotape, where Ahmad Abu Adass
claimed responsibility for the blast and the killing of Mr. Hariri. From that time all
available ISF resources, except those occupied with the crime scene work, were
focused on the Abu Adass track.
Military intelligence
55. On 14 February 2005, General Raymond Azar was the Head of Military
Intelligence. He was promoted to the post in December 1998 and stepped down
during spring 2005 in the aftermath of the blast that killed Mr. Hariri. According to
his statement, he was alerted about the blast by Colonel Mohamed Fehmi, Head of
the Military Security Branch. He did not go to the crime scene, but followed the
case in detail from his office, together with Colonel Albert Karam, the Chief of
Beirut Intelligence Branch. He informed President Lahoud and General Ghazali
about the blast at the time of its occurrence [witness statement].
56. Personnel from Military Intelligence (mainly specialists in the field of
explosives) visited the crime scene and conducted their part of the examination.
They confirmed that the type of explosive used was TNT and the estimated amount
some 300 kilograms. All concrete evidence found on the site was handed over later
to ISF (General Hisham Aouar) and to General Azar’s knowledge there were some
metal fragments and a gun. His opinion was that basically ISF, but also the
Prosecutor General’s Office and the Investigative Judge, had the overall
responsibility for the crime investigation.
57. In the afternoon of 14 February 2005, General Azar attended the meeting with
the Higher Defence Council. At the meeting, a presentation was made about the
assassination of Mr. Hariri, with all the details that were available at that time. Each
participant presented his own point of view.
58.

At a later stage, his Directorate was assigned to focus on three elements:
• The videotape of Ahmad Abu Adass
• The cellular communications that took place in the area of the explosion
• The type and amount of explosives used.

Sûreté générale
59. On 14 February 2005, Brigadier General Jamil Al-Sayyed was the Head of the
Sûreté générale. He was promoted to the post in December 1998 and stepped down
during spring 2005 in the aftermath of the blast that killed Mr. Hariri. According to
his statement, he was at his office when he heard the blast, but thought that the noise
was a result of Israeli air fighters passing through the sound barrier. Somewhere
between 1315 and 1330 hours, Lieutenant Colonel Ahmed Al-Assir informed him of
the blast and that Mr. Hariri’s motorcade had been the target. He stayed at his office
and no one from the Sûreté générale was sent to the scene. He called the President,
the Minister of the Interior and General Ghazali.

25

S/2005/662

60. Later that afternoon, General Al-Sayyed attended the meeting with the Higher
Defence Council. The meeting was focused on the consequences in the near future
on the ground. The suggestions were submitted to the Government, which had a
meeting later the same evening.
61. On Tuesday morning, 15 February 2005, he received a telephone call from a
journalist from Al-Jazeera who told him nobody had yet picked up the Abu Adass
videotape. The tape was brought to him 16 February 2005. He made a copy and sent
the original to the Investigative Judge Abou Arraj.

Crime scene investigation
Internal Security Forces report
62. As with any similar criminal case, prompt examination of the crime scene and
its surroundings is of paramount importance for the outcome of the investigation.
The officer in charge of the crime scene, General Naji Mulaeb of ISF, arrived at the
scene at 1305 hours on 14 February 2005. He has issued a report dated 3 March
2005 on the crime scene examination conducted by the Lebanese authorities
[General Directorate of Internal Security Forces, Beirut Police Unit, Ref. No. 95]
stating the following:
On implementation of investigation order issued by the first investigating
judge of the military court in Beirut regarding the investigations and anything
that can throw light on the enquiry into the explosion which caused the death
of former Prime Minister Hariri and others
Record: Investigation order issued by the first investigating judge of the
military court in Beirut No. 23/2005 dated 14 February 2005.
Order from the General Department of Referrals No. 207/1181 dated
15 February 2005.
On 14 February 2005 at about 1250 hours, an explosion took place in
Beirut which the operations room reported as being close to the St. George
Hotel. All patrols were ordered to go to the scene. I proceeded there and
arrived within a few minutes. Cars on both sides of the road in the vicinity
were ablaze and there was a lot of smoke. Civil defence, fire brigade and Red
Cross vehicles hastened to the area and took action to put out the fire, gather
the corpses and take the wounded to hospital. The scene was chaotic, and
security and military personnel were mixed with civilians, firemen and first aid
personnel, and civilians, newspaper journalists and the media were all eager to
get to the scene. I ordered all the officers and police officers and patrols to do
everything necessary to maintain security corridors and to take the requisite
measures to safeguard the scene of the crime and keep away onlookers, and
made the commander of the second Beirut regional secretariat responsible for
implementation.
The preliminary indications are that the explosion took place in the
motorcade of Prime Minister Hariri but the outcome is not yet known.
Specialists in gathering evidence and explosives experts began their
work.

26

S/2005/662

In addition to political and security officers, there came to the scene a
Government commissioner from the Military Court with some support staff;
and Rasheed Mezher, the first investigating judge from the Military Court in
Beirut, who orally delegated me, in my capacity as officer in charge of the
police during the absence from 12 February 2005 of the Police Commander on
a mission abroad, or whoever I should see fit, to undertake the investigations
and anything that could throw light on that explosion and to duly inform him.
The oral authorization would be followed up in writing.
As soon as the General Director of Internal Security arrived at the scene,
I informed him of all the above.
In accordance with the above-mentioned oral delegation of authority, I
ordered Major Salah Eid to undertake the necessary investigative procedures in
his capacity as the commander of the second Beirut regional secretariat, within
the remit of which the explosion took place, and to keep me informed.
The work of retrieving the corpses and taking the wounded to hospital
continued, as did the work of personnel from the Central Office of Accidents
and the explosives experts. A complete sweep was made of the scene and the
surroundings. A team of engineers from the Lebanese Army came and took
samples from the scene in order to carry out tests thereupon. An army
detachment carried out a search of the site and buildings and assisted in
imposing a security cordon.
In view of the urgency of the investigation, we sent telegram No. 2065
dated 14 February 2005 to the leadership of the regional police unit and to
police unit commanders in which we asked that all the necessary investigations
should be carried out within the remit of each unit with respect to the corpses
that had been taken to the hospitals in each area, in order to permit their
relatives to identify them and duly inform me, thereby enabling me to gain the
approval of the relevant authorities for the return to their relatives of those
corpses. Depositions were to be taken from the wounded and a copy deposited
in the file of the overall investigation, through the Al-Burj squad.
Further to our telegram No. 2077 dated 14 February 2005, sent to unit
departments regarding the isolation of the scene of the crime and establishment
of a security cordon around it, we ordered the commander of the second Beirut
regional secretariat to use whatever personnel were necessary to perform those
tasks and to place metal barricades and yellow tape around the scene and, in
coordination with the commander of the traffic secretariat, to ensure the flow
of traffic.
Major Eid kept me informed of the progress of the investigation and its
outcome, and I duly informed the first investigating judge from the Military
Court. The corpses were handed over to their relatives in accordance with legal
principles.
On the instructions of the first investigating judge of the Military Court,
and with the approval of the General Director of the Internal Security Forces,
the cars from the Hariri motorcade were taken to the Helou barracks, once they
had been photographed in situ and a video recording had been made in the
presence of the commander of the second Beirut regional secretariat, the
commander of the second Beirut traffic squad, the commander of the Al-Burj

27

S/2005/662

detachment and a squad of criminal investigators, and using the lights
provided by the civil defence, in accordance with report No. 144/302 dated
14 February 2005. They were deposited in the Helou barracks.
In our telegram No. 2122 dated 15 February addressed to the commander
of the emergency services, we requested that they should be safeguarded and
that no one should be allowed to touch them.
At 1500 hours on 15 February 2005, Major Omar Makkawi, the
commander of the Beirut police unit, reported and assumed his command. He
informed me of all the procedures that had been taken and all incidents that
had occurred, and we followed up the process of the investigation being
undertaken by Major Salah Eid. We then duly informed the first investigating
judge of the Military Court of the same.
Pursuant to warrant No. 2F206/... dated 17 February 2005, the unit
commander transferred to us the written delegation of authority issued by the
first investigating judge of the Military Court, Ref. 23/2005 dated 14 February
2005, concerning the explosion, which was transmitted to us for
implementation by the General Directorate as No. 2SH207/1181 dated
15 February 2005.
Similarly, the unit command gave us, pursuant to warrant No. 206/1735
dated 18 February 2005, written authorization from that party, Ref. 36/2005
dated 18 February 2005, which included an order to keep the cars from the
Hariri motorcade inside the barracks, cover them with tents and place them
under guard, which was done.
In accordance with warrant No. 2F206/1736 dated 18 February 2005, the
first investigating judge of the Military Court gave us written authorization
Ref. 36/2005 dated 18 February 2005, which included an order to contact the
Governor of Beirut, who should supply us with the names of those recently
working at a workshop at the site of the explosion. The aforementioned
authority was carried out by means of a document of 14 pages which is
attached.*
Pursuant to the first delegation of authority referred to above, on the
basis of the order to the commander of the second Beirut regional secretariat to
carry out the investigation, and as a result of the first report, No. 302/143
dated 14 February 2005 and all the investigations arranged by the units in the
police unit and the regional police unit, we hereby submit the following: table
No. 1 has been prepared concerning the corpses that have been returned to
their relatives; table No. 2 has been prepared concerning the persons injured
by this explosion; table No. 3 contains the depositions that were made
concerning the explosion; a table has been prepared showing the measures that
were taken: an examination of the scene of the crime; articles impounded;
damaged cars; the loss of one person at the site of the explosion and the failure
to find him.*
All those procedures have been verified in report No. 302/1 dated
14 February 2005.

* Not included in the present report.

28

S/2005/662

Swiss forensic report
63. The Lebanese experts involved in the crime scene examination, representing a
variety of different agencies, came up with different opinions on the findings and
results of the examination. As a result, they were summoned to a meeting at the
Military Court in the presence of the Prosecutor General [witness statement]. The
meeting led to a request from the Lebanese authorities for foreign assistance in
examining the crime scene, which was directed to the Government of Switzerland.
A Swiss forensic expert team visited Lebanon in March 2005 and conducted a
forensic investigation. The team’s final report stated (excerpt):
Our conclusions about an explosion above or under ground are based
upon the following examinations:
• Interpretations based on dispersion of fragments, size and shape of
fragments
• Interpretations based on size and shape of crater
• Ballistic interpretations
• Interpretations of damage on buildings (structure, glass)
After interpretation and analysis of the dispersion of fragments, we
cannot give clear evidence whether there was an explosion above or under
ground. Our analysis and research concerning the shape and form of the crater
also give no clear evidence whether there was an explosion above or under
ground.
On the other hand, the form and shape of the crater give some
information about the possible amount of the charge (above or under ground):
• As mentioned in our report it is expected that an amount of about 1,000
kg above ground will create a crater like the one at the scene
(…)
Concerning the fact that the charge was possibly placed in a car, it must
have been of larger size. If such a vehicle has been used we expect some big
fragments (e.g. from the frame) of the vehicle close to the centre of the
explosion.
The grade of damage of the metal fragments which were shown to us by
the police (said to have originated from a Mitsubishi Canter) is consistent with
fragments we would expect if such a vehicle was located in the centre of the
explosion.
(…)
After having conducted all the analysis and discussions of the facts we
have collected, we came to the conclusion that it was most likely an explosion
above ground.
According to this finding we estimate an amount of 1,000 kg of high
explosive.
The unconfirmed and preliminary results of the analysis of a soil sample
of the crater showed Trinitrotoleune (TNT) as explosive charge.

29

S/2005/662

Rifi report
64. In March 2005, the present Head of ISF, General Ashraf Rifi, prepared a report
on the initial measures taken by the competent Lebanese authorities at the scene of
the crime, which was submitted to the United Nations Fact-finding Mission. The
report concluded (excerpt):
II.

Measures taken

The importance of this tragic event that led to the assassination of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri had an effect on all subsequent measures and
actions taken.
A.

Rescue and evacuation operations and find of bodies

In the immediate aftermath of the explosion, security, military and civil
defence organs as well as the Red Cross rushed to the crime scene to perform
their duties. In spite of all the measures taken, these were, unfortunately, not
up to the level that would save the face of these organs. These measures were
flawed. Therefore, the Minister of Interior and Municipalities issued a
memorandum 137/(sad)2, dated 25 February 2005, instructing the General
Inspectorate of the Internal Security Forces to investigate the deeds and
actions. Based on the results, he suggested the dismissal of both the General,
Chief of Beirut Police and the General, Chief of the Judicial Police.
B.

Preservation of the crime scene

Immediately after the explosion happened, the military investigating
judge was put in charge of the investigation. All the security and judicial
police personnel were put at his disposal. He gave rogatory commissions and
stipulated the kind of measures to be carried out, especially the preservation of
the crime scene. However, the measures taken were below the required level
and contrary to the obvious fundamental basis upon which crimes as serious as
this one or even less serious crimes are investigated, in which case, strict
measures ought to be taken in order to prevent any tampering with the crime
scene or any clues that could be used as criminal evidence to help in the
investigation and uncover the truth. This could have been carried out without
neglecting the humanitarian aspect of the tasks to be implemented, i.e. giving
priority to finding the victims and the injured, providing the latter with first
aid in order to save them. Serious mistakes were recorded in this regard:
(a) There was a state of chaos at the crime scene not only during the
first few hours following the explosion, during which much focus was on
extinguishing the fire, saving the injured and looking for the missing, but
regrettably and unnecessarily for a much longer time.
(b) There was no coordination between all the security organs present
at the crime scene.
(c) Looking for the missing persons was done in an irresponsible,
unprofessional and careless way. Some were later found by accident or by their
families. The following controversial elements were recorded:
• The body of Zahi Abu Rujaili, a Lebanese citizen, was found on
15 March 2005. According to the medical examiner, the victim had
survived the explosion for approximately 12 hours.

30

S/2005/662

• The body of one of the victims was found by coincidence 8 days
after the explosion.
• The body of Abdel-Hameed Shalayini, a Lebanese citizen, was
found 16 days after the explosion by his family and not the judicial
or civil defence officers.
• The fate of Farhan Ahmad Al-Issa is still unknown, he is still
missing. It is feared that finding his body would constitute yet
another scandal.
(d) A few hours after the explosion took place, around 2300 hours,
major evidence was removed from the crime scene. The convoy cars of the late
former Prime Minister were transferred to Helou barracks under the pretext of
preserving them although what was left of the cars did not justify their
preservation except for their value as criminal evidence because they were the
target of the explosion. This was not the only instance bearing proof of
tampering with the crime scene. A BMW car that was not part of the convoy
was also removed, whereas focus should have been on not removing any cars
and maintaining them the way they rested after the explosion in order to
determine how the crime was committed.
(e) A bulldozer was introduced into the crime scene on the day of the
explosion, 14 February 2005, in the evening for no justifiable reason. As soon
as the Minister of Interior and Municipalities got knowledge of it, he gave
orders to retrieve it and preserve the crime scene as it was.
C.

The conduct of the investigation, its conditions and the
determination of how the crime was committed

(a) It is common knowledge that major mistakes were made in the
course of conducting the investigation, among them the leaking of information
that created confusion. This in turn compromised the trustworthiness of the
local investigation.
(...)
III. Responsibilities
(a) Responsibility for a tragic crime such as the one we are dealing
with cannot be limited to one aspect. As mentioned above, it encompasses the
political, judicial and security aspects.
(…)
Decision to remove motorcade vehicles
65. The decision to fill the crater at the crime scene, to remove the motorcade
vehicles and to reopen the street on the day after the blast is confusing, assuming
that there was a collective will to perform a professional crime scene examination in
order to track down the perpetrators and bring them to justice. The confusion,
reflected in the variety of statements from the officials most closely involved,
speaks for itself.

31

S/2005/662

Investigative Judge Mezher
66. At 2230 hours on 14 February, Judge Mezher was at his home, when he got a
telephone call from General Naji Mulaeb, who informed the Judge that the
representatives from the various agencies at the crime scene had started collecting
pieces of metal from the motorcade vehicles in order to perform their own further
forensic examinations. There was nothing General Mulaeb could do to stop them.
He suggested that the motorcade vehicles be removed to a safe place and proposed
the Helou barracks in Beirut. Judge Mezher agreed to the proposal under the
following conditions. The vehicles should be filmed on the spot, they should be
marked and numbered: they should also be filmed during the transportation and
again upon arrival at the Helou barracks, where they should be covered and guarded
around the clock in order to avoid any tampering with evidence. Judge Mezher had
no information about a decision to fill the crater and reopen the street [witness
statement]. The vehicles were moved from the crime scene during the night of
14 February.
General Jamil Al-Sayyed
67. On the morning of 15 February 2005, General Al-Sayyed read in the
newspaper about the removal of the motorcade vehicles. At 0800 hours, he called
General Ali Al-Hajj, the Head of ISF, and asked what was going on. General AlHajj replied that two teams were working on clearing the road which would be
reopened at 1000 hours. In response to a direct question, General Al-Hajj stated that
the orders came from Mustapha Hamdan, the Commander of the Presidential Guard
[witness statement].
General Ali Al-Hajj
68. On 14 February 2005 at 2230 hours, General Al-Hajj received a telephone call
at his office (where he was with General Hisham Aouar) from the Director General
of the Public Works Ministry, Mr. Fadi Nammar. Mr. Nammar told him that a
decision had been taken to reopen the road the next day and that his staff were ready
to start working at sunrise the next morning. The call was on the landline and was
overheard by General Aouar. He claimed to be surprised about the telephone call
because Mr. Nammar had no jurisdiction in the matter. It was publicly recognized
that Fadi Nammar was very close to the Presidential Palace, which meant that he
was taking his orders from there. Mr. Nammar alleged that he had cleared the matter
with the Investigative Judge. He called the acting Chief of Beirut Police, General
Naji Mulaeb, and informed him about the call from Mr. Nammar and asked him to
check with Judge Mezher whether he was aware of this decision. General Mulaeb
called Judge Mezher, who was aware of the decision to reopen the road and had no
objection. General Mulaeb then asked what should be done with the vehicles. Judge
Mezher replied that they should be brought to a secure place and proposed the
Helou barracks [witness statement].
69. The next morning, 15 February 2005, Mr. Nammar met with the Governor of
Beirut, Mr. Yacoub Sarraf, in order to arrange for the reopening of Minae Al-Hosn
Street. Sarraf is very close to the Presidential Palace and he was also aware of the
decision [witness statement].

32

S/2005/662

General Hisham Aouar
70. With regard to the removal of the motorcade, General Aouar indicated that he
did not know who gave the order. He was asked to assist in the filming of the
removal of the motorcade on 14 February 2005 during the meeting with the
Investigative Judge, but nothing else was mentioned about the removal of the
motorcade vehicles from the crime scene. On that same evening, between 2230 and
2300 hours, he was at the office of ISF General Director, General Ali Al-Hajj, and
he told him that the cars were going to be removed. He also told him that ISF had to
provide assistance by marking the locations of the vehicles and their filming
[witness statement].
Director General Fadi Nammar
71. Mr. Nammar did not remember whether General Al-Hajj telephoned him on
14 February 2005, but he remembered his calling General Al-Hajj the next day, as
he always did in similar situations. At the time of the telephone call, he was at the
office of the Governor of Beirut. He told General Al-Hajj that they were prepared, if
needed, to offer help. General Al-Hajj passed him on to a General working for ISF,
who told him that there was a survey going on at the crime scene. The General
stated he would come back to Mr. Nammar in due course. Mr. Nammar did not
recall the name of the General, but he was with Al-Hajj. He had no authority to
decide to open roads in Beirut and he did not give any orders to remove the
motorcade vehicles. He also denied any contacts with the Presidential Palace
[witness statement].
72. Subsequently, it was confirmed (from telephone lists) that General Ali Al-Hajj
made the telephone call from his landline to Mr. Nammar’s mobile phone on the
evening of 14 February 2005. It was also confirmed that Mr. Nammar made the
telephone call to General Al-Hajj the following day [witness statement].
The Governor of Beirut, Yacoub Sarraf
73. According to his statement he did not give any instructions. The Army and the
Police took over. He had telephone contact with Mr. Fadi Nammar on 14 February
2005.
Acting Commander of Beirut Police, General Naji Mulaeb
74. Between 2030 and 2200 hours on 14 February 2005, General Mulaeb received
a telephone call at his office from General Ali Al-Hajj who ordered General Mulaeb
to transfer the convoy vehicles from the crime scene and secure them in a safe place,
on the understanding that within two days the road would be reopened. If experts
wanted to come and inspect the vehicles, they would be available. General Mulaeb
was surprised by this order and did not accept it. He told General Al-Hajj that he
had nothing to do with the crime scene, since the site was under the authority of
Judge Mezher. General Al-Hajj told General Mulaeb to contact the Judge, which he
did. The Judge was also surprised and asked the reason for the hurry. General
Mulaeb told him that he received his orders from General Al-Hajj and that he was
surprised as well. The Judge told him to give him some time and that he would call
back. After a while, between 10 and 30 minutes, the Judge called back and said that
the cars could be transferred [witness statement].

33

S/2005/662

General Mustapha Hamdan
75. After the blast on 14 February 2005, General Hamdan took all necessary
measures to protect the President and the presidential areas. He did not recall any
details, but he did not go to the scene of the blast. He did not issue any orders or
directives regarding the activities at the crime scene, since it did not fall within his
responsibilities. Thus, he had nothing to do with any orders to clean the street, to fill
the crater or to remove the motorcade vehicles [witness statement].
Head of Internal Security Forces, General Ashraf Rifi
76. In a meeting with the Commission on 1 June 2005, General Rifi stated that the
person who gave the order to get a bulldozer or bulldozers to the crime scene to fill
the hole caused by the explosion etc. was General Mustapha Hamdan, who at the
time of the incident was the Commander of President Lahoud’s security detail and
therefore by Lebanese law had nothing to do with issues related to crime scene
investigation [witness statement].

Lebanese investigation: Ahmad Abu Adass
77. At approximately 1411 hours on 14 February 2005, barely an hour after the
explosion, Leila Bassam of Reuters received an anonymous telephone call from a
man with an accent that was not Lebanese but which she could not identify.
According to Ms. Bassam, as soon as she answered the call, the man directed her to
“[w]rite this down,” told her to be quiet, and then read the following statement in
classical Arabic:
We, Al-Nasra wal Jihad fee Bilad Al-Sham, declare that we have meted out
due punishment to the infidel Rafik Hariri so that he may be an example to
others.
The caller concluded with an Islamic religious saying and then hung up.
78. Ghassan Ben Jeddou, the Beirut bureau chief of Al-Jazeera, recalls receiving
four telephone calls that day related to the same claim of responsibility. In the first
telephone call, a man whom Mr. Ben Jeddou described as speaking poor Arabic in
an African, Afghan or Pakistani accent, claimed that Al-Nasra wal Jihad was
responsible for Mr. Hariri’s execution by a suicide bomb. Shortly thereafter, AlJazeera informed the public about this claim of responsibility. (Mr. Ben Jeddou
recalls that Al-Jazeera received four telephone calls that afternoon, the first around
1340 and the last around 1600 hours. However, telephone records show only three
telephone calls to Al-Jazeera that afternoon, at 1419, 1527 and 1704 hours.) AlJazeera next received a call from another anonymous person claiming to be from the
same group, this time a fluent Arabic speaker, who explained where Mr. Ben Jeddou
and his colleagues could locate a videocassette containing further information about
the assassination — namely, in a tree near the Economic and Social Commission for
Western Asia (ESCWA) building in downtown Beirut — and directing them to fetch
the tape within 15 minutes. Mr. Ben Jeddou sent a colleague to locate the
videocassette. Eventually, a white envelope containing a typewritten detailed
statement and a videocassette was found. After more calls from the same group
asking why the tape had not yet been aired, Al-Jazeera aired the footage later that
afternoon.

34

S/2005/662

79. The letter accompanying the tape, purporting to be from the Nasra and Jihad
Group of Greater Syria, states in part:
Praise be to God for the banner of Nasra and Jihad is victorious in
Greater Syria, and with God’s blessings the agent of the infidels in Mecca and
Medina, Rafik Hariri, has been meted out his due punishment through a
suicide operation executed by the Mujahid Ahmad Abu Adass bearing the
banner of Nasra and Jihad in Greater Syria on Monday, 14 February 2005, the
5th of Muhurram 1426 according to the Islamic Calendar, in Beirut. …
Attached is film recording of the martyr Ahmad Abu Adass, executor of the
operation.
In the tape, an individual identifying himself as Mr. Abu Adass uses similar
phraseology.
80. Soon after the airing of the tape, the Lebanese authorities acquired extensive
information about Mr. Abu Adass’s background and began questioning his family
and associates. Much of this information apparently came from Sheikh Ahmed
Abdel-Al, of Al-Ahbash, an Islamic group active in the area of the Palestinian
camps where Mr. Abu Adass had reportedly lived. Sheikh Abdel-Al stated to the
Commission that he had received a telephone call from the Presidential Palace
shortly after the airing of the Abu Adass video, enquiring whether Mr. Abdel-Al had
any information about Mr. Abu Adass. According to Mr. Abdel-Al, he obtained
information about Mr. Abu Adass’s background, including his address, the fact that
he often went to Ein al Helwa, that he was a Wahabi, that he was well-educated, had
probably studied computer science and that he visited Abu Obeida (deputy to the
leader of Jund al Sham). Sheikh Abdel-Al also obtained the names of Mr. Abu
Adass’s family and friends: he sent this information by facsimile to President
Lahoud, Ali Al-Hajj, Albert Karam, Jamea Jamea and Maher al Toufeily. Sheikh
Abdel-Al reportedly also met with Jamea Jamea, a Syrian intelligence official, on
the evening of 14 February 2005 and gave him the information about Mr. Abu
Adass, which Jamea Jamea subsequently relayed to ISF.
81. ISF visited Mr. Abu Adass’s house, accompanied by a member of Al-Ahbash,
and seized a computer, as well as a number of compact disks which were primarily
of a fundamentalist Islamic nature. Although the report on the search noted that
most of the documents stored on the computer had been downloaded from the
Internet, there was no indication that Mr. Abu Adass’s home had Internet access.
Many of Mr. Abu Adass’s friends and relatives were interviewed extensively by the
authorities (including by ISF and military intelligence) in the days immediately
following the explosion. Mr. Abu Adass himself, however, could not be located. On
the day of the explosion 10 people were questioned and over the course of the next
two months approximately 40 people were interviewed. The Lebanese investigation
further revealed that Mr. Abu Adass had been employed at a computer shop in the
summer of 2004, which was owned in part by Sheikh Ahmed Al-Sani, who was a
member of the Ahmed Miqati and Ismail Al-Khatib network.
82. In a report dated 17 February 2005 from General Al-Sayyed to Judge Mezher,
General Al-Sayyed concluded that the videotape was authentic and that “Ahmad
Abu Adass, who appears on the tape, was ... clearly a definite participant in the
assassination”. The only basis provided for this conclusion was the statement that
“[t]he way in which he delivers the statement and shows himself without any
covering over his face is the manner adopted by suicide bombers in similar cases.

35

S/2005/662

The fact that he did not conceal his face while making the statement indicates that
he must have been personally responsible for setting off the explosion” [information
about facts relating to the broadcast on Al-Jazeera of a videotape claiming
responsibility, No. 606/A’A, 17 February 2005].

Australian investigation
83. On 15 February 2005, a request was forwarded to the Australian Federal
Police from the Prosecutor General requesting that six individuals be arrested as
suspects for participating in the Hariri assassination. The responsible ISF official at
Beirut International Airport informed ISF General Al-Hajj about these six
individuals. General Al-Hajj transmitted this information directly to the Prosecutor
General, Judge Rabia Kaddoura, who contacted the Australian authorities. The
Australian investigation absolved these six suspects of any involvement in this
crime, a position with which the Lebanese authorities in charge of the investigation
agreed.
84. The records indicate that the Lebanese authorities based their suspicion on the
following factors:
(a) The six persons of interest departed from Beirut International Airport one
and a half hours after the bombing occurred;
(b)

The six persons had no luggage;

(c) One of the six persons bore a resemblance to Mr. Abu Adass, who was
depicted in a video of an extremist group that had claimed responsibility for the
bombing.
85. The Australian authorities executed an extensive investigation to assist the
Lebanese authorities. The investigation included raising airport alerts, interviewing
the six individuals and other members of the group, swabbing for residual
explosives (including the individuals, their aeroplane seats, and their luggage) and
examining the aircraft for possible explosives. Although it was reported that the six
persons identified as “suspects” were without luggage, they in fact were carrying
luggage. Three of the six suspects were subjected to a forensic examination.
86. The findings of the Australian investigation revealed: (a) the group was
travelling to Jeddah as part of a religious pilgrimage; (b) no common organic or
inorganic explosive or post-blast residue was detected in any of the samples taken;
and (c) no person interviewed by the Australian authorities with respect to this
investigation had any involvement in nor any knowledge about any involvement in
the Hariri assassination.

V. The Commission’s investigation
Overview
87. The Commission was declared operational by the Secretary-General on
16 June 2005. From 16 June to 6 October 2005, 244 witness statements, 293
investigators’ notes and 22 suspect statements were issued. A number of searches
were conducted and 453 crime scene exhibits were seized. A total of 16,711 pages

36

S/2005/662

of documents have been produced. Thirty investigators from 17 different nations
have been involved in the Commission’s investigative measures, as well as external
experts.
88. At the outset, the time factor affecting the Commission has to be emphasized.
The Commission was declared operational four months after the actual crime, which
means that the perpetrators and their accomplices had plenty of time to destroy
evidence and/or to collude with each other, the ability to recall potential witnesses
had diminished and previous omissions and inadvertent or deliberate loss and
destruction of evidence could not be undone.
89. The first month after the Secretary-General declared the Commission
operational was focused on updating the investigators on the current status of the
investigation, including an assessment of measures undertaken by the Lebanese
authorities. Much time was spent on analysis of material handed over to the
Commission by the Prosecutor General, followed by interviews for clarification
with key witnesses, based on written materials on the following topics:
• Reconstruction of actions and whereabouts of Mr. Hariri prior to the blast
• Findings and results from activities of the Lebanese authorities undertaken at
the crime scene and adjacent areas
• Tampering with evidence
• Roadworks at the scene prior to the blast
• The Abu Adass track
• The Mitsubishi Canter van
• Collection and analysis of telephone lists
• Collection and analysis of closed-circuit television (CCTV) material, videos
and photos collected from a diverse set of possessors depicting the scene prior
to and after the blast
• Financial transactions
90. These measures in turn led to new witnesses. A public information hotline was
installed on which anybody could approach the Commission about the case: this
measure resulted in several new interviews and new clues that needed to be
followed up.
91. The compilation and organization of files and evidence was time-consuming,
involving maintaining and improving the system for storing and recording evidence,
which includes thousands of pages of documents and written testimonies, as well as
numerous videos and photographs. Legal issues highlighted the need for research
into Lebanese criminal law and procedure in order to ensure the proper protocols for
searches, arrests, suspect interviews and charging documents. The Lebanese
authorities’ assistance in these matters was very praiseworthy.
92. The second month was characterized by a change in investigative directions
and priorities, in the sense that investigators followed up new clues and tracked
down new witnesses based on their conclusions from previous measures and
professional analysis. Many different sources approached the Commission and
provided the investigation with useful information. The vast majority of senior

37

S/2005/662

officials among the relevant Lebanese authorities were interviewed to clarify the
allotment of competencies, chains of command and the extent of their involvement,
as well as decisions taken (or neglected). During this period of time the support base
of the Commission was reinforced and new software programs were installed, which
made the database more operational.
93. During the third month, a full-scale crime scene examination was conducted
by a joint Dutch/British/Japanese expert team at the site itself and in adjacent areas,
including the sea floor adjacent to the scene of the blast. The aim of this operation
was to find physical evidence at the crime scene, to reconstruct the improvised
explosive device (IED) used and to identify the Mitsubishi Canter van. The
operation was accomplished in situ during September.

Planning of the assassination
94. Despite all measures and efforts undertaken by the Commission, no new hard
leads or traces regarding the motive and reason for assassinating Mr. Hariri have
emerged to supplement those which can be attributed to events during the second
half of 2004, which culminated in Mr. Hariri’s decision to step down as the Prime
Minister, and to the prognosis of the outcome of the general elections in Lebanon.
Strong indicators on the latter matter are the massive Future Party election
campaign; the Lebanese authorities’ reaction in the olive oil affair in February 2005,
in which distributors were arrested (by the Lebanese authorities while distributing
free olive oil at the behest of Mr. Hariri) (investigator notes) and last but not least
the factual outcome of the elections. New witnesses have approached the
Commission who were reluctant to have any contacts with the Lebanese authorities
due to lack of confidence, stating that the assassination of the former Prime Minister
could not have occurred without the knowledge of the Lebanese authorities and the
approval of the Syrian Arab Republic.
95. The structure and organization of the Syrian and Lebanese intelligence
services in Lebanon at the time of the blast, including protocols for reporting, shows
a pervasive impact on everyday life in Lebanon. Good examples of this are
documents collected from the former Syrian intelligence post, Villa Jabr, at Bologna
Forest, Lebanon, and an intercepted telephone conversation between General
Ghazali and a prominent Lebanese official on 19 July 2004 at 0945 hours, an
excerpt of which follows:
Ghazali: I know it is early but I thought we should keep you posted. The
President of the Republic told me this morning that they are two to rule the
country, the Prime Minister and him. He said that things cannot continue this
way. The Prime Minister is always irritating him and we are always shutting
him up and yelling at him. He made it clear he cannot continue this way.
(...)
X:

Take it easy on me. Can you appoint a new Government at this

time?
Ghazali: Yes we can appoint one. What could be the problem? We can
name Botros Harb.
(…)

38

S/2005/662

Ghazali: Let me tell you one thing. Let the worker’s movement take the
street on the 20th in Solidere and Koraytem.
X: Let’s talk it over. Take it easily. I have to take into consideration the
best interests of Syria and Lebanon.
Ghazali: We are keen on Syria’s best interest but I am now talking
about Rafik Hariri.
X:

So, the decision is taken.

Ghazali: I wish to tell you one thing. Whenever we need to speak to
Hariri we have to suck up to him and he does not always answer.
X:

To hell with him. What do I care about him?

Ghazali:
why should I?
X:

What do I care about him? The President can’t stand him so

Fine, may he rot in hell …

(…)
Ghazali: No. Let him be the laughing stock and be pointed at as the
person who ruined and indebted the country. Let the people take the street in
Koraytem and Solidere; let the manifestations continue until he is forced to
resign like a dog.
X: What about another option: I send him a message saying: Resign
God damn it.
Ghazali: No, don’t send him a message or else he will say “they forced
me to resign”. Let the street … you know what I mean. Or else he will use this
as a bargaining card with his American and French masters.
X:

So shall we leave things to the street?

Ghazali:
X:

This is better.

Let’s go for it.

96. One witness of Syrian origin but resident in Lebanon, who claims to have
worked for the Syrian intelligence services in Lebanon, has stated that
approximately two weeks after the adoption of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004), senior Lebanese and Syrian officials decided to assassinate Rafik Hariri. He
claimed that a senior Lebanese security official went several times to the Syrian
Arab Republic to plan the crime, meeting once at the Meridian Hotel in Damascus
and several times at the Presidential Place and the office of a senior Syrian security
official. The last meeting was held in the house of the same senior Syrian security
official approximately 7 to 10 days before the assassination and included another
senior Lebanese security official. The witness had close contact with highly ranked
Syrian officers posted in Lebanon.
97. At the beginning of January 2005, one of the highly ranked officers told the
witness that Rafik Hariri was a big problem to Syria. Approximately a month later
the officer told the witness that there soon would be an “earthquake” that would
rewrite the history of Lebanon.

39

S/2005/662

98. The witness visited several Syrian military bases in Lebanon. At one such
base, in Hammana, he observed a white Mitsubishi van with a white tarpaulin over
the flatbed. The observations were made on 11, 12 and 13 February 2005. The
Mitsubishi left the military base in Hammana on the morning of 14 February 2005.
The Mitsubishi Canter van, which was used as the bomb carrier, entered Lebanon
from the Syrian Arab Republic through the Bekaa border and a military “hot lane”
on 21 January 2005 at 1320 hours. It was driven by a Syrian colonel from the tenth
army division.
99. On 13 February 2005, the witness drove one of the Syrian officers to the
St. George area in Beirut on a reconnaissance exercise, as he subsequently
understood it to have been after the assassination took place.
100. Regarding Mr. Abu Adass, the witness has stated that he played no role in the
crime except as a decoy. He was detained in the Syrian Arab Republic and forced at
gunpoint to record the videotape. Subsequently, he was killed in Syria. The
videotape was sent to Beirut on the morning of 14 February 2005, and handed over
to General Al-Sayyed. A civilian with a criminal record and an officer from the
Sûreté générale were tasked with putting the tape somewhere in Hamra and then
calling Ghassan Ben Jeddou, an Al-Jazeera TV reporter.
101. General Al-Sayyed, according to the witness, cooperated closely with General
Mustapha Hamdan and General Raymond Azar in the preparation of the
assassination of Mr. Hariri. He also coordinated with General Ghazali (and, among
others, people from Ahmad Jibreel in Lebanon). General Hamdan and General Azar
provided logistical support, including money, telephones, cars, walkie-talkies,
pagers, weapons, identification cards, etc. Those who knew of the crime in advance
were, among others, Nasser Kandil and General Ali Al-Hajj.
102. Fifteen minutes before the assassination, the witness was in the vicinity of the
St. George area. He received a telephone call from one of the senior Syrian officers,
who asked the witness where he was. When he answered, he was advised to leave
the area immediately.
103. Another witness approached the Commission and stated that he had met with
General Hamdan in the middle of October 2004. General Hamdan talked very
negatively about Mr. Hariri, accusing him of being pro-Israeli. General Hamdan
ended the conversation by stating: “We are going to send him on a trip, bye-bye
Hariri”. After the assassination, the witness was strongly reminded not to discuss
this conversation with anyone.
104. Another “witness” who later became a suspect, Zuhir Ibn Mohamed Said
Saddik, has given detailed information to the Commission about the crime, in
particular insofar as the planning phase is concerned. The main points of
Mr. Saddik’s statement are set out in paragraphs 105 to 110 below.
105. One of the main issues raised in Mr. Saddik’s statement was a report that he
said was drafted by Nasser Kandil. This report stated that Mr. Hariri and Marwan
Hamadeh had had a meeting in Sardinia. At the end of the report Mr. Kandil stated
that a decision should be taken to eliminate Mr. Hariri. Mr. Kandil was tasked with
planning and implementing a campaign aimed at ruining Mr. Hariri’s reputation at
the religious and media levels. The Baath Party in Lebanon decided that it should
get rid of Mr. Hariri by any possible means and isolate him, since President
Lahoud’s attempt to remove him from the political scene had failed.

40

S/2005/662

106. Mr. Saddik stated that the decision to assassinate Mr. Hariri had been taken in
the Syrian Arab Republic, followed by clandestine meetings in Lebanon between
senior Lebanese and Syrian officers, who had been designated to plan and pave the
way for the execution of the assault. The meetings started in July 2004 and lasted
until December 2004. The seven senior Syrian officials and four senior Lebanese
officials were alleged to have been involved in the plot.
107. Planning meetings started in Mr. Saddik’s apartment in Khaldeh and were
subsequently moved to an apartment in Al-Dahiyye, a district of Beirut. Some of
these individuals visited the area around the St. George Hotel under different guises
and at different times for purposes of planning and preparing the assassination.
108. Mr. Saddik also gave information about the Mitsubishi itself and that the
driver eventually assigned had been an Iraqi individual who had been led to believe
that the target was Iraqi Prime Minister Iyad Allawi (who happened to be in Beirut
prior to the assassination).
109. Mr. Saddik had been informed that TNT and some special explosives had been
used in order to direct suspicions towards extremist Islamic groups, as these kinds
of explosives had only been used in operations in Iraq.
110. A trip by Mr. Saddik with Abdel-Kareem Abbas led to a camp in Zabadane.
Mr. Saddik claimed to have seen the Mitsubishi Canter van in this camp: mechanics
were working on it and emptying the sides. The sides of the car’s flatbed, as well as
the doors of the Mitsubishi, had been widened and filled with explosives, which had
also been put underneath the driver’s seat. In the camp he had seen a young man
whom he had been able to identify as Mr. Abu Adass after seeing the video on TV
on 14 February 2005.
111. On 30 August 2005, the Commission sent an official letter to the Syrian Arab
Republic with questions regarding the Zabadane camp. The answer was handed over
personally to the Commissioner in New York, confirming the existence of the camp
but denying it to have been used for any purposes others than juvenile educational
activities. However, from other information given to the Commission, there are
strong indications of activities within the camp during the period from 5 to
9 September 2005, geared towards changing the features and operations within the
premises. Satellite pictures also show high walls and watchtowers in the area.
112. On 26 September 2005, investigators of the Commission had a meeting with
Mr. Saddik. On 27 September, Mr. Saddik confessed in a handwritten document that
he had participated in the immediate planning phase before the assassination
(January and February 2005) and that he was acting as a driver for several of the
above-mentioned suspects during the entire day of 14 February.
113. Consequently, on 13 October 2005, on the suggestion of the Commission, the
Lebanese Prosecutor General issued an arrest warrant concerning Mr. Saddik, which
led to his arrest on 16 October.
114. At the present stage of investigation, a certain amount of information given by
Mr. Saddik cannot be confirmed through other evidence.
115. The wife of Mr. Saddik has confirmed that, during the period from July to
December 2004, her husband met a huge group of people on several occasions in
their home in Khaldeh as well as at other locations. He did not want her to be
present, since these people wished not to be identified. She has also confirmed visits

41

S/2005/662

at their home by Dhafer Al-Yussef, in the company of three other men unknown to
her.
116. The fact that Mr. Saddik implicated himself in the assassination, which
ultimately led to his arrest, adds to his credibility.
117. Other witnesses have informed the Commission that the day before the
assassination of Mr. Hariri, the late chief of Mr. Hariri’s close protection detail
(Yehya Al-Arab, alias Abu Tareq) had a meeting with General Ghazali. It seemed
that Mr. Al-Arab was badly shaken by that meeting. Instead of reporting
immediately to Mr. Hariri as usual, he went to his house, turned off his phone and
stayed there for a few hours. The version given by General Ghazali of this meeting
is not compatible with the information given by other witnesses to the Commission.
Other elements to be considered
118. Some other circumstances to be kept in mind regarding the planning phase of
the crime are the surveillance measures targeting Mr. Hariri undertaken by ISF and
the wiretapping of Mr. Hariri’s telephones by the Military Intelligence Service (see
section entitled “Hariri telephone wiretapping”).
119. One of the first measures General Al-Hajj undertook after being appointed to
the post as the head of the Internal Security Forces was to reduce the number of
State security personnel around Mr. Hariri from a level of 40 down to 8 in
November 2004. The reason was asserted to have been a letter from the Lebanese
President and the Prime Minister that Lebanese law should be applied at all levels
and in all matters. According to a decree (No. 3509 of 1993), the number of security
staff for a person in the Hariri category should be eight. The Commission has not
been able to ascertain whether anyone else was affected by the same decree.
120. There are still some activities on Minae Al-Hosn Street in Beirut prior to the
blast that have to be further investigated, which could elucidate details from the
planning phase and as such lead to the perpetrators.
121. The investigation shows that eight telephone numbers and 10 mobile
telephones were used to organize surveillance of Mr. Hariri and to carry out the
assassination. The lines were put into circulation on 4 January 2005 in the northern
part of Lebanon, between Terbol and Menyeh. The lines were used on individual
days to observe Mr. Hariri’s habits, mostly in the area of Beirut city.
122. On 14 February 2005, six of the telephones were used in the area stretching
from Parliament Square to the St. George Hotel and the axes of Zqaq el Blat and Al
Bachoura. The calls occurred at 1100 hours. They covered all routes linking the
Parliament to Kuraytem Palace. The telephone located at the Parliament was used to
make four calls to the other telephones at 1253 hours, the time when the Hariri
motorcade left Nejmeh Square. The telephones have been inactive since the blast, at
1256 hours. The lines were used only to make calls to each other for the entire
period from early January to 14 February 2005.
123. With all these circumstances in mind, including the previously described
conversation of 26 August 2004, there is little probability that a third party would
undertake surveillance and monitoring measures against Mr. Hariri for more than a
month prior to the blast and maintain the resources, logistics and capacity needed to
initiate, plan and commit a crime of this magnitude without the knowledge of the

42

S/2005/662

competent Lebanese authorities. This includes the procurement, handling and
maintenance of a large quantity of highly aggressive explosives, a stolen Mitsubishi
Canter van, the recruitment of the related human resources and a base station for the
necessary preparations.
Conclusion
124. There is probable cause to believe that the decision to assassinate former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri could not have been taken without the approval of
top-ranked Syrian security officials and could not have been further organized
without the collusion of their counterparts in the Lebanese security services.

Hariri telephone wiretapping
125. According to a witness, ISF personnel were ordered to keep Mr. Hariri under
surveillance at the end of January and beginning of February 2005. No
documentation on this topic has been found during the Commission’s investigation.
126. Colonel Ghassan Tufayli was responsible in the Lebanese Military Intelligence
Service for the technical department. It included the telecommunication including
wiretapping service. The department tapped political, military and suspect people.
His superior was the head of the Military Intelligence Service, General Raymond
Azar. Colonel Tufayli received his orders from his superior in oral rather than
written form. Several important people, such as former presidents, prime ministers
and deputies, were permanently wiretapped. Although Mr. Hariri was no longer
Prime Minister in early 2005, he was a very important political and economic figure
in Lebanon and the Middle East. Therefore he was under permanent wiretapping.
The technical department monitored and recorded conversations. Staff from the
Lebanese Sûreté générale supported Tufayli’s army unit. The protocols were
forwarded on a daily basis to General Azar and to the head of the army, General
Michel Suleyman. The head of the Lebanese Sûreté générale, Jamil Al-Sayyed, was
also provided with the results. According to Colonel Tufayli’s statement, General
Azar sent the protocols to the Lebanese President and to General Ghazali, the head
of the Syrian Military Intelligence Service in Lebanon.
127. Colonel Tufayli mentioned that the Republican Guard Brigade also had an
internal wiretapping service.
Conclusion
128. Through the constant wiretapping of Mr. Hariri’s telephone lines, the
Syrian and Lebanese security and intelligence services were kept informed of
his movements and contacts.

Roadworks
129. The Commission also investigated whether there was excavation work on the
road in front of the St. George Hotel in the period before the assassination. There
have been suggestions that unusual roadworks — including the installation of wires
and open manholes — occurred in the road in front of the St. George Hotel shortly
before the assassination, implying that individuals involved in the assassination may

43

S/2005/662

possibly have had an opportunity to install a bomb or a remote bomb device
underneath the road, thus causing the explosion.
130. Municipal records show that the last permits for work in the area near the
crime scene granted prior to the blast were issued in January 2005. For example,
from 3 to 8 January 2005, the Beirut water authorities were provided permits to dig
for a water pipe and to excavate the main roads around the St. George Hotel. Ogero,
the telecommunications company, was granted a permit to install a
telecommunications cable between 13 and 20 January 2005. However, some
witnesses have stated that there may in fact have been roadworks conducted in the
area in front of St. George closer to the day of the explosion, including the night
before. For example, a taxi driver reported that he had dropped two passengers at
the Phoenicia Hotel on 12 February 2005 at approximately 0615 hours. As he turned
left onto Minae Al-Hosn he realized that the street was closed just in front of the
St. George Hotel facing the HSBC bank and that some roadworks were being carried
out, including two open manholes in front of the St. George, and that workers and
military personnel were present at the location. Another witness, a marina worker,
noted that while the installation of the telephone wires had started at the marina,
they were not in use as they had not been connected to an external wire and no
cables were connected for televisions or computers. Another individual reported that
on Sunday afternoon, the day before the assassination, as he and his wife
approached the site of the explosion, they saw three people working in the middle of
the street and lowering into a hole in the ground near the St. George Hotel what
appeared to be a pallet and also observed two black cables about half an inch in
diameter running from the hole to the St. George Hotel. By contrast, other witnesses
were certain that there were no roadworks in the vicinity in the days prior to the
explosion.
Conclusion
131. The issue of whether there had been excavation in front of the St. George
Hotel remains an open question that the Commission has not been able to
resolve beyond certain witnesses’ recollections, which have not been
independently substantiated. Municipal records do appear to make clear,
however, that excavation close to the time of the crime was not carried out
pursuant to city permits.

Execution of the bombing
132. A branch of the HSBC bank is located close to the scene of the explosion. The
bank operated its own CCTV security system, which recorded the movements of the
Hariri motorcade immediately prior to the explosion but did not record the scene of
the blast itself. On close scrutiny, the recorded footage showed a white Mitsubishi
Canter van entering the area of the explosion shortly before Mr. Hariri’s convoy.
133. The recording clearly showed that this Mitsubishi Canter was moving
approximately six times slower than all other vehicles traversing the same stretch of
roadway. A time series analysis showed that for the approximately 50 metres of road
covered by the camera, a normal car took three to four seconds to cover the
distance, while a large truck took five to six seconds to travel the distance. The

44

S/2005/662

Mitsubishi Canter took approximately 22 seconds to travel the distance and entered
the area 1 minute and 49 seconds before the Hariri convoy.
134. Samples collected from the crime scene and further forensic examinations
have succeeded in identifying the Mitsubishi Canter van. Through a part of the
engine block, found and collected at the crime scene, it has been concluded that the
engine comes from a Mitsubishi vehicle stolen on 12 October 2004 in Sagamihara
City, Japan.
135. The Commission has interviewed all the survivors who were involved in the
Hariri motorcade, eyewitnesses on the spot and in adjacent areas as well as shop
owners, employees, vendors, residents, etc. in the neighbourhood of the crime
scene.
136. None of the people interviewed made any unusual observations on 14 February
2005, at Minae Al-Hosn Street or in adjacent areas of activity different from the
normal situation at these locations.
137. One of the main issues for the Commission was to determine how it was
known that Mr. Hariri would take the maritime route on his way back to the
Kuraytem Palace from the meeting at Parliament.
138. It was common knowledge that Mr. Hariri would attend the pre-election
meeting at Parliament that particular morning. It was also known that he would
return to the Kuraytem Palace after the meeting, since he had invited more than 20
people for lunch at the Palace.
139. From the Nejmeh Square back to Kuraytem there were three options of routes.
The decision to take the maritime road was made just before departure by a senior
staff member in Mr. Hariri’s private security detail and communicated to the lead
car, but it was already envisaged in the morning that if the motorcade was able to
return to the Palace before 1400 hours they would have chosen the maritime road. If
not, another road would have been taken. The motorcade left the Nejmeh Square
area and drove along Ahdab Street and Foch Street. At the junction of Foch Street
and Seaport Street the convoy was delayed for several minutes due to some traffic
hindrance. At the above-mentioned junction the convoy turned left and took the
maritime road towards Ain Mreisa and the St. George Hotel.
140. The motorcade was composed of six cars. The first car, a Toyota Land Cruiser,
was manned by four officers from the Internal Security Forces; the second was a
Mercedes 500 S manned by three persons from Mr. Hariri’s private security team;
the third car was an armoured Mercedes driven by Mr. Hariri with Mr. Fleyhan as a
passenger; the fourth and the fifth cars were Mercedes 500 S, each manned by three
security officers from Mr. Hariri’s private security team and positioned in the
convoy on the flanks of the third car; the last car in the convoy was a Chevrolet,
fully equipped as an ambulance and manned by three Hariri staff members, two of
whom were paramedics. The second, fourth and fifth cars were equipped with
jamming devices, which were switched on and functional.
141. When the motorcade passed the St. George Hotel at Minae Al-Hosn Street, at
1256 hours, a huge explosion occurred, which resulted in the death of Mr. Hariri and
21 others. In addition, more than 220 persons were injured and the damage to
surrounding buildings and vehicles was severe. Mr. Hariri was taken to American

45

S/2005/662

University Hospital, where his body was identified and the cause of death was
concluded to be immediate brain injury resulting in cardiac arrest.
142. An Opel which followed the motorcade from Nejmeh Square to the junction of
Foch Street and Seaport Street has not been identified. It should be noted that
because the motorcade was delayed at a T-junction, for a short while it went against
the traffic on a one-way street from Nejmeh Square to Foch Street, followed by the
Opel. The Commission has not succeeded in elucidating the reason for the delay of
the motorcade at the T-junction.
143. The FitzGerald report (S/2005/203) concluded that Mr. Hariri during the three
months prior to the blast had taken the maritime road on six different occasions, but
it should be kept in mind that, during the same period of time, he appeared in public
in the Beirut area fewer than 10 times.
144. The Commission has not found any indication that there were leaks from or
accomplices within Mr. Hariri’s close staff members. However, the Commission
determined that Mr. Hariri had been under surveillance at least one month prior to
the blast by people planning the crime (see the section entitled “Hariri telephone
wiretapping” above).
145. The weaknesses in the initial measures taken by the Lebanese authorities and
the tampering with evidence during the first crime scene examination have worked
against identifying the type of explosives used in the blast. The first samples of
residues collected were tested in an “itemizer”, which only gives an indication of
the explosives. In this case it indicated TNT, but no forensic laboratory
examinations of the samples were undertaken. This fact has hampered the
investigation, since it has been impossible to track down the origin of the
explosives, which subsequently could lead to the perpetrators.
146. In addition, no other CCTV security systems were seized in the area except
those from the HSBC bank. This negligence could have led to the loss of important
evidence.
Conclusion
147. It would not have been difficult for individuals outside of Hariri’s “inner
circle” to predict the route that his convoy would follow on 14 February 2005.
The Mitsubishi Canter van shown on the HSBC bank CCTV security system
was the carrier of the explosives. The negligence of the Lebanese authorities to
undertake proper investigative measures and a full-scale professional crime
scene examination immediately after the blast has made it difficult to resolve
key questions regarding the execution of the bombing, such as the type of
explosive used, or may have resulted in the potential loss of important evidence,
such as useful CCTV videos.

Use of prepaid telephone cards
148. Investigations by both ISF and Military Intelligence Service have led to six
prepaid calling cards, which telephone records demonstrate were instrumental in the
planning of the assassination. Beginning at approximately 1100 hours on
14 February 2005, cell site records show that cellular telephones utilizing these six
calling cards were located in the area stretching from the Nejmeh Square to the

46

S/2005/662

St. George Hotel, within a radius of a few blocks, and made numerous calls to each
other and only to each other. The phones were situated so that they covered every
route linking the Parliament to Kuraytem Palace: that is, cell site records
demonstrate that these telephones were placed to cover any route that Hariri would
have taken that day. One of the cellphones located near the Parliament made four
calls to the other telephone lines at 1253 hours — the time that Mr. Hariri’s convoy
left Nejmeh Square. The calls — and all usage on the cards — terminated at 1253
hours on 14 February, a few minutes before the blast. The lines have all been
inactive since.
149. Further investigation has revealed that these six lines — along with two
others — were put into circulation on 4 January 2005, after calling number 1456
activated them. They were all activated at the same location in northern Lebanon
between Terbol and Menyeh. Since they were first purchased in early January 2005
until the time of the explosion, the lines only had calls to each other. In that time
period, until the assassination, there appears to be a correlation between their
location and Mr. Hariri’s movements, suggesting that they might have been used to
follow his movements in that time period.
150. The Commission, in conjunction with the Lebanese authorities, continued the
investigation of the origin of these telephone lines. The six prepaid cards originated,
along with four others, from the Powergroup Company, Beirut, a store owned by a
reportedly active member of Al-Ahbash with close ties to Sheikh Ahmad Abdel-Al.
According to company records, the lines were delivered to the store’s Tripoli
branch. One of the employees of that Tripoli store reported that on 30 December
2004, he had received a telephone call from Raed Fakhreddin, the owner of another
cellphone shop in Tripoli and the nephew of Tarek Ismat Fakhreddin, a prominent
businessman and consultant to former Lebanese Prime Minister Omar Karame. Raed
Fakhreddin reportedly urgently wanted to buy 10 prepaid cards; the Tripoli store
employee noted that the enquiry itself was unusual, as Mr. Fakhreddin did not
customarily buy lines from the Tripoli store nor typically have commercial dealings
with the Tripoli store other than mobile handset purchases. However, the 10 calling
cards bearing these particular lines were located, and Raed Fakhreddin sent a
messenger to pick up the cards from the Tripoli store. That messenger reported to
the Commission that he had paid $700 in cash at the Tripoli store to purchase the
10 lines and deliver them to Mr. Fakhreddin. The forms legally required for
purchasing cellular lines had not been filled out that day, however, but rather over
two weeks after the lines had been sold, on 12 January. The supporting
identification required for the purchase, which was provided by Raed Fakhreddin,
proved to be false. On 14 September 2005, ISF arrested Mr. Fakhreddin, along with
others involved in the transfer and sale of the calling cards. Mr. Fakhreddin was
subsequently interviewed as a suspect by the Commission. In that interview, while
he admitted that he had purchased the lines, he denied any knowledge of the use of
six of the lines in connection with the Hariri assassination.
151. Of the 10 mobile phones used in connection with these 10 cellular telephone
cards, 5 have been traced to a store in Tripoli.
Conclusion
152. The investigation of the prepaid telephone cards is one of the most
important leads in this investigation in terms of who was actually on the ground

47

S/2005/662

executing the assassination. This is a line of investigation that needs to be
pursued thoroughly.

Jamming devices
153. Hariri’s convoy included three vehicles equipped with jamming devices,
designed to disturb the signals of remote-controlled IEDs.
154. Although the Commission received information from one source that a trusted
associate of Mr. Hariri’s had tampered with the jamming devices prior to the blast,
the Commission has not been able to corroborate this information. Indeed, all
available evidence indicates that the jamming devices were operational and in
proper working condition at the time of the assassination. Those responsible for
managing the jamming devices reported that they had conducted a detailed check of
the jammers every three months, an operation performed for the last time in early
January 2005, when no problems were observed. In addition, the jamming system
was checked by a member of Mr. Hariri’s security detail two days before the
explosion and was deemed to be in good working condition. Of the three jamming
devices, one was completely destroyed by the blast, another was burned but was
retrieved and is being kept as evidence and a third was still operational and, upon
testing, was found to be working properly. Moreover, the report of the Dutch
forensic explosives experts about the two devices that survived as evidence further
concluded that the intact jammer had essentially been operational. Finally, the
telecommunication firms MTC Touch and Alfa reported that their networks had
been disrupted on 14 February from about 1200 to 1300 hours between Place de
l’Etoile and the St. George Hotel. The Commission’s investigators conducted a
reconstruction on 19 August 2005 in cooperation with MTC and Alfa, by taking
three vehicles similar to those in Mr. Hariri’s convoy equipped with similar
jamming devices along the same route that the convoy took from Place de l’Etoile to
the St. George Hotel. This reconstruction produced relatively similar results
regarding the temporary disruption of telecommunications as occurred on
14 February, even accounting for other factors that could have affected
telecommunications in the area. Thus, it can be assumed that at least one of the three
jamming devices was operational and functional at the time of the explosion.
155. Even though at least one jamming device was operational, the investigation
has revealed that there are ways to overcome, avoid or evade jamming devices.
Different possibilities include a suicide bomber, a wireless explosion using
frequencies different from those of the jamming devices or using the frequencies of
the jamming devices, a wireless explosion using the jamming devices themselves, a
wireless explosion using a satellite phone from Thuraya, the only telephone
company working on Lebanese territory with satellite links, a wired explosion using
a TNT cable or a wired explosion using another kind of installed cable such as a
telephone line as a connecting wire. Although it appears to the Commission based
on its investigation to date, specifically the results of the Dutch forensic
examination of the crime scene, that it is possible that a suicide bomber caused this
explosion, these other possibilities warrant further investigation, both as to whether
they were feasible standing alone or in conjunction with a suicide bomber.

48

S/2005/662

Conclusion
156. It appears that the jamming devices in Hariri’s convoy were operational
and functional on 14 February at the time of the blast. Further investigation
may provide information about how the IED was activated.

Interference with telecommunications in downtown Beirut
157. The Commission received information that there was interference on
14 February 2005 from 0900 until 1400 hours of the telecommunications antenna
covering the area of Riad Solh, which includes the crime scene area. The matter was
investigated with the Ministry of Telecommunications. This information was
confirmed through information provided by the telecommunications provider MTC
Touch. Consequently, the mobile phone callers in the crime scene area could not use
this specific antenna and were diverted to other antennas. No evidence has been
found to date which would clearly point to internal manipulation at MTC Touch,
although such internal manipulation cannot yet be completely discounted. It remains
equally possible that an outside individual, criminal organization, company or
authority would also have been able to generate such interference, for example with
a mobile appliance. Moreover, a direct connection between this interference and the
assassination cannot be excluded.
Conclusion
158. It appears that there was interference with a telecommunications antenna
in the crime scene area during the time of the crime. This is a line of inquiry
that should be thoroughly pursued.

Crime scene
159. Until the establishment of the Commission, the Lebanese authorities had not
carried out a thorough crime scene examination. Since this constitutes the basis of
any criminal investigation, the Commission deemed it necessary to seek the
assistance of United Nations Member States to second experts in order to determine
primarily whether the explosion took place above ground or underground.
German forensic team
160. On 6 July 2005, the German forensic team, comprising four forensic experts,
submitted its report to the Commission. Excerpts of the most important paragraphs
conclude:
The Swiss expert team’s findings and conclusions can be fully supported.
Due to the distribution of the so far located parts of a Mitsubishi Canter lorry,
it can be assumed that that vehicle played a significant part in the course of
action and was possibly used as carrier of the bomb.
After the assessment of all facts and estimations an above-ground
explosion is the most feasible possibility. If we assume such an explosion, the
amount of explosive must have been around 1,000 kg. Highly aggressive
explosive was used. The result of an A-sample from the crater wall shows that
TNT was used. But this result is not one that has been achieved in the presence

49

S/2005/662

of an expert from the United Nations Fact-finding Mission to Lebanon and
thus must be regarded as preliminary and not finally confirmed result. During
our work at the location of the incident we could not detect any hints with
regard to the kind of trigger that has been used.
Dutch forensic team
161. During the period from 12 August to 25 September 2005, a Dutch forensic
team conducted an examination of the primary crime scene and peripheral areas of
interest. The team was composed of seven experts specializing in post-blast
investigations. The objective for the forensic investigation of the explosion site was
to find physical evidence to reconstruct the IED which caused the explosion. To
examine a crime scene nearly half a year after the incident occurred is not a
common practice. Moreover, it was known that the crime scene had been disturbed
on several occasions. This seriously diminishes the strength of conclusions that can
be drawn from the location where the exhibits were found. It can never be excluded
that the materials at the crime scene were manipulated by someone or intentionally
put there. Nevertheless, it was felt to be useful to carry out a full crime scene search,
mainly because it was likely that certain areas of the crime scene had not been
contaminated, such as the upper floors of the Byblos and St. George Hotel. The
crime scene area was cordoned off on 15 February 2005, according to ISF, and was
guarded 24 hours a day from that date on.
162. The Dutch forensic team was assisted by many people in carrying out the
crime scene investigation, e.g., forensic police officers from ISF, a team of British
divers, a French expert on explosives, a forensic scientist from Northern Ireland, a
German electrical engineer specialized in jamming devices, a team of Japanese
crime scene investigators, a German car expert, a Dutch car expert and a number of
Lebanese specialists.
163. A coherent and comprehensive report on the findings and results from the
crime scene investigation has been submitted to the Commission. The report
comprised 87 pages and contained four main conclusions:
(a) Detonation of high explosives. The damage inflicted on the buildings,
vehicles, surrounding lamp posts and other objects in the vicinity of the explosion
site demonstrates that a large amount of high explosives was activated and
detonated to the left side in front of the main entrance of the St. George Hotel on
Minae Al-Hosn Street. This detonation set fire to many vehicles within a distance of
20 to 30 metres of the explosion centre. From the damage pattern it is clear that it
was one explosion of a charge of high explosives.
(b) Mitsubishi Canter vehicle. Regarding the physical evidence recovered,
the human remains identified by the Lebanese forensic specialist, the HSBC security
video and the damage on the vehicles parked on the road, the most likely scenario is
that a Mitsubishi Canter van containing the IED was activated when the Hariri
convoy of six vehicles drove by. The engine number of this Mitsubishi Canter van
was found among the debris on the crime scene. This engine number has led to the
vehicle registration number and the production date.
No remains of the constituents of the IED have been found among the debris,
apart from the vehicle parts of the Mitsubishi Canter in which the IED was placed.
Because of the size of the explosion and the exploded charge, this is not unexpected.

50

S/2005/662

A few damaged parts of circuit board have been recovered which may be related to
the activation mechanism. However, these circuit boards should first be examined
by electronics experts, who might give an indication of the application of these
boards.
(c) Location of convoy vehicles and bomb vehicle. When the explosive was
activated, the Mitsubishi Canter was parked almost in line with the other parked
vehicles along the pavement in front of the St. George Hotel with the front of the
vehicle facing west. It was not parked fully in line judging from how the force of the
explosion acted on the red Ford vehicle, which was most likely parked directly in
front of the Mitsubishi. The red Ford was most severely damaged from the left rear
side, which means that the Mitsubishi could not have been parked fully in line with
the red Ford vehicle.
Among the six convoy vehicles, the black Mercedes numbered 404 was closest
to the explosion centre when the IED was detonated. The direction of the explosive
force on this vehicle was from the right side, meaning it was most likely located
alongside the Mitsubishi. From the damage patterns it can be stated that vehicles
401, 402 and 403, the latter with Messrs. Hariri and Fleyhan as occupants, had just
passed the Mitsubishi when the explosion occurred. Vehicles 405 and 406 were
damaged most severely at the right front side, meaning that those vehicles had not
yet driven by the Mitsubishi at the moment of the detonation.
(d) Activation mechanism of the IED. Regarding the physical evidence
presented in this report and the fact that only a small amount of human remains of
an unidentified person have been found and no large body parts, such as legs, feet or
lower arms, the most likely scenario for the activation of the IED is a suicide
bomber. Another only slightly less likely possibility is that of a remote-controlled
device. However, no residues of such a device have been recovered from the crime
scene.
British forensic team
164. On 5 September 2005, the British forensic team submitted its report to the
Commission. The British team was composed of seven experts. The objective of the
team was to conduct an underwater search of the sea floor and the marina adjacent
to the scene of the blast. While performing its duties, the British team was assisted
by Lebanese divers from the Civil Defence Fire and Rescue Team. Forty items were
collected and seized during the underwater search, of which the vast majority were
vehicle parts.
Japanese forensic team
165. On 27 September 2005, the Japanese team submitted its report to the
Commission. The team comprised three forensic experts accompanied by an
interpreter. The objective of the team was to identify the Mitsubishi Canter van.
166. The Japanese experts examined all the evidence recovered from the crime
scene and sorted out 69 pieces as suspected Mitsubishi Canter parts. Of the 69
pieces, 44 items were identified as Canter parts by the Mitsubishi Fuso Corporation
in Japan.
167. The Mitsubishi Canter van was finally identified. The vehicle had been stolen
in Sagamihara City, Japan, on 12 October 2004.

51

S/2005/662

Northern Irish and French experts on improvised explosive devices
168. The experts were in agreement with the comments and conclusions in the
Dutch forensic team’s report.
Conclusion
169. The explosion that killed Mr. Hariri and 22 others took place above
ground. For this purpose, an amount of no less than 1,000 kilograms of military
explosives was used.

After the crime: analysis and evaluation
170. The Commission has undertaken extensive measures to map Mr. Hariri and his
whereabouts and doings prior to the blast as well as other occurrences in order to
find the motive and the reasons behind the crime.
171. Interviews have been conducted with his relatives, staff members, friends,
associates and colleagues. None of these efforts have led anywhere other than to the
prelude of Mr. Hariri stepping down from the post of Prime Minister.
172. This information has reinforced a picture of a tense relationship between
Mr. Hariri on the one hand and President Lahoud and the Syrian authorities on the
other. Evidence is also adduced from the phone conversation between General
Ghazali and a senior Lebanese official on 19 July 2004; the conversation between
President Al-Assad and Mr. Hariri on 26 August 2004; in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the approach to Mr. Hariri by Yehya Al-Arab, Wissam El-Hassan and Salim Diab in
October-November 2004 to increase the security around him due to the political
tension and Mr. Hariri’s response that “they don’t dare to touch me”; the meeting
between General Ghazali and Yehya Al-Arab on 13 February 2005; and the
Lebanese authorities’ response to the distribution of olive oil during February 2005.
173. All the key players among the competent Lebanese authorities have been
interviewed as well as their experts involved in the initial measures of the
investigation. The early investigation showed a pattern that no one claimed they had
the slightest clue that something was going on around Mr. Hariri that could threaten
his life. The efforts undertaken by the Commission during a limited period of time
have come to a diametrically opposite conclusion. There were a number of warning
signs regarding Mr. Hariri’s security in his immediate surroundings in the aftermath
of the occurrences during the second half of 2004, in particular in the context of
previous Lebanese experiences of assaults targeting individuals through bombings.
174. On 30 August 2005, the Lebanese authorities arrested and detained four highlevel officials of the Lebanese security and intelligence apparatus, pursuant to arrest
warrants issued by the Lebanese Prosecutor General based on recommendations
from the Commission that there was probable cause to arrest and detain them for
conspiracy to commit murder in connection with the assassination of Rafik Hariri.
The individuals arrested were General Jamil Al-Sayyed, former director-general of
the Sûreté générale; General Ali Al-Hajj, former head of ISF; General Raymond
Azar, former head of military intelligence; and General Mustapha Hamdan,
Commander of the Republican Guard Brigade.

52

S/2005/662

175. The four have been interviewed by the Commission in the presence of counsel.
They each continue to deny any involvement in the planning or execution of the
assassination of Hariri, any awareness of such a conspiracy beforehand or
undertaking or ordering any actions designed to obstruct the investigation afterward.
176. As in any investigation, the points of departure for the Commission have been
the victim of the crime, the crime scene and witnesses. In addition, the Commission
has focused on the five sub-investigations described below.
1.

Ahmad Abu Adass
177. The Commission’s investigation into the Abu Adass lead focused on seeking to
determine Mr. Abu Adass’s whereabouts and evaluating the likelihood that Mr. Abu
Adass was actually the suicide bomber he was purported to be.
178. The Commission was unable to interview Mr. Abu Adass’s father, who had
been interviewed by the Lebanese authorities on 14 February 2005, because he died
on 7 March shortly after being called to appear before the investigative judge.
179. Mr. Abu Adass’s mother, Nehad Moussa, was interviewed by the Commission
on 7 July 2005 and had previously been interviewed at least four times by Lebanese
authorities, the first time on 14 February 2005. She and Mr. Abu Adass’s father,
Tayssir, had been illegally detained for approximately 10 days. She stated that she
had told the Lebanese authorities the following: Mr. Abu Adass had disappeared on
16 January 2005 and had not been heard from since. According to her, in early
January 2005, Mr. Abu Adass explained to her that he had met an individual whom
she knew only as “Mohammed” who wanted to convert to Islam from Christianity
and that Mr. Abu Adass was helping him. Mr. Abu Adass reported that Mohammed
appeared to be wealthy and he would occasionally disappear for a period of a week
or so. After one such disappearance, on the evening of Saturday, 15 January 2005,
Mohammed called their home. Mohammed told Mr. Abu Adass that he would come
to pick him up the next morning to show him a surprise. Mr. Abu Adass left with
Mohammed that Sunday, 16 January 2005, promising his mother he would be out
for only a few hours, since she had requested that he stay to help her clean a large
carpet. Mr. Abu Adass never returned. On Monday morning, Mr. Abu Adass’s
mother received a call from an individual who told her not to worry about Ahmed as
he was in Tripoli where their car had broken down and they were just waiting to
have it fixed. Ms. Moussa understood that this was the same individual called
Mohammed whom she had spoken to on the telephone two days earlier. She asked to
speak to her son, but was told that her son was waiting at a house without a phone
and the caller was in the car shop. The caller told Ms. Moussa that her son would be
back in time to help clean the carpet. At approximately 9 p.m. that same day, she
received another call from the individual called Mohammed who said they had not
had an accident and had not broken down. The caller went on to say that Mr. Abu
Adass wanted to go to Iraq and would not be coming back. When Ms. Moussa
expressed surprise and stated that Mr. Abu Adass had never mentioned any such
interest before, the caller said he would try to get her Mr. Abu Adass’s phone
number so she could try to change his mind. The caller hung up and never called
back. The family filed an official missing person’s report with ISF on 19 January
2005.
180. In a follow-up interview with the Commission, Ms. Moussa added that
Mr. Abu Adass’s best friend was a man by the name of Ziad Ramadan whom he had

53

S/2005/662

met as a colleague at a computer company approximately two years earlier. The last
contact she had with Mr. Ramadan was when he called her several days after her son
disappeared to ask if she had any news from her son. In her interviews with the
Lebanese authorities, Ms. Moussa stated that she had confirmed that her son did not
have a driver’s licence and that there was no Internet connection in their house.
181. The Commission was unable to locate Ziad Ramadan for an interview. After
being interviewed by the Lebanese authorities on 14 February 2005, it appears that
Mr. Ramadan returned to the Syrian Arab Republic with his family. In his interview
with the Lebanese authorities, Mr. Ramadan stated that he had known Mr. Abu
Adass for approximately two years, as they had worked together in the same
company for two months. Mr. Ramadan saw Mr. Abu Adass last the Thursday or
Friday preceding his disappearance, when Mr. Abu Adass discussed his new
employment decorating book covers.
182. One individual whom neither the Commission nor the Lebanese authorities
was able to interview so far was Khaled Midhat Taha, another religious associate of
Mr. Abu Adass, who is of significant interest based on the travel records available
for him and some unusual coincidences. Mr. Taha met Mr. Abu Adass when they
were students at the Arab University where they used to meet in the University’s
mosque. According to travel records, Mr. Taha departed from Beirut International
Airport for the United Arab Emirates on 21 July 2003 and returned to Beirut on
17 October 2003. The next record for him is an entry into Lebanon coming from the
Syrian Arab Republic by land on 15 January 2005, the day before Mr. Abu Adass’s
disappearance. The next day, Mr. Taha left Lebanon by land towards the Syrian
Arab Republic. The records do not show a departure from Lebanon prior to
15 January 2005, which indicates that he entered the Syrian Arab Republic prior to
that date illegally. Further investigation revealed that three of Mr. Taha’s e-mail
addresses went through Damascus and the fourth went through Lebanon itself while
purporting to be in Turkey. Moreover, the date of his final departure for the Syrian
Arab Republic from Lebanon — 16 January 2005 — is the same as the date of
Mr. Abu Adass’s disappearance, suggesting a possible link between Mr. Taha’s trip
to Lebanon and Mr. Abu Adass’s disappearance. Moreover, as the Lebanese
authorities noted in their report, he was never arrested for his apparently illegal
entry into the Syrian Arab Republic prior to 15 January 2005, even upon his return
to the country on 16 January, an uncommon occurrence, suggesting that his
departure and entry the following day had been facilitated by someone. The Syrian
authorities have recently been approached by the Commission to provide it with
detailed information on Khaled Taha, especially his travel records into and out of
the Syrian Arab Republic.
183. As noted above, in the course of the investigation, the Lebanese interviewees
included Mr. Abu Adass’s friends and associates, former neighbours, acquaintances
from the mosque, colleagues from former jobs and classmates. A number of these
individuals were re-interviewed by the Commission. None had ever heard of AlNasra wal Jihad, the group that Mr. Abu Adass was purportedly a member of
according to the suicide bomb video message. Many of them reported similar stories
of being taken by ISF, handcuffed, blindfolded, stripped and detained for a period of
time while being questioned about Mr. Abu Adass and his affiliations with Islamic
groups; most reported that they shared with their interrogators their view that
Mr. Abu Adass was a loner and introvert who did not have the intelligence to be
capable of committing such a crime.

54

S/2005/662

184. In response to a request through the Lebanese authorities, the Syrian
Government informed the Commission that their computer files showed no
indications that Mr. Abu Adass had either entered or left the Syrian Arab Republic.
Iraqi authorities informed the Lebanese authorities through the Iraqi embassy in
Beirut that Mr. Abu Adass had not obtained a visa for Iraq.
185. The Commission also submitted a request for details of any organization
within Lebanon that may have had Mr. Abu Adass under observation between
September 2004 and January 2005. The files obtained in response to this request
confirmed that no department within Lebanon had had Mr. Abu Adass under any
observation during the relevant time period.
186. A number of sources, confidential and otherwise, provided information to the
Commission on the role and whereabouts of Mr. Abu Adass. Although the
information provided has not been independently verified, significantly, none of this
source information supported the theory that he was a lone suicide bomber acting
for an Islamic fundamentalist group. Indeed, all of the source information pointed to
the likelihood of Mr. Abu Adass being used by the Syrian and Lebanese authorities
as a scapegoat for the crime, rather than being the instigator of crime himself. For
example, one witness claimed to have seen Mr. Abu Adass in the hallway outside of
General Ghazali’s office in December 2004 in Anjar. Another witness claimed that
Mr. Abu Adass was currently being held in prison in the Syrian Arab Republic and
would be killed once the investigation was over. According to him, Mr. Abu Adass
had no role in the assassination except as a decoy, and the videotape was recorded at
gunpoint approximately 45 days before the assassination. He later stated that
General Assef Shawkat had forced Mr. Abu Adass to record the tape in Damascus
approximately 15 days before the assassination. He also stated that the tape had
been given to Al-Jazeera by a woman with the nickname “Um Alaa”. Another
witness stated that the day after the assassination Faysal Al-Rasheed had insisted
that the case had been solved and that the perpetrator was Mr. Abu Adass, as a
suicide bomber and that Mr. Abu Adass’s body was still at the crime scene. Zuhir
Saddik stated that in early February 2005, he had seen Mr. Abu Adass at the
Zabadane training camp in the Syrian Arab Republic, and that his information was
that Mr. Abu Adass had initially planned to commit the assassination but had
changed his mind at the last minute. He said that Mr. Abu Adass had subsequently
been killed by the Syrians, and his body had been placed in the vehicle containing
the bomb and thus had been destroyed at the crime scene.
187. To date, no DNA evidence has been found on the crime scene that can be
linked to Mr. Abu Adass.
188. Despite months of investigation by both the Commission and the Lebanese
authorities, Mr. Abu Adass remains a mysterious figure. A few significant points
can still be made, however, in connection with the Abu Adass investigation.
189. Other than the videotape itself, which definitely was of Mr. Abu Adass, there
is little else supporting the idea that he perpetrated this assassination through a
suicide bomb. There is no evidence, other than the claim on the video itself, of the
existence of a group called the Nasra and Jihad Group of Greater Syria. There is no
information about such a group in any open sources prior to 14 February 2005, for
example, and neither the Lebanese authorities nor Mr. Abu Adass’s friends and
acquaintances appear to have even heard of the group prior to the day of the
assassination. Nor have any of Lebanon’s neighbouring countries’ security

55

S/2005/662

authorities, which have been asked by the Commission to provide information on
the assassination, have any knowledge of this group. Moreover, Mr. Abu Adass’s
disappearance on 16 January 2005 has not been explained in a manner that is
consistent with the notion that he would be a suicide bomber a month later. Notably,
none of the individuals who knew him well considered it likely that he could
commit such a crime, in the light of his nature and intelligence. Finally, although
there is always the possibility that no trace of DNA of a suicide bomber conducting
a massive blast would be found, it is noted that there is no evidence of Mr. Abu
Adass’s DNA at the crime scene or indeed any other evidence, such as witnesses,
that he was present at the crime scene at the time of the crime.
190. However, one aspect of the investigation to date is clear: much of the
information surrounding Mr. Abu Adass and his disappearance points to the Syrian
Arab Republic. Khaled Taha’s peculiar travel records, indicating an entry into
Lebanon from the Syrian Arab Republic the day before Mr. Abu Adass’s
disappearance, as well as the attempt to obscure his presence in the Syrian Arab
Republic by seeking to show that his e-mails came from Turkey when they in fact
came from the Syrian Arab Republic, are indicative of the type of evidence pointing
to Syrian involvement in Mr. Abu Adass’s fate which cannot be discounted as mere
coincidence. Moreover, the vague information available about “Mohammed”
indicates that he was likely Syrian, and the sudden return to the Syrian Arab
Republic of Mr. Abu Adass’s Syrian best friend, Ziad Ramadan, shortly after having
been interviewed by the Lebanese authorities, all suggest Syrian connections to
Mr. Abu Adass’s disappearance. Finally, much of the source information relevant to
Mr. Abu Adass’s fate points to the Syrian Arab Republic and Syrian officials, as
well as certain Lebanese officials. While it is true that little of this source
information has been independently corroborated, it is significant that no
information points to any other entity as being involved in his disappearance or that
he was a suicide bomber. Although this is not definitive, these repeated connections
to the Syrian Arab Republic bear further investigation.
Conclusion
191. There is no evidence that Mr. Abu Adass belonged to the group called
Al-Nasra wal Jihad fee Bilad Al-Sham, as claimed in the Al-Jazeera videotape,
nor even that such a group has ever existed or does exist now. There are no
indications (other than the videotape) that he drove a truck containing the
bomb that killed Mr. Hariri. The evidence does show that it is likely that
Mr. Abu Adass left his home on 16 January 2005 and was taken, voluntarily or
not, to the Syrian Arab Republic, where he has since disappeared.
2.

Telephone analysis
192. One of the most important aspects of this investigation has been the analysis of
telephones. Specialized software was used to analyse and investigate numerous
telephone calls by those figures identified as the most important to the investigation,
permitting the Commission to achieve an optimal result with a limited staff and a
short time frame. The assistance of the Lebanese telephone companies and
authorities was essential to making the analysis effective. For example, the
Lebanese telecommunications companies MTC Touch and Alfa responded quickly
to requests for cellphone subscriber information and toll records. Similar
information on landlines was provided to the Commission through the Ministry of

56

S/2005/662

Telecommunications. This prompt assistance was invaluable, as it permitted
investigators to quickly analyse specific telephone calls of subscribers and to
establish patterns of communication between particular groups of subscribers. In
total, the Commission requested information on approximately 2,235 subscribers
and obtained telephone connection data for approximately 70,195 telephone calls.
The telephone analysis, which has already been critical in establishing leads and
determining connections between the key figures, will continue to be a central
aspect of this investigation as it evolves.
193. According to Ghassan Ben Jeddou, the director of Al-Jazeera, Al-Jazeera
received four calls on the afternoon of 14 February prior to airing the Abu Adass
videotape. The records revealed only three calls to Al-Jazeera that afternoon,
however, at 1411, 1527 and 1704 hours.
194. It has not been possible to identify the time or origin of the reported fourth call
to Al-Jazeera.
195. Leila Bassam of Reuters reported that it had received one telephone call on
14 February regarding Mr. Abu Adass’s claim of responsibility for the bombing,
which records show occurred at 1411 hours.
196. Telephone records reveal that the same prepaid card was used to contact AlJazeera and Reuters for all of the above telephone calls. It was purchased in Beirut,
Najaar, on 10 February 2005. The calls to Al-Jazeera and Reuters were made from
four different telephone booths, all located in Beirut and one of which is near the
ESCWA Centre downtown, approximately two kilometres from the crime scene.
This prepaid card was used only to dial Al-Jazeera and Reuters and there is no
record that it was used to make any other telephone call.
197. The videotape of Mr. Abu Adass confessing to the crime was placed in a tree
in front of the ESCWA building in downtown Beirut. The Commission obtained and
viewed the CCTV tapes from ESCWA for 14 February 2005 in order to seek to
identify any individuals or vehicles that could have been connected to the drop-off
of that videotape and the subsequent calls to Al-Jazeera. After viewing the images,
however, it was determined that it was not possible to clearly identify any vehicles
or individuals approaching the tree in front of ESCWA from the video. Commission
investigators also interviewed security guards from Protectron Security, which is
responsible for providing security for the parking lots situated next to the ESCWA
and Al-Jazeera buildings in downtown Beirut. However, none of the security guards
interviewed on duty that day witnessed any unusual activity related to placing an
item in the tree in front of ESCWA.
Conclusion
198. It has not yet been possible to identify the individual or individuals
responsible for telephoning Al-Jazeera and Reuters on 14 February or the
individual or individuals responsible for the videotape of Mr. Abu Adass.
3.

Use of prepaid telephone cards
199. Investigative Judge Elias Eid obtained records for and reviewed all of the
phone calls on 14 February 2005 to Al-Jazeera. Judge Eid noted one mobile phone
call to Al-Jazeera as particularly significant: one made to Al-Jazeera on a prepaid
card at 2207 hours on 14 February. This same prepaid card received a telephone call

57

S/2005/662

one minute after the blast, at 1257 hours, from a telephone booth located in Tripoli
near a building housing the Syrian intelligence services. On 30 January a call was
made to the landline at the home of Mr. Abu Adass from that same Tripoli phone
booth.
200. The Commission obtained and reviewed the call records for prepaid card
number 03925152 based on this information from Judge Eid. The Commission’s
investigation has revealed so far that while there is no identified subscriber, the card
bears significant connections. On 8 February 2005, for example, that prepaid card
had a contact with a mobile telephone number belonging to Tarek Ismat Fakhreddin.
Mr. Fakhreddin, a prominent businessman, is a close associate of then-Prime
Minister Omar Karame. Tarek Fakhreddin also made calls hours after the blast to
General Hamdan, General Azar, General Al-Hajj and the Syrian intelligence officer
Jamea Jamea. In addition, he had telephone contact with his nephew, Raed
Fakhreddin, at 1337 hours on 14 February. Raed Fakhreddin is heavily suspected to
have bought the prepaid cards which were used to organize the assassination. The
prepaid card also had contacts with another telephone number which was in contact
with Raed Fakhreddin’s mobile phone in December 2004, and January, February and
March 2005.
201. This prepaid card has also been connected to a number of prominent Lebanese
and Syrian officials. For example, the card was in contact with three different
numbers which in turn were in contact with Mustapha Hamdan’s mobile phone in
January, March, and July 2005. Two days before the explosion, on 12 February
2005, this prepaid card was also in contact with a mobile phone number belonging
to ex-Minister Abel Rahim Yussef Murad. Mr. Murad’s mobile phone in turn called
Ali Al-Hajj after the blast. The mobile phones of Mr. Murad and Tarek Ismat
Fakhreddin were in contact with each other on 17 January, one day after Ahmad
Abu Adass’s disappearance. This prepaid card also had contacts with a telephone
number which in turn was in regular contact with the mobile phone number
belonging to the politician Nasser Kandil, and the card had contacts with two mobile
phone numbers in February and March 2005 which in turn were in contact on 14 and
17 February 2005 with the mobile phone number used by Syrian intelligence officer
Jamea Jamea.
202. The prepaid card had contacts with a telephone number on 5 January 2005
which was in contact on 26 January with the telephone number of Younis Abdel-Al,
of Al-Ahbash, the brother of the above-mentioned Ahmed Abdel-Al. The prepaid
card was also in contact with a different telephone number on 5 January which was
in contact twice on 10 January with a telephone number belonging to Walid AbdelAl, a brother of Younis and Ahmed Abdel-Al and a member of Mustapha Hamdan’s
Republican Guard Brigade.
Conclusion
203. The identification of the user or users of this prepaid card on 14 February
2005 is significant and is a priority for this investigation.
4.

Australian investigation
204. In an interview with the Commission, Adnan Addoum, Minister of Justice at
the time of the bombing, stated that it was his belief that the Commission’s
investigators should pursue this investigation and question the six Australian

58

S/2005/662

suspects as to their purpose of travelling. He also indicated his belief that in light of
the fact that the vehicle allegedly used in the bombing was a right-hand-drive
vehicle (as used in Australia), further suspicion should be cast on those six suspects.
He added that it was his belief that “due to media and religious pressures, the
investigation judge did not give this matter enough importance”.
205. The investigators thoroughly reviewed the results of the Lebanese and
Australian investigation into these six suspects and, as set out below, have
concluded that there is no basis for believing that they had any involvement in the
assassination of Mr. Hariri. In pursuing this review, Commission investigators also
were aware that there were six SIM cards used in connection with the assassination
and that usage on the SIM cards had terminated at the time of the explosion. Noting
that there were six suspicious Australians and six suspicious SIM cards, an unusual
coincidence, the Commission believed that a review of the Australian and Lebanese
investigations into this area would be prudent.
206. Having closely examined the file, the Commission can highlight the following
points:
• The Lebanese authorities reported and requested assistance from Interpol to
locate and interview the suspects identified in accordance with established
protocol.
• The protocol followed by Interpol was correct.
• The Australian authorities were contacted via Interpol to follow up on this
matter.
• The Australian authorities carried out a thorough investigation into the matter
and presented a report on their findings to the Lebanese authorities.
• The Lebanese authorities properly suspended this present line of inquiry based
on the report presented by the Australian authorities.
Conclusion
207. Based on the above, the investigation carried out by the Australian
authorities and the findings obtained should be considered as conclusive.
Mr. Addoum’s suspicions are unfounded and there is no evidence to support
them. The pursuit of this line of investigation distracted the Lebanese
authorities from following other lines of investigation.
5.

Ahmad Abdel-Al
208. Sheikh Ahmad Abdel-Al, a prominent figure in the Al-Ahbash, was
responsible for the public relations and military and intelligence for Al-Ahbash, the
Association of Islamic Philanthropic Projects, a Lebanese group with strong
historical ties to the Syrian authorities. Abdel-Al has proven to be a significant
figure in the light of his links to several aspects of this investigation, especially
through his mobile phone, which had numerous contacts with all the important
figures in this investigation; indeed, it does not appear that any other figure is as
linked to all the various aspects of this investigation as Abdel-Al.
209. Abdel-Al was interviewed as a witness and later as a suspect by the
Commission. Some of his actions, and some statements made during his interview,

59

S/2005/662

suggest attempts to hide information from the investigation. For example, he tried to
hide the origin of his mobile telephone number on giving his prepaid card on
12 March 2005 to his Al-Ahbash friend Mohammed Halawani and requesting that
the card be registered in Halawani’s name. During the Commission’s interview with
Halawani, it took him several hours to admit that the telephone number in question
was in fact used by Ahmad Abdel-Al. In addition, according to Abdel-Al’s
statement, on 14 February 2005, he left home and went to the Al-Ahbash office. His
telephone records reveal that at 1147 hours, he had a telephone contact with a
number which phoned his home telephone number several times immediately before
the explosion, at 1226, 1246 and 1247 hours. While Abdel-Al told the Commission
that he had called home shortly after the explosion at 1256 hours, telephone records
show that the call was made at 1254 hours, two minutes before the explosion.
Abdel-Al stated that he did not leave the Al-Ahbash office the day of the blast for
security reasons. The telephone records showed four calls to Syrian intelligence
officer Jamea Jamea, at 1142, 1814, 2023 and 2026 hours. According to a witness,
Abdel-Al visited Jamea Jamea’s office the evening of the blast at 1930 hours in
which the two discussed Mr. Abu Adass. Moreover, shortly after his visit to Jamea
Jamea’s office, Abdel-Al’s mobile phone registered a call to General Ghazali, at
1956 hours. Abdel-Al also sought to steer the investigation towards Mr. Abu Adass,
not only by providing the Lebanese authorities with extensive information on
Mr. Abu Adass shortly after the blast, but also stating to the Commission that the
Al-Ahbash security service had seen Mr. Abu Adass before the assassination in the
Ain Al-Hilweh Palestinian camp together with Abu Obeida, the deputy leader of the
terrorist group Asbat al Ansar.
210. There are also numerous contacts between Ahmad Abdel-Al and Lebanese
State security on the day of the blast. For example, Abdel-Al had almost daily
telephone contact with Brigadier General Faysal Rasheed, Chief of State Security in
Beirut, and on 14 February 2005, they had telephone contact at 1035, 2008, 2113,
2114 and 2216 hours. Ahmad Abdel-Al also had contact with suspect Raymond
Azar, of the Lebanese Army, on 14 February 2005, as well as on 16 and
17 February. There was a call between the mobile phone of Albert Karam, another
member of the Lebanese Army Intelligence, and Ahmad Abdel-Al on 14 February as
well, at 1212 hours, about 44 minutes before the blast.
211. Abdel-Al’s phone also had extensive contacts with Mustapha Hamdan’s phone,
as 97 calls occurred between the two between January and April 2005. Of these,
four were made on 14 February 2005, after the explosion. Ahmad had two telephone
contacts with his brother, Walid Abdel-Al, a member of the Republican Guard, the
day of the blast at 1615 and 1729 hours. In addition, Abdel-Al received a call on
11 February 2005 at 2217 hours from the same telephone booth used to call
Al-Jazeera shortly after the blast on 14 February. He also received a call on 4
February 2005 at 1934 hours and on 26 February 2005 at 0933 hours from the booth
used to call Reuters shortly after the blast.
212. Abdel-Al has been in frequent contact with Mahmoud Abdel-Al, his brother,
who is also active in Al-Ahbash. Mahmoud Abdel-Al’s telephone calls on
14 February are also interesting: he made a call minutes before the blast, at 1247
hours, to the mobile phone of Lebanese President Emile Lahoud and at 1249 hours
had contact with Raymond Azar’s mobile telephone.

60

S/2005/662

213. Abdel-Al also has notable connections to a significant weapons store
discovered in southern Beirut in July 2005. This weapons store was raided by ISF
on 26 July 2005 and five people with close connections to the former Mourabitoun
militia were arrested. One of the arrestees was the driver and bodyguard of Majed
Hamdan, Mustapha Hamdan’s brother, who runs a firm which reportedly provided
security for the St. George Hotel. Abdel-Al reportedly arranged for another arrestee
to be employed as an electrician in the Presidential Palace. Furthermore,
immediately after the arrests, another individual fled and promptly telephoned
Ahmad Abdel-Al.
Conclusion
214. The evidence, including his links to other important figures, especially
Mustapha Hamdan and the Republican Guard, his telephone calls and his
involvement in the Lebanese investigation into Mr. Abu Adass, make Ahmad
Abdel-Al a key figure in any ongoing investigation.

VI. Conclusions
215. It is the Commission’s view that the assassination on 14 February 2005 was
carried out by a group with an extensive organization and considerable resources
and capabilities. The crime had been prepared over the course of several months.
For this purpose, the timing and location of Rafik Hariri’s movements had been
monitored and the itineraries of his convoy recorded in detail.
216. Building on the findings of the Commission and Lebanese investigations to
date and on the basis of the material and documentary evidence collected and the
leads pursued until now, there is converging evidence pointing at both Lebanese and
Syrian involvement in this terrorist act. It is a well-known fact that Syrian military
intelligence had a pervasive presence in Lebanon at the least until the withdrawal of
the Syrian forces pursuant to resolution 1559 (2004). The former senior security
officials of Lebanon were their appointees. Given the infiltration of Lebanese
institutions and society by the Syrian and Lebanese intelligence services working in
tandem, it would be difficult to envisage a scenario whereby such a complex
assassination plot could have been carried out without their knowledge.
217. It is also the Commission’s view that the context of the assassination of
Mr. Hariri was one of extreme political polarization and tension. Accusations and
counter-accusations targeting mainly Mr. Hariri over the period preceding his
assassination corroborate the Commission’s conclusion that the likely motive of the
assassination was political. However, since the crime was not the work of
individuals but rather of a sophisticated group, it very much seems that fraud,
corruption and money-laundering could also have been motives for individuals to
participate in the operation.
218. The Commission considers that the investigation must continue for some time
to come. In the short time period of four months more than 400 persons have been
interviewed, 60,000 documents reviewed, several suspects identified and some main
leads established. Yet, the investigation is not complete.
219. It is the Commission’s conclusion that the continuing investigation should be
carried forward by the appropriate Lebanese judicial and security authorities, who

61

S/2005/662

have proved during the investigation that, with international assistance and support,
they can move ahead and at times take the lead in an effective and professional
manner. At the same time, the Lebanese authorities should look into all the
ramifications of the case, including bank transactions. The 14 February explosion
needs to be assessed clearly against the sequence of explosions which preceded and
followed it, since there could be links between some, if not all, of them.
220. The Commission is therefore of the view that, should the Lebanese authorities
so wish it, a sustained effort on the part of the international community to establish
an assistance and cooperation platform together with the Lebanese authorities in the
field of security and justice is essential. This will considerably boost the trust of the
Lebanese people in their security system, while building self-confidence in their
capabilities.
221. The recent decision to proceed with new senior security appointments was
hailed by all the Lebanese parties. It was an important step towards improving the
integrity and credibility of the security apparatus. However, it took place after
months of a security vacuum and extensive sectarian-political debate. Much needs
to be done to overcome sectarian divisions, disentangle security from politics and
restructure the security apparatus to avoid parallel lines of reporting and duplication
and to enhance accountability.
222. It is the Commission’s conclusion that, after having interviewed witnesses and
suspects in the Syrian Arab Republic and establishing that many leads point directly
towards the involvement of Syrian security officials with the assassination, it is
incumbent upon the Syrian Arab Republic to clarify a considerable part of the
unresolved questions. While the Syrian authorities, after initial hesitation, have
cooperated to a limited degree with the Commission, several interviewees tried to
mislead the investigation by giving false or inaccurate statements. The letter
addressed to the Commission by the Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic
proved to contain false information. The full picture of the assassination can be
reached only through an extensive and credible investigation conducted in an open
and transparent manner to the full satisfaction of international scrutiny.
223. As a result of the Commission’s investigation to date, a number of people have
been arrested and charged with conspiracy to commit murder and related crimes in
connection with the assassination of Mr. Hariri and 22 others. The Commission is of
course of the view that all people, including those charged with serious crimes,
should be considered innocent until proven guilty following a fair trial.

62
