United Nations

A/RES/55/278

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 August 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 97

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/55/L.89)]

55/278. Statute of the United Nations System Staff College in
Turin, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 54/228 of 22 December 1999, 55/207 of 20 December
2000 and 55/258 of 14 June 2001,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
1.
Reaffirms the role of the United Nations System Staff College as an
institution for system-wide knowledge management, training and continuous
learning for the staff of the United Nations system, in particular in the areas of
economic and social development, peace and security and internal management;
2.
Welcomes the consultations, held in the framework of the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, on the functions, governance and funding of the Staff
College aimed, inter alia, at making the new College an innovative instrument to
enhance cooperation and coherence throughout the United Nations system, including
in system-wide coordination to assist with the implementation of the United Nations
Millennium Declaration, as requested in resolution 55/162 of 14 December 2000;
3.
Approves the statute of the Staff College, as contained in the annex to the
present resolution;
4.
Requests all relevant bodies to expedite those administrative,
organizational and logistic arrangements needed to ensure a smooth start of
operations of the Staff College as from 1 January 2002;
5.
Invites the Secretariat to keep the General Assembly informed of the
implementation of the present resolution, inter alia, of the activities of the Staff
College, its funding situation and its planned work programme, including through
informal briefings;

1

00 57577

A/55/989.

A/RES/55/278

6.
Decides that the first biennial report on the work, activities and
accomplishments of the Staff College, including on collaboration with other relevant
United Nations institutions, should be submitted to the General Assembly for its
consideration at its fifty-eighth session.
107th plenary meeting
12 July 2001

Annex
Statute of the United Nations System Staff College
Article I
Establishment
The General Assembly of the United Nations, by adopting the present statute,
establishes the United Nations System Staff College as from 1 January 2002 as an
institution for system-wide knowledge management, training and continuous
learning for the staff of the United Nations system, aimed in particular at the areas
of economic and social development, peace and security and internal management of
the United Nations system.
Article II
Objectives
1.
The Staff College shall serve as a distinct system-wide knowledgemanagement and learning institution, with a view to fostering a cohesive
management culture across the United Nations system. It shall provide strategic
leadership and management development for international civil servants with a view
to strengthening collaboration within the system in areas of common organizational
responsibility; increasing operational effectiveness; enhancing cooperation with
States Members and observers of the United Nations, the specialized agencies,
regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and civil society; and
developing a more cohesive system-wide management culture.
2.
The Staff College shall carry out its activities on the basis of the needs
expressed by the agencies of the United Nations system and in close cooperation
with training and learning institutes and similar bodies within the United Nations
system. It may also collaborate with relevant entities outside the system.
Article III
Location
The Staff College shall be located in Turin, Italy.
Article IV
Governance
1.
The Staff College shall have a Board of Governors composed of
representatives of the member organizations of the Administrative Committee on
Coordination. The Director of the Staff College shall participate as an ex officio
member in the work of the Board and shall arrange for secretarial support for the
Board.

2

A/RES/55/278

2.
The Board shall meet at least once a year and shall adopt its own rules of
procedure, which shall be consistent with the provisions of the present statute.
3.

The Board shall be responsible for:
(a)

Formulating general policy for the activities of the Staff College;

(b) Considering the work programme and budget, on the basis of proposals
submitted by the Director, and making recommendations thereon to the
Administrative Committee on Coordination;
(c) Considering ways and means of enhancing the financial resources of the
Staff College with a view to ensuring the effectiveness and continuity of its
operations;
(d) Evaluating the activities of the Staff College and their impact and
reporting thereon to the Administrative Committee on Coordination;
(e) Submitting an annual report to the Administrative Committee on
Coordination.
4.
The Board shall establish an expert technical review panel to advise on the
development of the activities of the Staff College, to review its performance and to
report thereon to the Board. The technical review panel shall be composed of expert
staff of the common system organizations who shall be selected by the Board.
5.
The Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chairman of the Administrative
Committee on Coordination, shall submit a biennial report to the General Assembly
on the activities of the Staff College.
Article V
Director and staff
1.
The Director of the Staff College shall be appointed by the Secretary-General
after consultation with the Administrative Committee on Coordination in the light of
criteria recommended by the Board.
2.
The Director shall be responsible for the management of the Staff College and
accountable for its results in accordance with directives issued by the Board. The
Director shall in consultation, as appropriate, with the technical review panel, inter
alia:
(a) Submit the work programme and budget of the Staff College to the Board
for its consideration;
(b)
College;

Oversee the execution of the work programme and budget of the Staff

(c) Submit to the Board annual and ad hoc reports on the activities of the
Staff College and the execution of its work programme;
(d) Manage the staff of the Staff College in accordance with the Staff
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations and the terms of the present statute;
(e) Coordinate the work of the Staff College with that of related organs of
the United Nations system and of relevant institutions outside the system;

3

A/RES/55/278

(f) Negotiate such arrangements, including those with Governments, as may
be appropriate with a view to offering and receiving services related to the activities
of the Staff College;
(g) Seek appropriate funding for the implementation of the work programme
of the Staff College;
(h) Accept, subject to the provisions of article VII below, voluntary
contributions to the Staff College.
3.
The staff of the Staff College shall be appointed by the Director on behalf of
the Secretary-General, under letters of appointment signed by him or her, and
limited to service with the College. The staff shall be responsible to the Director in
the exercise of their functions.
4.
The terms and conditions of service of the Director and the staff shall be those
provided for in the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, subject to
such administrative arrangements as are approved by the Secretary-General in his
capacity as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on Coordination.
5.
The Director and the staff of the Staff College shall be officials of the United
Nations within the meaning of Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Article VI
Associate collaborators and consultants
1.
The Director may designate a limited number of well-qualified persons to
serve as associate collaborators of the Staff College. Associate collaborators shall be
permitted to pursue their work at the College and shall be expected to provide
advice and assistance in matters related to the work programme of the College.
2.
Associate collaborators shall be designated for a fixed period in accordance
with their qualifications and with the criteria and procedures established by the
Director and approved by the Board. Associate collaborators shall be neither staff
members of the Staff College nor consultants or officials of the United Nations.
3.
The Director may arrange for the services of consultants for special
assignments in connection with the work programme of the Staff College.
Article VII
Finance
1.
The Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations, as well as the
financial procedures of the United Nations, shall apply to the financial operations of
the Staff College.
2.
The Staff College shall have a biennial budget approved by the Administrative
Committee on Coordination. A core portion of this budget shall be met by the
members of the Committee in accordance with the cost-sharing formula decided
upon by it.
3.
The Staff College may also receive voluntary contributions from Governments,
intergovernmental organizations and foundations and other non-governmental
sources.
4.
The Director may accept contributions on behalf of the Staff College, provided
that no contribution for a specific purpose is accepted if the purpose is inconsistent

4

A/RES/55/278

with the purposes and policies of the College and the Financial Regulations and
Rules of the United Nations. Contributions that may directly or indirectly involve an
immediate or ultimate financial liability for the College may be accepted only with
the approval of the Board, after consultation with the Controller of the United
Nations.
5.
The Staff College shall organize courses and other activities related to its
mandates on a fee basis.
6.
The Director of the Staff College shall prepare budgets on a biennial basis. The
budget shall show separately the core portion of the budget and projected income
and expenditures in respect of voluntary contributions. The Director shall submit the
proposed budget to the Board at least six weeks before the session of the Board at
which it is to be considered.
7.
The Board shall consider the proposed budget and make recommendations
thereon to the Administrative Committee on Coordination. The budget, as approved
by the Committee, shall be forwarded to the participating agencies. The United
Nations shall bill the agencies for their share of the core budget.
8.
The funds of the Staff College shall be kept in a separate account to be
established by the Secretary-General in accordance with the Financial Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations.
9.
The funds of the Staff College shall be administered solely for the purposes of
the College. The United Nations shall perform all necessary financial and
accounting functions for the College, including acting as custodian of its funds, and
shall prepare and certify its biennial accounts.
10. The Director may enter into commitments only if the total amount of such
commitments does not exceed the core portion of the budget and the amount of
voluntary contributions received.
11. The Staff College shall be subject to audit by the United Nations Board of
Auditors in accordance with the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations.
Article VIII
Administrative support
The United Nations shall provide the Staff College with appropriate
administrative support. The College shall reimburse such support at a level that shall
be determined from time to time in consultations between the United Nations and
the Board.
Article IX
Status and authority
1.
The Staff College, as part of the United Nations, shall enjoy the status,
privileges and immunities provided for in Articles 104 and 105 of the Charter of the
United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations 2 and other international agreements and United Nations resolutions relating
to the status, privileges and immunities of the Organization.

2

Resolution 22 A (I).

5

A/RES/55/278

2.
The Staff College may, under the authority of the Director, enter into contracts
with organizations, institutions or firms for the purpose of carrying out its
programmes. The College may acquire and dispose of real and personal property and
may take other legal action necessary for the performance of its functions.
Article X
Amendments
Amendments to the present statute may be made by the General Assembly on
the recommendation of the Administrative Committee on Coordination.

6
