S/2019/388

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 May 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 10 May 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2431 (2018), by which
the deployment of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) was authorized
until 31 May 2019. In the resolution, the Council welcomed the conduct of a technical
assessment of AMISOM by the United Nations, working closely with the African
Union, the Federal Government of Somalia and key international stakeholders, to
review the reconfiguration of AMISOM in support of the Somali transition plan, the
progress made towards achieving its strategic objectives and its ability to conduct its
priority tasks, and to provide recommendations on the progressive transition from
AMISOM to Somali security responsibility, taking into account the capacities of the
Somali security forces.
Pursuant to resolution 2431 (2018) and communiqués of the African Union
Peace and Security Council, the fifth joint African Union -United Nations review of
AMISOM was carried out from 4 to 19 March 2019, jointly led by the Departments
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Peace Operations of the United Nations
and the Peace Support Operations Division of the African Union, with the
participation of the Department of Operational Support of the United Nations, the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), the United Nations Support Office in Somalia
(UNSOS) and the United Nations Office to the African Union, as well as key
international partners on security in Somalia.
On 4 and 5 March 2019, the review team held meetings in Addis Ababa with
AMISOM police- and troop-contributing countries and members of the international
community. Those meetings were followed by a visit to Somalia from 6 to 16 March,
for consultations with the Federal Government of Somalia and AMISOM. The review
team visited all AMISOM sector headquarters (Mogadishu, Baidoa, Kismaayo,
Beledweyne and Jawhar) and presented its findings and recommendations to the
African Union Commission and international partners in Addis Ababa, on 18 and
19 March 2019. The findings and recommendations of the joint review team were
considered by the Peace and Security Council on 9 May 2019, at its 848th meeting.
Political and security situation
The Federal Government of Somalia continues to advance towards building an
inclusive, federal Somali State. There has been steady technical progress on the
review of the Provisional Federal Constitution, and planning for universal elections
in 2020/21 has begun. Notably, the Federal Government’s economic reforms are
starting to bear fruit. The World Bank unlocked exceptional financing through

19-07852 (E)

200519

*1907852*

S/2019/388

pre-arrears clearance grants for strengthening basic service delivery, improving
financial management capabilities and restoring economic resilience and
opportunities. Progress on economic reforms was recognized at the Spring Meetings
of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, held in Washington, D.C., on
12 April 2019, where it was noted that arrears clearance and debt relief under the
Fund’s Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative were in sight. Transformative
dynamics in the Horn of Africa are improving prospects for greater regional
cooperation between Somalia and its neighbours, with growing opportunities for
partnership.
Nevertheless, challenges remain. The impact of the Gulf crisis on the country is
still being felt, and the unresolved maritime boundary dispute between Somalia and
Kenya could affect the security and stability of Somalia. A political sta lemate between
the Federal Government and some of the federal member states impedes further
progress, including, importantly, on the implementation of the national security
architecture, agreed among Federal Government and federal member state leaders in
2017, to build a viable federal Somali security sector under appropriate governance
and financial mechanisms.
The security situation remains volatile, complex and difficult to predict. The
main security threat still comes from Al-Shabaab, in particular in southern and central
Somalia, where the group controls large parts of rural areas. Al -Shabaab operates
under a well-organized structure, capable of effectively generating revenue through
the taxation of businesses and local communities and through tolls at checkpoints
along main supply routes, among other revenue streams. The group continues to
successfully recruit new fighters into its ranks, including children and foreign
fighters.
Of particular concern is the increase in the number and frequency of Al -Shabaab
attacks in Mogadishu. The group has increased its capability and its use of mortars,
as evidenced by the mortar attack carried out on 1 January 2019 on the United Nations
compound and subsequent mortar attacks on the Federal Government ’s executive
compound at Villa Somalia and on AMISOM and Somalia National Army bases. In
the month of March alone, Al-Shabaab carried out two complex attacks and a total of
28 improvised explosive device attacks in Mogadishu. The Federal Government has
developed a comprehensive plan, supported by AMISOM and international partners,
in response to the need to secure the city and its boundaries and to establish more
robust and effective checkpoints at city entry points and strategic locations.
The existence of elements affiliated with Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in
Mogadishu, Puntland and other areas further complicates the security situation,
including by creating competition and conflict with Al -Shabaab over extortion
networks and revenue streams.
Progress and prospects for the Somali transition plan
In the transition plan, developed by the Federal Government in consultation with
federal member states in March 2018 and endorsed by the international community,
conditions and milestones are set out until 2021 for the progressive transfer of security
responsibility to Somali security institutions. The plan is comprehensive and has three
areas of activities: operational, supporting and institution-building. Under the
supporting and institution-building pillars, the Federal Government is taking
commendable steps towards institutional reform and capacity-building in the security
sector. It recently completed a two-year biometric registration process of national
army troops, which would assist the Government in rightsizing national army forces
by retiring veterans and enabling the recruitment of new personnel. Biometric
registration of personnel in other security services, including the Somali Police Force
2/14

19-07852

S/2019/388

and the National Intelligence and Security Agency is ongoing. N otwithstanding the
challenges, the Federal Government is also taking steps to ensure payment of security
personnel salaries.
Over the past year, control of two locations, the national stadium and the Jaalle
Siyaad Military Academy in Mogadishu, were transferred from AMISOM to Somali
authorities and security services. Progress on the implementation of the transition
plan outside Mogadishu was limited, however, and it is expected that the first phase
will not be completed in June 2019 as envisaged. The Federal Government redirected
focus from initially expected priorities towards offensive operations against
Al-Shabaab in Shabelle Hoose and Shabelle Dhexe, to reinforce security in the
Mogadishu area as a basis for further operations. With support from AMISOM and
international partners, the Federal Government has begun operations on the
Mogadishu–Afgooye main supply route. The Government also plans to take over
responsibility for security at 12 forward operating bases from AMISOM by December
2019 and complete operational planning in 2019 for securing the Mogadishu–Baidoa
main supply route and other priorities set out in the first phase of the transition plan.
Political dynamics, including upcoming regional electoral processes in Jubbaland and
Galmudug, may continue to affect timelines.
After some initial progress, momentum on integrated planning between the
Federal Government, AMISOM and international partners has slowed. The number
of joint targeted offensive operations between AMISOM and Somali security forces
in the previous year was limited, and there was insufficient comprehensive planning
and inclusion of international partners to ensure that non-military aspects, such as
community recovery and rule of law, were integrated into transition activities, which
is necessary for achieving sustainable gains in the medium and long terms. In certain
sectors, both the national army and AMISOM adopted a largely defensive posture,
with AMISOM awaiting appropriate alignment with the Federal Government ’s
priorities and timelines for the implementation of the transition plan.
Instances of some AMISOM troop-contributing countries vacating forward
operating bases without adequate joint planning with Somali security forces resulted
in Al-Shabaab reoccupying locations. Unplanned or uncoordinated withdrawal of
troops has often led to increased vulnerability and the forced displacement of local
populations, due to threats of retaliation by Al-Shabaab for collaboration and
impediments to delivery of life-saving humanitarian assistance. It has also resulted in
harm to or abductions of humanitarian workers. There is a need to improve
coordination in Mogadishu between the Federal Government and AMISOM
headquarters, and between the respective headquarters and sectors of both AMISOM
and the national army, and to relaunch broader integrated planning with the various
security, stabilization and humanitarian partners.
During the review, the Federal Government reiterated its request for the lifting
of the arms embargo, in order to enable its access to weapons and ammunition needed
for the security effort.
Capacities of Somali security forces
Strengthening Somali security capacity in a sustainable way requires progress
to be made on the implementation of the national security architectur e, in particular
by agreeing on and establishing governance structures, delineating the roles and
responsibilities of the various security services and integrating regional forces. That
progress will depend in large part on the resumption of political dial ogue between the
Federal Government and the federal member states, leading to necessary political
decisions and agreements, and on progress made on reconciliation processes at the
federal, state, regional and clan levels. Through an assessment of regional forces in
19-07852

3/14

S/2019/388

Somalia currently not part of a federated security sector was completed in February
2019, some 20,000 regional forces were recorded from across the federal member
states.
The Federal Government has indicated that there are currently 47 national army
battalions organized under five brigades, including the 14 October brigade consisting
of 1,300 troops, named after the date of the deadliest terrorist attack in Somali history,
carried out in 2017. There are plans under the National Integration Commis sion to
generate a total of four integrated battalions in 2019 and 2020, of which two will be
new and two created by rebalancing existing forces from all 47 existing national army
battalions. The Federal Government also presented plans to rightsize existin g national
army forces to 10,000 and to recruit an additional 8,000 troops, up to a total of 18,000,
as specified in the national security architecture. The Government has also recruited
new, younger officers among the top management ranks of the national army to
professionalize the institution. Similar reforms will be extended to the police force.
National army training is provided by bilateral partners, including the European
Union, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America. On the basis of figures provided, it is considered that a total
of 11,400 national army troops will be bilaterally trained by 2021. Nevertheless,
better coordination of training and capacity-building of national army forces by
international partners remains a critical need. Further joint planning is required to
determine how troops being trained by other bilateral partners are used to directly
support the implementation of the transition plan.
The Federal Government presented plans to generate over 7,500 new police
personnel by December 2021, in coordination with the federal member states. They
will supplement the existing 7,700 federal police personnel, the majority of whom are
deployed in Mogadishu, and 1,260 state police personnel in Kismaayo (Jubbaland),
Baidoa (South West State) and Jawhar and Beledweyne (HirShabelle). Currently, the
strength and capabilities of state police vary widely across federal member states.
Under current projections, the rate of generating new police personnel may not meet
the goal set out under the national security architecture of a total of 32,000 federal
and state police force personnel by 2027.
Mandate implementation and reconfiguration
AMISOM continues to play a critical role in securing main population centres
within its area of responsibility; protecting key installations and government
facilities; assisting Somali security forces in protecting the Somali authorities and
their efforts towards stabilization, reconciliation and peacebuildi ng; and enabling the
international presence in the country. It continues to provide combat mentoring to
Somali military forces and mentoring and training to Somali police, in collaboration
with UNSOM. AMISOM experiences challenges in the priority tasks of conducting
targeted offensive operations against Al-Shabaab (including jointly with Somali
security forces) and securing main supply routes. Over the past year, no major
offensive operations were carried out, although there were limited operations in some
sectors, and AMISOM supported some national army operations against Al -Shabaab,
including through combat mentoring. Towards the end of March 2019, AMISOM and
national army commenced joint operations in Shabelle Hoose. Despite serious
security and other challenges, AMISOM facilitated and implemented quick-impact
projects and peace-strengthening projects as part of its support for stabilization
efforts. AMISOM continues to enable and support the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, including relief and food aid, through coordination with humanitarian
actors and local leaders.

4/14

19-07852

S/2019/388

On the basis of the recommendations of the joint review conducted in 2018, the
Security Council, in its resolution 2431 (2018), requested the reconfiguration of
AMISOM in support of the implementation of the transition plan. AMISOM has
undertaken a number of steps towards that goal, with further planning and
implementation ongoing. An operational readiness assessment of AMISOM was
completed in September 2018, through which capacities and areas requiring
additional support were identified, as were ways in which AMISOM resources could
be better allocated to support its functions. That assessment was followed by the
development of a revised concept of operations in November 2018, in which the
strategic-level tasks for the transfer of security responsibility from AMISOM to the
Somalis are set out, in three phases, over the period from June 2018 to December
2021, aligned with phases of the transition plan.
At a conference of AMISOM and national army sector commanders held from
11 to 14 February 2019, AMISOM and the national army jointly developed detailed
operational plans for each phase, including joint operations, locations for handover,
planning for the clearance of main supply routes and timelines. At the time of the
review, a technical committee was assessing those plans for subsequent endorsement
by AMISOM force and sector commanders and Mission leadership.
Each AMISOM sector has a dedicated concept of operations implementation
plan under which forces will be realigned, involving the collapse of some positions
and forward operating bases and the transfer of others to Somali security forces,
beginning largely in the second phase, between July 2019 and December 2020.
AMISOM intends to use some of the troops released as a result to create mobile forces
in each sector and a quick reaction force under the force commander. It is important
that the plans for and implementation of the handover of positions be aligned between
AMISOM and Somali security forces, including coordination with UNSOS on
support requirements, to avoid outcomes where Al-Shabaab or other non-state armed
groups are able to take over locations vacated by AMISOM.
As AMISOM is reconfigured, it will be important for the force commander to
have effective operational command over all troops, so as to have the flexibility
needed to redeploy troops and assets as the situation demands. The review team was
informed that the African Union has approved a new structure for AMISOM force
headquarters that places military air assets under the force commander ’s control,
including armed helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicles and systems, and that will
strengthen force-level command and control in the sectors and enable closer
coordination both among the sectors and between force headquarters and the sectors.
Recent deployments of a new AMISOM force commander, deputy force commander
and several new sector commanders provide an opportunity to improve command and
control arrangements and intra-AMISOM coordination.
AMISOM is also reconfiguring its police and civilian components to support
the transition. AMISOM police are currently deployed in Mogadishu, Baidoa,
Kismaayo, Jawhar and Beledweyne, and plans to expand its presence to Dhooble and
other major population centres beyond federal member state capitals, with mandated
tasks to train and mentor federal and state police personnel in collaboration with
UNSOM under the joint police programme. Of the minimum 1,040 authorized
AMISOM police strength, AMISOM currently has 718 police officers deployed,
comprising three formed police units of 160 personnel each and 238 individual police
officers. Two additional formed police units (320 personnel) are expected to deploy
over the second and third quarters of 2019.
AMISOM has recently begun to deploy civilian staff to each federal member
state to support its military and police presence in the implementation of the transition
plan in the sectors. AMISOM civilian sector teams and UNSOM regional presences
19-07852

5/14

S/2019/388

can complement each other’s work within their respective mandates, with the former
potentially able to have greater access to remote areas, alongside AMISOM military
forces, to engage in the areas of civil affairs and community engagement,
humanitarian affairs and human rights. In Mogadishu, the AMISOM civilian
component provides political analysis and support to AMISOM leadership; facilitates
humanitarian support; conducts human rights monitoring and inve stigations; and
supports the work carried out by AMISOM jointly with the United Nations, the
Federal Government and partners. AMISOM civilian staff also perform
administrative and support functions. The review team was informed of plans to
revive a tripartite memorandum of understanding between the African Union, the
United Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, which should
ensure that all three organizations work in Somalia in a coordinated and
complementary manner, in support of agreed and joint political strategies.
Joint planning and coordination
The review team identified a strong need for improved and regular coordination
and information-sharing between the Federal Government and AMISOM, to enable
appropriate and effective joint planning, the effective conduct of operations and
monitoring of the implementation of the transition plan. A robust joint planning
mechanism is needed to ensure an integrated approach to the planning process,
covering operational, supporting and institution-building activities, with a Federal
Government lead in consultation with AMISOM and in coordination with all relevant
actors, including national army, police, federal member state authorities, UNSOM,
UNSOS and other support elements, and partners. Without such a mechanism, the
implementation of the transition plan will not be appropriately aligned with AMISOM
support, likely resulting in further delays. The mechanism would also enable the
Federal Government and AMISOM to adjust implementation priorities and timelines
through mutual consultation, on the basis of ground realities and progress, and would
engage all actors concerned on stabilization activities. More broadly, the joint
planning and coordination mechanism would update and revise the transiti on plan as
needed between now and 2021, in line with the overall objective of seeing Somali
security forces take the lead responsibility for security by that time. Importantly, the
mechanism would enable Somalia to ensure closer alignment of security perso nnel
generation with transition priorities, thus allowing for anticipated dividends in terms
of AMISOM human resources.
The review team also recommends regular consultation between the mechanism
and humanitarian actors, to provide appropriate information on the humanitarian
impacts and risks of the reconfiguration and transition, including AMISOM
withdrawal from anticipated locations. Such consultation would enable
implementation and handover to be carried out in a manner that adequately considers
the needs and vulnerabilities of the populations that would be affected.
The concept of reconfiguration as proposed by the 2018 joint review included a
“fusion cell”, or combined joint operations and information cell, as a format for
coordinating, sharing information and deconflicting with all relevant security actors
in Somalia, especially national army and other security forces. The 2019 review team
was informed by AMISOM that conditions for creating that type of cell did not yet
exist, but that there was movement towards improved coordination between
AMISOM and the national army at both force headquarters and in the sectors, as seen
in recent joint operations by the national army and AMISOM in Shabelle Hoose that
were conducted after the review.

6/14

19-07852

S/2019/388

Support implications for Mission and Somali security forces
Al-Shabaab has adapted, conducting mobile and asymmetric warfare, which
requires AMISOM to adopt a more agile posture and enhance its mobility to be able
to implement the tasks outlined in the transition plan, mitigate the risk of attacks and
undertake both offensive operations and the clearing and securing of main supply
routes. The review team took note of the need to strengthen AMISOM operational
capacity and capability, including by addressing shortfalls in logistics and equipment
and by deploying additional enablers and multipliers such as equipment to counter
the threat posed by improvised explosive devices and effective intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance capabilities and unmanned aerial vehicles and
systems.
To achieve that goal, the review team recommends an approach favouring the
optimization of AMISOM equipment, which would include a comprehensive line -byline equipment review by June 2019, conducted jointly by the African Union,
AMISOM and UNSOS, to examine whether AMISOM logistical and equipment
capabilities and capacities are aligned with the tasks ahead. Based on a defined
statement of unit requirements, the outcome of that review would include
recommendations on detailed equipment adjustments and the identification of
opportunities for resources that could be made available to support the deployment of
specific capabilities to address critical gaps and enhance AMISOM operational
capacity and safety and security.
UNSOS is currently mandated, pursuant to resolutions 2431 (2018) and 2245
(2015), to provide logistical support in eight categories (food, water, fuel, tentag e,
transportation, in-theatre medical evacuation, interoperable communications and field
defence stores) for up to 10,900 Somali security force personnel, subject to the
following criteria: (a) that those forces are formally part of the national security
architecture, deployed on joint operations with AMISOM and part of the Mission ’s
overall strategic concept in line with the transition plan; and (b) that support is
provided in compliance with the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations
support to non-United Nations security forces. Support is financed through a trust
fund. While the intention of the Security Council in extending support to Somali
security forces (from national army forces previously) was seen as a means of
encouraging the integration of regional forces into the federal Somali security sector,
the recipients of UNSOS logistical support have yet to extend beyond the national
army, owing to delays in integration and to donor conditions stipulating the use of
trust fund contributions for the national army only. A shift to having UNSOS support
regional forces can take place only after they have been integrated into Somali
security forces, on the basis of clear mechanisms and decisions of the Somali
authorities.
During the review, the Federal Government requested that the possibility be
explored of extending UNSOS support to the entire national army, up to 18,000
soldiers when its formation is complete. The review team considers that the question
of support to Somali security forces should be addressed in a comprehensive manner,
together with coordination of support for training, equipment and sustainment, under
the leadership of the Federal Government. Such support should also include a
capacity-building element to facilitate the eventual handover of those functions to
Somali institutions.
Consequently, UNSOS would not be best placed to provide support to Somali
security forces beyond the current Security Council-mandated eligibility
requirements, in areas outside the AMISOM area of responsibility (such as Puntland
and Galmudug) and over the long term. Challenges relating to the provision of
UNSOS support through a trust fund would remain, including a lack of predictability
19-07852

7/14

S/2019/388

and sustainability, donor caveats and insufficient resources or capacities to manage,
oversee or monitor the delivery of support. In addition, as the transition progresses,
the provision of non-lethal support to the Somali security forces by UNSOS will
decrease as AMISOM draws down. It is therefore critical that other long-term
solutions are identified, with partner support, to meet the needs and requests of the
Federal Government in terms of non-lethal support for the national army, as it
gradually increases to its full strength of 18,000 troops.
For the above reasons, the review team recommends that the support provided
by UNSOS to the national army be maintained under the existing criteria, without
prejudice to the possibility of increasing, over the transition period, the ceiling of
troops that receive UNSOS support beyond 10,900. Any increase in the ceiling should
be used as an incentive for accelerated progress on implementing the national security
architecture and on measures to rightsize the national army and integrate additional
forces under the federal Somali security forces umbrella. Any additional support
beyond the current ceiling would require, in addition to adequate donor commitment,
an increase in UNSOS capacity to manage and provide the necessary support,
including through robust human rights due diligence policy implementation
mechanisms, in particular in relation to the integration of regional forces into the
national army.
The review team also considered the question of logistical support to the
national army once it takes over forward operating bases from AMISOM. It was
clarified that the current support items can be delivered to national army forces taking
over forward operating bases, as long as those troops meet the eligibility criteria for
joint operations with AMISOM, are within the Council-approved ceiling and have
met the risk mitigation requirements of the human rights due diligence policy, and as
long as sufficient financing is available in the supporting trust fund.
Accountability and compliance
The review team examined the status of the implementation of key prevention
and response measures with regard to violations identified in the human rights due
diligence policy framework since the 2018 review. Those measures include boards of
inquiry, human rights training, the dissemination of and adherence to AMISOM rules
of engagement and the Civilian Casualty Tracking, Analysis and Response Cell. The
review team took note of improvements in AMISOM sectors reporting to the Cell,
which continues to be used to track civilian casualties carried out by all actors and
which AMISOM agreed to continue to strengthen in order to ensure the uniformity of
reporting across all sectors. African Union-funded ex gratia or amends payments for
civilian harm caused by AMISOM are being implemented, starting with victims of
incidents that occurred in 2018. AMISOM has also translated its rules of engagement
into the languages of the troop-contributing countries and disseminated them to the
troops on the ground.
Training on human rights and international humanitarian law was provi ded to
both AMISOM troops and Somali security forces, to ensure compliance and
accountability. AMISOM continues to monitor the status of the implementation of
prevention measures for air assets, on the basis of letters of assist and risk assessments
for armed air assets. While steps to ensure that mitigation measures are largely in
place and that progress is being made, sustained coordination with UNSOS to ensure
enhanced visibility on their deployment and use will continue to be necessary
throughout the transition period.
The review team took note of a reduction in civilian casualties documented since
the 2018 joint review and an improved response to concerns about allegations of
violations by AMISOM raised by the United Nations. Improved collaboration at both
8/14

19-07852

S/2019/388

the strategic and technical levels between AMISOM and United Nations entities,
through the working groups on the human rights due diligence policy and on children
and armed conflict and the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse,
has facilitated constructive engagement on violations-related issues.
Ongoing strengthening and harmonization of AMISOM procedures with
UNSOM, including through agreement on harmonized standard operating procedures,
especially for its boards of inquiry, is a necessary part of efforts by the African Union
to enhance its accountability mechanisms on human rights issues. There are
challenges to the implementation of AMISOM standard operating procedures on the
treatment and handling of disengaged combatants at the reception stage, such as a
lack of facilities at the front line to sustain defectors until they are handed over to
Federal Government authorities within 72 hours, as required, subject to the principle
of non-refoulement. There is also a need to strengthen follow-up mechanisms after
the handing over of disengaged fighters to local authorities.
The review team also took note of challenges in tracking civilian casualties
arising from air strikes conducted by actors other than AMISOM, as well as issues in
identifying relevant levels of command and control of AMISOM current military air
assets. That is a particularly important concern because, as more military air assets
are being considered for AMISOM, requiring enhanced preventive and civilian
casualty tracking, analysis and response measures to be applied, tracking devices for
UNSOS-supported military aircraft will be required to aid in investigating any
reported civilian casualties by AMISOM air assets, or to confirm whether or not they
were involved, and to enable more effective prevention and response processes and
approaches overall.
AMISOM should continue to ensure, including through the comprehensive
implementation of the table of AMISOM human rights due diligence policy risk
mitigation measures, that human rights issues are considered, applied and reviewed
across the preparatory, conduct and review phases of operations. Beyond training,
those activities should continue to include selection and screening, the integration of
human rights into planning, the continued tailoring and application of standard
operating procedures and force commander directives and other operational orders to
the current operational context, the consolidation of practices on civilian casualty
tracking and efforts to ensure accountability should violations occur.
The need to focus attention on strengthening the capacity of Somali security
forces to comply with human rights standards and international humanitarian law in
the context of the transition is integral to ensuring a sustainably secure environment
for the population. With AMISOM providing mentoring or training for Somali
security forces, the example shown and role played by AMISOM will be crucial in
order to support the professionalization and institutionalization of preve ntion and
response mechanisms within Somali security forces. A draft tripartite memorandum
of understanding between the United Nations, the African Union and the Federal
Government of Somalia has been prepared to provide the legal framework for to the
provision of logistical support by UNSOS to the national army, including provisions
to strengthen the implementation of the human rights due diligence policy and the
application of risk mitigation measures. In its mentoring of and engagement with
Somali security forces, and together with UNSOM, UNSOS and international
partners, AMISOM should continue to promote its experience and activities, to ensure
compliance and accountability and the operational dividends that can be drawn from
strong compliance mechanisms.

19-07852

9/14

S/2019/388

Securing elections in 2020/21
A key indicator of progress on the country’s path towards becoming a fully
functioning federal State will be its preparations and readiness for one -person, onevote elections in 2020/21. AMISOM is expected to play a key role in support of
Somali security services to secure the electoral exercises. According to the National
Independent Electoral Commission, the process of selecting registration sites will
commence in June 2019, with voter registration to be carried out in early 2020 and
polling to take place in the last quarter of 2020. In the draft electoral bill, it is
stipulated that elections should take place “where possible”. Given the security
situation, it is expected that voter registration and the polling exercis e will be
concentrated in population centres secured by AMISOM and Somali security forces
and other designated locations that are assessed as being securable.
Preparations for electoral security are in the early stages. The review team was
briefed on Federal Government plans to establish a federal electoral security task
force as the national coordination body for electoral security, consisting of the Federal
Government, the National Independent Electoral Commission, AMISOM, the
national army and all federal and state police and other security services, as well as
the UNSOM-United Nations Development Programme Integrated Electoral Support
Group, taking lessons from a similar body created to oversee security plans for the
2016 electoral process. The task force will develop and oversee the implementation
of an election security plan covering the various electoral operations, including voter
registration, polling operations and related activities. The Electoral Commission has
currently identified some 1,780 potential sites for voter registration, following advice
from security forces, with final numbers and locations to be determined closer to the
start of voter registration. The establishment of the task force is especially urgent,
given that the process for confirming and securing voter registration sites should
begin in the coming months.
It is also important that the electoral security plan and designated locations are
consistent with the implementation of AMISOM priority tasks and the transition plan,
including through regular consultations between the joint planning and coordination
mechanism advocated by the review team and the federal electoral security task force,
to ensure that the reconfiguration and the transition are aligned with electoral security
planning. It is expected that Somali police will play a prominent role in providing
security for the elections, which might entail additional support from AMISOM police
and, in turn, require an increase in the numbers and support needs of the AMISOM
police component. Support provided by UNSOS to AMISOM to enable the conduct
of any additional tasks the latter is expected to perform in support of the electoral
process is also likely to require additional resources under the UNSOS budget, as well
as early joint planning and prioritization.
Implications for the Mission’s mandate
The review team considers that the Mission’s strategic objectives and priority
tasks, as set out in resolution 2431 (2018), remain valid, but should primarily be seen
in the context of the transition to Somali security responsibility. Notably, the
Mission’s role in degrading Al-Shabaab should be understood within the context of
the progressive implementation of the transition p lan and the strategic end goal of a
full handover of security responsibility to ready and capable Somali security forces
and institutions by 2021. AMISOM should continue to carry out targeted offensive
operations against Al-Shabaab, including jointly with Somali security forces, within
the overall concept of supporting the implementation of the transition plan. At the
same time, it should be emphasized that significantly reducing the threat from
Al-Shabaab is not a purely military task. It requires a compre hensive effort towards

10/14

19-07852

S/2019/388

the extension of State authority, the provision of rule of law, including policing and
justice, and addressing the ideological, clan-based and socioeconomic reasons
explaining why Al-Shabaab and other non-state armed groups continue to thrive in
Somalia. All those efforts require continued support from the international
community, under the leadership and priorities of the Federal Government. Similarly,
the Mission’s priority task of securing main supply routes requires a combination of
military presence, policing, civilian engagement and the support of local populations,
and cannot be achieved without adequate involvement by Somali security and civilian
actors. Stabilization and reconciliation efforts led by Somali federal, state and local
authorities, with international support, are critical to the transition and to ensuring
that areas recovered by AMISOM and Somali security forces do not return to
Al-Shabaab control when AMISOM is no longer present.
In response to the Security Council’s intention to consider further uniformed
personnel reductions as security conditions and Somali capabilities and capacities
allow (resolution 2431 (2018), para. 24), progress on the transition, specifically on
generating Somali security forces and building Somali institutional capacity, and a
constant assessment of the threat environment, should be the driving parameters in
determining AMISOM uniformed personnel levels until after the elections i n 2020/21.
In the light of the prevailing security situation and the status of and prospects for both
the transition and the federal Somali security sector, the review team identified the
options outlined below for AMISOM uniformed personnel levels until a fter the
elections.
Option 1
Maintain current troop ceiling, while allowing for reductions based on progress
on the ground
Option 1 is based on the assessment that the threat level in Somalia remains high
and that the lack of progress made in the implementation of the transition plan in the
past year, in particular the slow pace of generating capable Somali security forces,
does not allow for a clear determination of uniformed personnel reductions at the
present stage, especially considering the upcoming voter registration and electoral
exercises. Implementation of the agreed collapse or handover to Somali authorities of
a number of AMISOM locations would present opportunities to release AMISOM
forces, as long as there is adequate and clan-balanced generation of security personnel
under the national security architecture, with coordinated training and capacity building by international partners. Nevertheless, decisions on reductions and
adjustments should be made in the field, in accordance with the pace and success of
the implementation of the transition plan. Further reductions would be encouraged
over the next two years, based on conditions on the ground.
This option would allow AMISOM, the Federal Government and relevant
partners to assess and recommend appropriate AMISOM uniformed personnel levels
required to support the electoral cycle until its completion at the end of 2020 or the
beginning of 2021, including any reductions, possibly through the revived joint
planning and coordination mechanism intended to implement the transition plan.
Recommendations on rebalancing military and police activities, including increasing
AMISOM police personnel within the mandated uniformed personnel ceiling, could
also be made through the mechanism, if and as the security situation and operational
demands allow. It should be noted that the handover of AMISOM locations to Somali
authorities should continue even if troop levels are maintained, which would release
AMISOM forces to undertake more mobile operations.
The review notes, however, that avoiding further prescribed reductions may
increase the likelihood of continued insufficient progress on the implementation of
the transition plan and on building Somali security capacity within projected
19-07852

11/14

S/2019/388

timelines. Without mandated reductions, there is a risk that the transition would not
make sufficient progress in the coming years and AMISOM troop reductions after the
elections would not be set along a momentum of transition.
Option 2
Progressive reduction of the Mission’s uniformed personnel ceiling
with timelines
As part of the implementation of the transition plan, and in the light of the
Federal Government’s plans for taking over security responsibility and building
capable Somali security forces in 2019 and 2020, a continuation of the trajectory of
reductions in AMISOM troop numbers that began in December 2017 would maintain
the momentum towards Somali security ownership and leadership. Further mandated
reductions could serve as an impetus for accelerated implemen tation of the national
security architecture, including the generation of security personnel, and for adequate
planning and implementation of transition and other security sector objectives that
would need to be achieved in time for the reductions to take place.
The next reduction in AMISOM uniformed personnel numbers could be
mandated to take place by the end of February 2020. That timing would avoid
affecting voter registration, scheduled to begin in the first quarter of 2020, while also
allowing AMISOM time to plan and carry out operations, secure main supply routes,
collapse or hand over forward operating bases and complete other reconfiguration
tasks in the implementation of its concept of operations and in support of the
transition.
The Federal Government’s proposal and plans to take over 12 forward operating
bases by the end of 2019 are likely to release approximately 2,000 AMISOM troops,
which presents two possibilities for reductions by the end of February 2020. The first
is to reduce the uniformed personnel ceiling by 1,000 troops, following the precedent
of the previous troop reductions and in line with AMISOM plans to create mobile
forces and a quick reaction force with some of the troops made available from the
collapse or handover of forward operating bases and other locations. If, however, the
objectives laid out by the Federal Government and AMISOM are not effectively
planned and achieved, there is a risk that the withdrawal of those troops would result
in exposing civilian populations to Al-Shabaab reprisal attacks or negatively affect
the reconfiguration of AMISOM by preventing the creation of mobile forces.
The second possibility is to reduce the current level of uniformed personnel by
2,000 troops, likely encompassing all of the troops tha t would be made available by
the collapse or handover of forward operating bases, if that occurs on time. While that
reduction could provide an opportunity for accelerated generation of Somali
capabilities to assume security responsibility, it entails cons iderable risks. It would
likely preclude the Mission’s ability for further reconfiguration and would prevent
the creation of mobile forces. If delays in transition plan implementation continue,
AMISOM may be forced to vacate key positions without Somali security forces being
ready to take over, leaving populations in those areas exposed and vulnerable to
Al-Shabaab and increasing the likelihood of forced internal displacement.
Alternatively, AMISOM could continue to hold those key positions, but at the risk of
reducing the implementation of a number of its mandated tasks, potentially negatively
affecting overall security, including for voter registration and elections.
Mission police
In the long term, internal security in Somalia should progressively be come a
police responsibility, especially in population centres. With a view to facilitating the
successful transition of such responsibilities, and considering the critical role that
12/14

19-07852

S/2019/388

Somali and AMISOM police will likely play in securing the 2020/21 elections, an
increase in AMISOM police personnel could also be considered, within the overall
uniformed personnel ceiling and in line with the Security Council ’s request for
AMISOM to reconfigure in favour of police. The review team suggests that the
AMISOM police component could be augmented through the deployment of up to
two additional formed police units of 160 personnel each and up to 67 individual
police officers by 2020. Any increase in AMISOM police numbers would be matched
by a commensurate reduction of AMISOM military personnel.
The above recommendations for AMISOM are intended to cover the period until
the completion of the elections cycle, at the end of 2020 or the beginning of 2021,
although that does not preclude a review of AMISOM and the security transition
before that date, if required. After that period, which should coincide with the
implementation of third phase of the transition plan and the AMISOM concept of
operations, a strategic review should be undertaken to assess the prospects f or a full
handover to Somali security forces.
Observations
I thank the African Union Commission for its strong collaboration with the
United Nations in conducting the 2019 joint review of AMISOM. The active
participation of representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia in the review
is equally commendable and an indication of the country’s commitment to taking full
responsibility for its security. I also thank the European Union, the members of the
Security Council, AMISOM police- and troop-contributing countries and other
international partners for their engagement with the review team. I commend
AMISOM, UNSOM, UNSOS and the United Nations Office to the African Union for
facilitating the joint review exercise and for their continuing efforts to make the
security transition in Somalia a reality. I endorse the recommendations of the joint
review team as outlined above and urge the Council to consider them in a positive
light.
With respect to options for AMISOM uniformed personnel levels, I urg e the
Security Council to make its decision on the basis of the opportunities and risks
outlined above. I concur with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission in
his recommendation to the Peace and Security Council that AMISOM troop numbers
be maintained at this stage, in consideration of the security situation in Somalia and
the delays in implementing the transition plan. Any decision on uniformed personnel
levels should ensure that existing gains are preserved, in particular on the protection
of civilian populations, that electoral security is not compromised and that
humanitarian access is safeguarded. The availability of predictable and sustainable
financing of AMISOM will remain a key factor in determining the troop levels that
AMISOM will be able to sustain after 2020. Avenues for financing AMISOM beyond
that period should continue to be explored jointly with the African Union, and I call
on the international community to extend its support in that regard.
In 2019, Somalia is taking steps to overcome existing internal political
divisions, further advance political, security and economic reforms and regain
momentum for sustained progress. Prospects for the creation of a viable security
sector with the inclusion of regional forces from all federal member states depend in
large part on progress made in political and reconciliation processes at the federal,
state, regional and clan levels. I urge the leaders of Somalia to redouble their efforts
to resume their political dialogue under a common vision for a federal Somali State,
which will translate into sustained and regular cooperation to resolve all outstanding
issues and enable accelerated progress on building a federal security sector in
accordance with the agreed national security architecture.

19-07852

13/14

S/2019/388

The Somali transition plan provides the framework for a holistic, conditions based transition from AMISOM to Somali security responsibility. I am confident of
the Mission’s commitment to supporting the transition and commend the steps it is
taking to reconfigure itself for that purpose. I welcome the conduct of the AMISOM
operational readiness assessment and the development of the strategic concept of
operations and urge the finalization of detailed joint AMISOM and national army
implementation plans. AMISOM efforts to deploy the full police component and a
portion of the civilian component in sector headquarters demonstrates the clear
commitment of the Mission’s engagement in Somalia. I believe that a strong
partnership between the African Union, the Intergo vernmental Authority on
Development and the United Nations, leveraging the strengths of each organization,
can be a potent vehicle for support for the political process in Somalia.
It is important to revive and improve effective joint planning and coordin ation
between AMISOM, Somali authorities and security institutions and relevant
international partners. The successful implementation of the transition plan depends
on progress in generating able, acceptable, accountable and affordable Somali
security forces that should progressively take over from AMISOM. As AMISOM is
reconfigured, whether by vacating positions or handing them over to Somali security
forces, the risk of Al-Shabaab returning to those areas is high, leaving populations
exposed and vulnerable to reprisal. It is critical that the impacts of the reconfiguration
on communities is understood and mitigated. To ensure human security, transition
planning and implementation must be comprehensive, conducted in compliance with
human rights standards and international humanitarian law and encompass
non-military aspects, including through the provision of rule of law, basic services
and the establishment of local administrations. At the same time, the country ’s
international partners on security should strengthen their efforts to coordinate on
supporting training and capacity-building of the Somali security forces, with the aim
of creating federal security institutions, in accordance with the national security
architecture, that are essential to the effort to implement the transition plan supported
by AMISOM. Those efforts are all the more urgent, given the deeply concerning
security trends in Somalia, in particular in Mogadishu.
A key indicator of progress on the country’s path towards becoming a fully
functioning federal State will be its preparations and readiness for one -person,
one-vote elections in 2020/21. I commend the work of the National Independent
Electoral Commission in that regard and look forward to the adoption of the electoral
bill by Parliament, to provide the necessary legislative framework. I encourage the
Federal Government to establish a federal electoral security task force, including all
relevant entities, as soon as possible, to ensure adequate security planning and
readiness, and I call on the international community to provide the additional support
needed to ensure a secure and credible electoral exercise.
I pay tribute to the brave men and women of AMISOM and of the Somali
security forces for their efforts and sacrifices towards a chieving security and peace
for millions of Somalis.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the members
of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

14/14

19-07852
