General Auembly-Twenly-nlnlh Seselon

10

Assembly27 regarding the decisions reached at the second session of the Conference, held at Caracas from
20 June to 29 August 1974,
Noting further the decision of the Conference to
invite national liberation movements recognized by the
Organization of African Unity or by the League of
Arab States operating in their respective regions to
participate in its proceedings as observers without the
right to vote,
Having considered the decision of the Conference,
as contained in the letter of its President to the President of the General Assembly, that its next session
should be held at Geneva from 17 March to. 3 or
10 May 1975, the closing date to depend upon arrangements to be made with the World Health Organization,
Noting with satisfaction the decision of the World
Health Organization, as communicated to the SecretaryGeneral by its Director-General, to postpone the opening of the twenty-eighth World Health Assembly from
6 to 13 May 1975,2~
1. Approves the convening of the next session of
the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of
the Sea for the period from 17 March to 10 May 1975
at Geneva;
2. Decides to authorize the Conference to include
Arabic as an official and working language;
3. Reque~ts the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) Papua New Guinea to attend any future session
of the Conference, if independent, as a participating
State and, while not independent, to attend as an
observer;
( b) The Cook Islands, Netherlands Antilles, Niue,
Surinam and the West lndies Associated States to attend any future session of the Conference as observers
or, tf any of them becomes independent, as a participating State;
(e) The Trust Territory of the Pacific lslands to
attend any future session of the Conference as an
observer;
4. Notes the decision of the Conference to accept
the invitation of the Government of Venezuela to meet
at Caracas at an appropriate date for the purpose of
signing the Final Act and related instruments adopted
by the Conference and authorizes the Secretary-General
to make the necessary arrangements to that end.
2323rd plenary meeting
17 December 1974

Office of Public Information and the unit on information relating to decolonization established in pursuance
of resolution 3164 (XXVIII), to continue to collect,
prepare and disseminate, on a regular basis, basic material, studies and articles relating to the problems of
decolonization, and, to that end, to make provision for
the necessary personnel and facilities;
5. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the discharge of the tasks entrusted to
him under paragraphs 3 an¡l 4 above:
6. Invites ali States, the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
and non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, as well
as other non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the field of decolonization, to undertake
or intensify, in co-operation with the Secretary-General
and within their respective spheres of competence, the
large-scale dissemination of the- information referred to
in paragraph 2 above;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Special Committee on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the effective dissemination of
information on decolonization and, in particular, to
hold consultations, as appropriate, with the Organization of African Unity and the national liberation
movements concerned, as well as with the non-governmental organizations having a special interest in the
field of decolonization;

9. Further requests the Special Committee to follow the implementation of the present resolution and
report thereon to the General Assembly at its thirtieth
session.
2321 st plenary meeting
16 December 1974
3334 (XXIX). Third United Nations Conference
on the Law of the Sea

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3067 (XXVIII) of 16 November 1973,
Noting the letter dated 29 August 1974 from the
President of the Third United Nations Conference on
the Law of the Sea to the President of the General

•
Other

21 /bid., Twe11ty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 26,
document A/9721.
2 ~ /bid., document A/9721/ Add.l.

•

•

deci,ion,

Credentials of representatives to the twenly-ninth session
of the General Assembly 29
(ltem 3)

At its 2281st plenary meeting, on 12 November 1974, the General Assembly,
after considering the letter dated 31 October 197 4 from the President of the
Security Council concerning the relationship between the United Nations and
20 See resolutions 3206 (XXIX) and 3207 (XXIX).
