S/PV.7577

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7577th meeting

Friday, 11 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Baublys
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-41992 (E)
*1541992*

S/PV.7577

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

the privilege of meeting representatives of all of Libya’s
neighbouring countries, as well as to Egypt, France,
Italy, Qatar, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates.

The situation in Libya
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya, to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Mr. Kobler,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Tunis.
The Security Council will now
consideration of its item on the agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, and Ambassador
Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent Representative of
Malaysia, in his capacity as the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.
Mr. Kobler: First of all, let me congratulate
the United States on taking up the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of December. I wish to
thank you, Madam, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Council so soon following my appointment
as Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Libya.
There have been important developments with
respect to the Libyan political dialogue process
since my predecessor last briefed the Council on
5 November (see S/PV.7550). Since assuming my duties
approximately three weeks ago, I have endeavoured to
ensure a seamless transition from my predecessor and
continuity in the Libyan political dialogue process. I
am fortunate to have met, in such a short period, a wide
array of political leaders, civil society representatives,
tribal elders, as well as women and youth leaders. I have
also met with the respective leaderships of the House
of Representatives in Tobruk and the General National
Congress in Tripoli. I have also had the opportunity
to hold extensive consultations with countries in the
region and beyond. I travelled to Algeria, where I had

2/6

11/12/2015

I am grateful for the warm welcome I have received
from all, inside and outside Libya, and for their
invaluable insights into the complexities of the Libyan
political and security landscapes. In all those countries,
there is a growing sense of alarm at the prospect
of a spillover of the terrorist threat from Libya into
neighbouring countries. Today, along with the Libyan
dialogue participants, I met with the President of
Tunisia, who also expressed his deep concern regarding
the risk of Daesh rapidly consolidating its influence
within Libya and the danger it poses to Tunisia and the
wider region.
I have no illusion about the difficult realities that
confront us in Libya. The two institutions at the centre
of the political conflict in Libya are beginning to show
dangerous signs of internal fragmentation. The military
conflict, particularly in Benghazi, continues to exact a
heavy toll on the civilian population, adding further to
the existing humanitarian situation. Across the country,
2.4 million people — of whom 435,000 are estimated to
be internally displaced, in addition to several hundreds
of thousands of refugees and migrants — are in
desperate need of humanitarian assistance. Basic items
of daily use and necessary medications have become
scarce in many hospitals. Criminality and lawlessness
have reached endemic levels in the south. Extremists
and terrorist groups continue to expand their spheres
of influence. Decreasing oil revenues and rapidly
depleting financial resources are accelerating Libya’s
economic decline. But in the face of all that, Libyans
are overwhelmingly united on one key point: Libya
cannot, and should not, wait any longer for peace to
come.
In the face of the continued inability of the House
of Representatives and the General National Congress
to move forward with the formal endorsement of the
outcomes of the Libyan political dialogue, I convened
a new round of Libyan political dialogue to discuss the
way forward. The two days of deliberations in Tunis,
which concluded earlier today, culminated in the
agreement on a number of key points.
First, a political settlement should be achieved on
the basis of the Libyan political agreement negotiated
within the framework of political dialogue facilitated
by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.

15-41992

11/12/2015

The situation in Libya

Secondly, notwithstanding the legitimate concerns
of some of the parties vis-à-vis elements of the
agreement, there would be no reopening of the text.
Thirdly, there was an agreement on the need to move
forward with the immediate endorsement and signing
of a Libyan political agreement. The participants in the
political dialogue, some 40 courageous men and women
who take considerable risks to put the interest of Libya
above their personal interest, decided to publicly
announce 16 December as a target date for the signing
of an agreement.
Fourthly, there was a unanimous call on all
political and security stakeholders to create a conducive
environment to enable a future Government of national
accord to assume its responsibilities in the Libyan
capital without threat or intimidation. All underlined
the need for collective agreement on the necessary
security arrangements to facilitate that.
In that regard, I wish to take this opportunity to
call directly on the leadership of the General National
Congress to allow me and my colleagues to land our
airplanes in Tripoli and in other cities in Libya to freely
interact with whomever we deem necessary. We can
only fulfil our mandate if we have free access to all
people responsible for security, particularly in Tripoli.
Critically, the participants in the political dialogue
highlighted the urgency — the time factor. Libya is in a
race against time. Its very social fabric, national unity
and territorial integrity are directly endangered by the
forces of extremism and terrorism, the likes of Daesh,
which are actively consolidating and seeking to extend
their influence beyond areas under their immediate
control. Many dialogue participants referred to the
imminent danger of Daesh expansion.
In thinking over their options, the plight of
Libya’s civilian population featured prominently in the
deliberations of Libyan political dialogue participants
today. Yesterday, the world marked the International
Human Rights Day. But for many in Libya, yesterday
marked yet another day of chaos, fear and hardship.
Libya’s civilian population, including children, bears
the brunt of gross human rights violations. Many
civilians continue to be victims of arbitrary killings
and violent attacks. Much of Benghazi, the cradle of the
17 February revolution, is today a wasteland. Hundreds
of thousands of its inhabitants have had to flee their
homes. The city’s infrastructure and vital facilities lie
in ruin.

S/PV.7577

The past two days of deliberations, which in
part were attended by Tunis-based Ambassadors and
Libyan envoys from Egypt, Italy and the United States
who travelled to Tunis, revealed that Libyans expect
the Council’s support and the support of the wider
international community. Such support is indispensable
to help them forge peace through unity. In that regard,
the forthcoming high-level ministerial conference, to
be hosted in Rome by Italy and the United States, will
provide an opportunity for the international community
to speak with a strong and united voice in support of
the Libyan political agreement. It is with the Rome
conference in mind that I also wish to convey, on behalf
of the Libyan dialogue participants, the following four
key points.
First, there is the hope that the Council will
unequivocally support the outcomes of the Libyan
political dialogue and the Libyan political agreement.
That would send a clear message to all those whose
narrow agendas continue to stand in the way of peace.
Secondly, every effort must be made to ensure that
technical support to the future Libyan Government of
national accord is visible, tangible and sustainable in
order to ensure that it can deliver quickly.
Thirdly, concerted efforts will need to be exerted
to address the humanitarian situation and the terrible
plight endured by the civilian population.
Fourthly, I cannot overstate the threat posed by
Daesh. Mobilizing international support to assist
Libyan authorities to take decisive measures to combat,
contain and eliminate the imminent danger is a must.
Libyans have a unique opportunity before them.
The time has come to make peace. It is unlikely that
there will be other opportunities without inflicting
further suffering and hardship on the Libyan people.
I wish to take this opportunity to assure all Libyans
that the door will always remain open for those who
wish to join the road to peace. Once the agreement is
signed, we will immediately assist in broadening the
basis of support for the new Government, which should
ultimately be based in Tripoli. Through engagement
with the militias, political parties, tribal elders and civil
society, we will advocate for acceptance of the Libyan
political agreement.
I appeal to the sense of patriotism and statesmanship
of Libya’s leaders to give consideration to Libya’s
higher national interests and the long-term welfare of

15-419923/6

S/PV.7577

The situation in Libya

the Libyan people. Their support to the Libyan political
agreement will be the first step on Libya’s road to
peace, security and prosperity.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ibrahim.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): In accordance with
sub-paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of
26 February 2011, I have the honour to report on the
work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The report covers
the period from 15 July to 10 December, during which
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations. At the outset, I would like to brief
the Council on the main points of the interim report
of the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution 2213
(2015), which the Panel submitted to the Council on
2 September.
In the light of the broadened sanctions designation
criteria outlined in resolutions 2174 (2014) and 2213
(2015), the Panel devoted a considerable section of
the report to describing political and security events
and highlighted acts that, in its assessment, fell under
those criteria. While the Panel identified individuals
and groups that consistently refused to engage in
negotiations and put pressure on those wanting to
participate, it also noted that it remained difficult to
distinguish between negotiating tactics and the actions
of deliberate spoilers.
The Panel elaborated on the security and
humanitarian situation in the country during the
reporting period, including on the expansion of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya. The Panel
perceived a continued disregard for the arms embargo
and an increased demand for military materiel in Libya.
It concluded that recent transfers of arms to Libya had
impacted the political transition as well as the security
situation in both the country and the region. Moreover,
the proliferation of arms from Libya to its neighbours
and the wider region had continued, including to
terrorist groups.
The Panel found that the current organization of
Libya’s financial system was no longer tenable and
prevented an effective response to the humanitarian
needs in the country. The Panel highlighted that the
Central Bank of Libya was disbursing salaries to
members of armed groups, and elaborated further on
its findings in that regard. As other sources for income

4/6

11/12/2015

of armed groups, the Panel identified the smuggling of
migrants, oil derivatives and subsidized goods, as well
as profits from foreign currency exchange schemes and
potential gold mining activities.
The Panel noted that the functionality of the
reporting mechanism concerning attempts to illicitly
export crude oil from Libya, introduced by resolution
2146 (2014), suffered from a lack of capacity in the
Libyan Government and the duplication of oil export
structures.
The assets freeze and travel ban sections of the
Panel’s report focused on listed individuals, in the
absence of any new sanctions designations. Concerning
the travel ban, the Panel reported that an individual
inscribed on the Committee’s sanctions list had
travelled without the prior approval of the Committee.
The Panel presented a total of 16 recommendations,
of which 5 were directed at the Security Council,
6 at the Committee, 3 at Member States and 2 at the
Government of Libya.
On 21 September, the Committee discussed the
interim report and its recommendations. The Panel’s
report was generally well received. The main points
emerging in the discussion were concerns about
ongoing armed clashes, the presence of terrorist
groups in Libya, arms flows into and out of Libya,
the financing of armed groups and illicit exports of
crude oil. The Committee agreed to follow up on seven
recommendations, including through a note verbale
to all Member States covering issues relating to the
designation criteria and the arms embargo.
Let me now touch briefly on the activities of the
Committee during the reporting period. On 22 July, the
Committee received a letter from the Panel of Experts
regarding the above-mentioned violation of the travel
ban. In that context, the Committee sent letters to the
two Member States concenred on 5 August.
On 4 September, the Committee received a
notification under sub-paragraph 13 (b) of resolution
2009 (2011) in relation to the arms embargo, on which no
negative decision was taken. However, the Committee
requested additional information from the notifying
Member State.
On 8 October, the Committee received a letter
from the Permanent Representative of Libya, informing
the Committee about a company that was apparently

15-41992

11/12/2015

The situation in Libya

attempting to access frozen funds in a Member State
using forged documentation.
On 22 October, the Committee dispatched a note
verbale to all Member States drawing their attention to
three recommendations made by the Panel of Experts.
In that context, the Committee encouraged Member
States to share any information on attacks against
foreign missions and the financing of armed groups
by illicit exploitation of natural resources, as well as
to provide certain air traffic control data to the Panel,
upon request and as appropriate. Subsequently, the
Committee received a report from a Member State
containing information on an attack on its diplomatic
mission.
On 20 November, the Committee approved a travel
ban exemption request under sub-paragraph 16 (a) of
resolution 1970 (2011) for humanitarian reasons.
On 22 November, the Committee received a
letter from the Panel of Experts in relation to the
implementation of resolution 2146 (2014) and the
Libyan oil export and financial infrastructure.
On 2 December, the Committee received a request
for guidance on the arms embargo as it relates to the
seizures of embargoed materiel.
During the reporting period, a member of the
Committee placed on hold a draft implementation
assistance notice on the assets freeze measure, which
the Committee had been considering in follow-up to a
proposal by the Panel of Experts in its interim report
submitted on 4 September 2014, pursuant to resolution
2144 (2014).
Also during the reporting period, the Committee
received two requests for delisting, one through the
focal point for delisting and another through a Member
State, both on behalf of individuals whose names
are inscribed on the Committee’s sanctions list. The
Committee did not accede to the request submitted
through the focal point, and requested additional
information from the submitting Member State on the
second request.
Furthermore, during the reporting period the
Committee received one implementation report from a
Member State.
The President: I thank Ambassador Ibrahim for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Libya.

S/PV.7577

Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, and
your delegation on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would also like to
thank Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011). I also thank Mr. Kobler for
his important briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment to the post of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya. I wish him every success in
his functions and assure him and his team of our full
support to ensure peace and security in Libya and to
create a Government of national accord that can enable
Libyans to tackle the challenges threatening their
country and the future of all Libyans.
The efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) have paved the way as much as
possible for a rapprochement of the different factions in
Libya. They also led to the political agreement signed
by the majority of parties in July. The agreement enjoys
broad popular support throughout Libya and has been
approved by a majority of the members of the House
of Representatives and the General National Congress.
It will now to be submitted to vote by the two parties.
While the negotiations that took place were sufficient,
due to the stubbornness of certain positions as well as
to certain threats, they did not lead to consensus when
the agreement was signed five months ago.
Hundreds of thousands of Libyan refugees are
subjected to humiliation far from their homes. There are
also just as many internally displaced persons in Libya,
their homes destroyed. Millions of people throughout
the country fear for their lives and their property. It is
no longer morally acceptable to leave the future of the
Libyan people in the hands of those who seek to take
advantage of their positions, functions and weapons in
order to perpetrate the suffering of the Libyan people
both in and outside Libya. It is no longer acceptable
to remain passive before those who continue to protect
their own interests and who attempt to incite hatred and
resentment following the agreement by putting forth
new illusory proposals that complicate the political
situation with the unique goal of sabotaging the results
of the dialogue. Those individuals are attempting to
encourage some citizens to undermine the efforts
of the United Nations. The absurd attempts to create
divisions carried out by some individuals in order to

15-419925/6

S/PV.7577

The situation in Libya

sabotage the agreement will simply lead to ongoing
bloodletting among brothers, a weakening of the army
and a strengthening of Daesh’s position and its spread
in neighbouring countries, in Europe and in other
countries of the world.
The time has come to sign the Skhirat agreement.
We hope that the agreement will be signed within the
established time frame, namely, by 16 December. The
Libyan people hope that the Security Council will
support the implementation of the agreement and act as
guarantor. We hope that the Council will authorize all
necessary measures to be taken against those would act
as spoilers of the agreement or threaten the Government
of national unity and prevent it from doing its work in
Tripoli.
We warmly welcome the meeting to be held in
Rome two days from now. We hope that it will offer the
international community the opportunity to endorse
the results of the Skhirat dialogue and that it will put an
end to the tactic of sabotaging the process. It should be a
moment to support the aspirations of the Libyan people
to peace, security, stability and economic recovery
under the guidance of a Government representing
all citizens in the framework of transparency and
accountability.
I take this opportunity to assure the Security
Council that no Libyan Government can be effective if
armed groups remain in Tripoli. The Libyan State can
hardly endure if the Government is not headquartered
in the capital, which can be secured only when
armed groups return to their homes and when those
from Tripoli itself are disarmed and their members
integrated into Libyan State institutions, pursuant to
relevant legislation and their own resolve. There are
some 10,000 police officers in Tripoli who are fully
capable of ensuring security in the capital if they are
equipped with small arms and light weapons and enjoy
the support of the international community. They are
entirely ready and able to shoulder their responsibility
to protect the Government of national unity.

11/12/2015

Combatting terrorism is the responsibility of
all Libyans — even more so than it is that of the
international community. Terrorism in Libya is no
longer the exclusive fruit of extremism arising from
an erroneous interpretation of religion. Terrorism is
now a lucrative job that attracts criminals, particularly
from neighbouring countries. There are thousands of
unemployed in Tunisia and Egypt who would seek
to enter Libya illegally to join Daesh and its sleeper
cells in Libya in exchange for food and housing, and
hope to be very well remunerated if Daesh is able to
seize the productive oil fields. Libyan experts believe
that this could happen next summer if a power-sharing
agreement cannot be reached in Libya.
The delay in the formation of a Government
of national unity cannot serve as a pretext for the
international community to fail to support the Libyan
army. Indeed, the international community should
do its utmost to ensure that all those who believe in
democracy can join the army. Armies can win wars
only if they have a strong, supportive Government
behind them. They cannot combat terrorism without
stable and sufficient financial resources and a reliable
and legal source of weapons and munitions. Armies
can be effective only if they are disciplined and subject
to military and civilian law, and if they are deployed
throughout the country. The army must protect all
borders and be respected by the civilian population.
These are the aspirations of the Libyan people. We hope
that the international community will help us to meet
them as soon as possible.
I have nothing to add to what I have said with respect
to the sanctions Committee. I should like to reaffirm
nonetheless that we must strengthen cooperation and
information exchanges between the Committee and the
Libyan Mission to the United Nations.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

6/6

15-41992
