S/2016/706

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 August 2016
Original: English

Thirty-second progress report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Liberia
I. Introduction
1.
By its resolution 2239 (2015), the Security Council extended the mandate of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) until 30 September 2016 and
requested me to keep it informed of the situation in Liberia and the implementation
of that resolution. The present report provides an update on major developments
since my report of 22 February (S/2016/169), including the assumption by the
Government of Liberia of its security responsibilities from UNMIL on 30 June, as
well as my recommendation for the extension of the Mission’s mandate.

II. Major developments
A.

Political situation
2.
During the reporting period, considerable attention was focused on the
assumption by the Government of Liberia of its security responsibilities from
UNMIL, which was achieved by the 30 June deadline established by the Security
Council in resolution 2190 (2014) and reaffirmed in subsequent resolutions.
Political discourse was also dominated by the upcoming 2017 elections and the
fallout from corruption charges levelled against senior officials by the international
non-governmental organization Global Witness, as well as the worsening economic
situation in the country.
3.
In the period leading up to the conclusion of the security transition, there was
considerable public anxiety about the ability of the security forces to protect the
population and to maintain stability, with reassurances from the Government about
the readiness of national security agencies to perform the tasks that UNMIL had
previously been undertaking. Given the public distrust of the Government, a group
of political and civil society actors threatened to stage mass demonstrations in
Monrovia in early March to express their lack of confidence in the capacity of the
Liberian institutions to provide security throughout the country. They called off
their planned rally, however, at the request of my Special Representative for Liberia
and, instead, on 11 March, presented him with a petition address ed to the Security
Council, which called for a continued UNMIL presence beyond the elections to be
held in October 2017. Against the backdrop of a politically tense environment,

16-13484 (E)

170816

*1613484*

S/2016/706

fomented largely by widespread suspicion over the causes of certain high-profile
deaths, this development successfully averted the potential for street violence,
which has often accompanied such demonstrations. To raise confidence and
awareness among the population about its mandate and transition -related activities,
UNMIL continued to hold town hall meetings throughout the country, deployed a
“peace caravan” comprising traditional communicators and artists to 11 of the
15 counties and dedicated airtime for government officials to convey confidence building messages about progress in building national security capacity on UNMIL
Radio, which broadcasts around the clock in all counties. During a ceremony held
on 1 July to mark the assumption of security responsibilities by the Government, the
President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, and my Special Representative
underscored the fact that the United Nations would continue to support the
consolidation of peace in Liberia.
4.
During the reporting period, there were several changes in the President’s
cabinet. In April, the former Minister of Justice, Benedict Sannoh, resigned after
tenure of just over a year for reasons that were not made public. In addition, the
Minister of Finance and Development Planning, Amarah Konneh, resigned to take
up a position with the World Bank. The ministers were replaced by former River
Gee County Senator Frederick Cherue and former Deputy Governor of the Central
Bank of Liberia Boima Kamara, respectively. Both appointments were confirmed by
the Senate and the incumbents have assumed their positions.
5.
On 11 May, Global Witness published a report entitled “The Deceivers”, which
detailed allegations of bribery and other corrupt acts, implicating several persons,
including senior Liberian officials and members of the ruling Unity Party. On
12 May, the President requested a special presidential task force, which was already
established to follow up on other corruption cases, to investigate the charges. The
then Chair of the Unity Party, Senator Varney Sherman, and the Speaker of the
House of Representatives, Alex Tyler, formerly a senior Unity Party official, were
indicted on 24 May on charges of bribery, criminal conspiracy, economic sabotage,
criminal soliciting and criminal facilitation. On 25 May, Mr. Sherman was arrested
and Mr. Tyler appeared in court under police escort. Both were released on bail but
charged in court on the same day. The arrests were met with criticism from some
legislators who questioned the authority of the Executive to undertake such
investigations. The charges also created divisions within the Legislature, with some
legislators calling for the recusal of the Speaker, leading to a series of altercations
within the House of Representatives. The Speaker, in turn, accused the President of
using the charges to attempt to remove him from office. Meanwhile, divisions
within the ruling party deepened, with Mr. Sherman and his supporters lobbying
against the President. During the party’s convention, held from 7 to 9 July, the Vice President of Liberia, Joseph Boakai, was elected uncontested as t he party’s standard
bearer, with the support of the President. The election of serving ministers into the
party’s executive committee drew criticism from political parties and civil society,
however, who pointed to the code of conduct for public officials, which prohibits
Government employees appointed by the President from engaging in, or using
government resources for, partisan political activities.
6.
On 17 June, the National Elections Commission published the schedule for the
2017 presidential and legislative elections, including the launch of civic education
activities in January 2017, voter registration in February 2017 and the start of
official campaigning on 8 August 2017. In June, a decision was reached, through a

2/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

process involving the Government, the Commission, the donor community and the
United Nations, to adopt an optical mark recognition system for voter registration,
rather than a biometric one, given that it would reduce costs and could be achieved
in a relatively compressed time frame. Opposition parties expressed concern about
possible fraud resulting from the use of the optical mark system.
7.
Since my previous report, Alexander Cummings of the opposition party
Alternative National Congress declared his intention to run for president, and the
Unity Party formally nominated Mr. Boakai as its candidate. The number of political
parties has increased to 23, following the registration in May of two new parties, the
Movement for Democracy and Reconstruction and Vision for Liberia
Transformation. The registration of more than 20 additional political parties is
pending. My Special Representative engaged regularly with political parties and
other stakeholders, encouraging political party dialogue, consultation, information sharing and coordination through the renewed framework of the Inter-Party
Consultative Committee organized by the National Elections Commission.
8.
On 17 March, a House of Representatives committee recommended that 6 of
the 25 constitutional reform propositions, supported and submit ted by the President
on 13 August 2015, be taken forward to a referendum. On 26 April, a Senate
committee requested that the President provide formulations on the six proposed
amendments, which it had yet to receive as at 1 August. Meanwhile, the debate on
proposition 24, which seeks to declare Liberia a nation founded on Christian
principles, continued to impede progress on the constitutional review process. On
5 March, the National Muslim Council of Liberia temporarily suspended its
membership in the Inter-Religious Council of Liberia, in protest of what it
perceived as support for the proposal by Christian community leaders, including the
Pentecostal bloc of the Liberian Council of Churches whose position was initially
unclear. My Special Representative remained extensively engaged with leaders of
various religious groups in both communities and other stakeholders with a view to
de-escalating the public rhetoric and encouraging constructive dialogue. In May, the
Independent National Commission on Human Rights submitted a petition against
the provision, which, in its assessment, would undermine unity and peace. The
Parliament of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) also
called upon Liberia to reconsider the petition in the light of the like ly consequence
that it would entrench religious divides. On 2 and 3 May, the Liberian Council of
Churches and the Inter-Religious Council of Liberia, respectively, issued statements
expressing their opposition to the proposition, which was followed by the resumed
participation of the National Muslim Council of Liberia in the Inter -Religious
Council of Liberia. On 6 July, the Senate Judiciary Committee forwarded its report
on the constitutional review process to the Senate. The report organized the
propositions into eight categories, with a stand-alone category for the controversial
proposition 24. Dates for the public hearings in the Senate on the propositions have
yet to be determined. In that regard, my Special Representative has been engaging
with the leadership of the Legislature to decide on the specific provisions to be
carried forward.
9.
On 17 May, the President submitted a revised budget for the 2016/17 fiscal
year in the amount of $556 million to the Legislature. The proposed budget
represents a reduction of 11 per cent compared with 2015/16, owing to austerity
measures instituted by the Government in the light of the global decline in the
prices of Liberia’s export commodities. Those measures include an increase in the

16-13484

3/21

S/2016/706

local currency portion of salaries and allowances paid to public employees to reduce
foreign currency spending.

B.

National reconciliation, political reforms and governance
10. No progress was made during the reporting period in advancing critical
pending reform legislation, including with respect to land rights, decentralization
and governance. There continued to be delays in advancing national reconciliation,
with the Palava Hut initiative stalled. County peace committees, the local -level
conflict management mechanism, continued to face funding challenges. Following
the directive from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, only three committees, in Grand
Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh and Lofa Counties, began to receive budgetary support
from their respective county development funds.
11. UNMIL, through its quick-impact projects, provided support for the work of
the Peace Ambassador, William Tolbert III, including the consultations held on
8 June with eminent persons on peacebuilding priorities and potential triggers for
social unrest leading up to the 2017 elections. On 11 May, the Peace Ambassador
organized remembrance ceremonies, with the participation of Christian and Muslim
young people, to commemorate the victims of the civil conflict, focusing on youth
participation in order to highlight the importance of maintaining social cohesion.
12. Following the expiration of the mandate of the Land Commission in January,
the President established an interim land taskforce on 18 March to facilitate the
passage of the land authority bill submitted to the Legislature in 2014 and to
maintain engagement with relevant partners, donors and other stakeholders in the
land sector. On 12 April, the Senate approved the land authority bill, which
remained pending as at 1 August, awaiting the concurrence of the House of
Representatives. On 28 June, representatives of 18 civil society organizations
published a statement warning that the continued failure to formalize customary
rights to land within the law could jeopardize peace and security and potentially fuel
a backslide into conflict.
13. Between 1 February and 1 August, the Government established county service
centres in three counties, as part of the implementation of its deconcentration
support plan, which is linked to the decentralization reform process. The centres,
which are now functioning in a total of four counties, provide a range of public and
legal services, including the issuance of birth certificates, business and driver’s
licenses and deeds, previously only available in Monrovia. The Governmen t has
publically committed to establishing service centres in all 15 counties by the end of
the term of the current administration in January 2018.
14. On 19 April, the Peacebuilding Commission and the Government endorsed a
revised statement of mutual commitments, in which the Government committed to
advancing security sector reform, strengthening the rule of law, promoting national
reconciliation, protecting human rights and working towards holding peaceful and
inclusive elections in 2017. For its part, the Peacebuilding Commission committed
to supporting those peacebuilding efforts by advocating for the necessary resources.
In June, a delegation led by the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission, Macharia
Kamau, visited Liberia and other countries in the region to discuss support for
peacebuilding priorities, taking into account the impact of the Ebola outbreak.

4/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

15. During the period under review, the General Auditing Commission completed
the audit of the procurement practices of the Ministry of Public Works with regard
to the construction of roads and bridges during the period from 1 July 2010 to
30 June 2013 and the management by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the grants
received from the Government of Japan in 2008. In both cases, the Commission
uncovered significant improprieties, including breaches of procurement and public
financial management laws. The audit reports are now before the Legislature, and a
task force has been charged with investigating and proposing appropriate action for
allegations of current and past Commission reports. The same task force is currently
mandated to investigate the bribery allegations contained in the Global Witness
report.
16. On 23 February, the former Minister of Commerce and Industry, Miatta
Beyslow, a director in the Ministry, the former managing director of the Liberia
Petroleum Refining Company, Nelson Williams, and a deputy managing director for
operations were indicted on charges of misapplication of entrusted property,
criminal conspiracy, criminal facilitation and violation of the public procurement
and concessions procedures and processes, resulting in Government losses of more
than $13 million between 2013 and 2015. Twelve former and current government
officials are being prosecuted on related criminal charges, whereas charges against
Ms. Beyslow were dropped on 20 July 2016.

C.

Security situation
17. The security situation remained generally stable, with limited improvements
recorded. Major challenges included intermittent public order concerns involving
allegations of poor governance and corruption, tensions in the concession areas,
suspicion over certain deaths and ritual killings and divisions along religious lines.
18. Perceptions of discrimination, exclusion and marginalization along ethnic or
religious lines, underpinned by land disputes and historic resentments, continued to
pose risks for tensions turning into violent confrontations. During the period under
review, concession-related labour and land disputes, some of which turned violent,
were the primary causes of tensions. On 1 April, approximately 700 aggrieved
workers of the Cocopa rubber plantation in Nimba County staged a protest to
demand several months of salary arrears, after which they received severance
packages. UNMIL contributed to the facilitation of the settlement. On 5 April,
workers of Sime Darby palm plantation near Tubmanburg in Bomi County
demonstrated in protest of the disappearance of a young woman, who was suspected
to have been the victim of ritual killing but was later found alive. The Police
Support Unit of the Liberia National Police deployed to the scene and arrested tw o
alleged organizers, who were later released. On 15 June, an intervention by the civil
society organization Concession Working Group helped to de -escalate a potentially
violent land dispute between the Aureus Mining Company and affected communities
in Grand Cape Mount County.
19. On 9 May, approximately 150 inhabitants of illegally built structures on the
University of Liberia’s Fendell campus protested against an eviction and demolition
exercise conducted by the Ministry of Public Works, temporarily block ing the
Monrovia-Kakata highway.

16-13484

5/21

S/2016/706

D.

Regional issues
20. On 4 June, Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf became the first woman elected Chair of
ECOWAS. In her acceptance speech, she committed to prioritizing the fight against
terrorism in West Africa, in collaboration with regional governments and the
international community. She also pledged to focus on agricultural development in
the region, with the aim of eradicating poverty and ensuring food security.
21. On 6 May, the Government organized a special session on the threat of
terrorism in West Africa, bringing together security experts with representatives
from ECOWAS member States to devise strategies for preventing and combating
terrorism in the region, including through greater collaboration among West African
nations. On 16 June, the President signed an executive order approving the legal
framework for, and enabling the establishment of, a national early warning and
response mechanism coordination centre, in line with Liberia’s obligations as an
ECOWAS member State. The President of the Commission of ECOWAS, Marcel de
Souza, and the President of Liberia met on 17 June to discuss cooperation between
Liberia and the regional organization on security and development issues. On
21 June, the Vice-President launched the ECOWAS national early warning and rapid
response mechanism in Liberia and constituted its board.
22. UNMIL and the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
continued to support cooperation between their respective host Governments,
including the elaboration of joint operational guidance for future security operations
to be conducted by the two national armies, as agreed during a quadripartite security
meeting held in March in Grand Bassam, Côte d’Ivoire. From 11 to 13 May,
UNMIL and UNOCI provided logistical support to technical and ministerial
meetings of the Mano River Union on peace and security held in Côte d’Ivoire. On
7 June, the Mano River Union held the first meeting of its joint border security and
confidence-building unit since the Ebola outbreak in Toulepleu, Côte d’Ivoire,
which brought together officials of both Governments, including from security
agencies, and representatives of border communities and the United Nations to
discuss common cross-border challenges. The meetings concluded with an
agreement on a draft subregional counter-terrorism framework and a memorandum
of understanding on maritime security, to be finalized and adopted by the respective
ministers of defence.
23. On 9 March, a joint team comprising Armed Forces of Liberia and Forestry
Development Authority personnel apprehended 20 nationals of Burkina Faso and
Côte d’Ivoire for illegal farming activities in Tarsala village in Grand Gedeh
County, near the Tempo border crossing point. The arrested persons were handed
over to the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, which subsequently
transferred them to the national police. They remain detained in Zwedru prison
where they are currently awaiting trial. On 28 March, Guinean authorities reported
the seizure in Macenta, Guinea, near the Guinea-Liberia border, of a motorcycle
transporting a cache of weapons, including rockets, rocket launchers and rifles. The
authorities are investigating the incident to determine the origin and intended
destination of the weapons. On 15 June, a national of Burkina Faso was arrested at a
checkpoint in Grand Gedeh County for allegedly being in possession of dynamite
intended for use in an illicit goldmine.

6/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

E.

Humanitarian situation
24. As at 1 August, Liberia was hosting 20,049 registered Ivoirian refugees,
including 15,300 in refugee camps and 4,700 in host communities. Although the
border with Côte d’Ivoire remained closed at the insistence of the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire, as a precautionary measure against the Ebola virus disease,
humanitarian corridors remained open for the repatriation of Ivorian refugees. Since
the resumption of voluntary repatriation operations in December 2015, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has facilitated the
return to Côte d’Ivoire of 18,124 refugees. UNHCR remains on track to reach its
target of facilitating the repatriation of 25,000 refugees in 2016, but the rate of
returns has decreased since peaking at 4,094 in March. This is attributed to the
refugees’ concerns about security and access to land and other property in areas of
return, as well as the onset of the rainy season. The refugees’ concerns about
conditions in areas of return were conveyed to a delegation from the Government of
Côte d’Ivoire, led by the Minister of Solidarity, Social Cohesion and Compensation,
which visited the three camps hosting Ivorian refugees in May.
25. On 22 March, Liberia temporarily closed its border with Guinea, following an
outbreak of the Ebola virus disease in the Nzérékoré reg ion of Guinea. On 31 March
in Monrovia, a woman and her two children tested positive for Ebola, after
reportedly entering the country through an unofficial border -crossing point with
Guinea. UNMIL engaged its good offices to encourage the reopening of the border
in order to reduce unofficial crossings, while also strengthening controls at official
checkpoints. The border was reopened after five days, with enhanced joint
surveillance at the border. The incident management system, which was activated on
31 March, successfully contained the virus to the three originally infected persons.
As part of the outbreak response, the infected persons and those who had been in
contact with them received an experimental Ebola vaccine but, these efforts
notwithstanding, the mother of the two children died from the virus. On 9 June, the
World Health Organization declared Liberia Ebola-free for the fourth time. Infection
prevention and control standards continued to be closely monitored, while epidemic
response plans were updated to take into account lessons learned from the most
recent outbreak.
26. On 9 May, the Legislature passed a disaster management bill, providing for the
establishment of a national agency that would be the institution responsible for
disaster preparedness, early warning and response. Given that the bill has not yet
been formally enacted, no allocations were provided for the agency in the proposed
2016/17 national budget. The United Nations and ECOWAS continued to support
the Ministry of Internal Affairs, including in strengthening the capacity of county
disaster management committees, training in the mapping of natural hazards and
formulating disaster response plans.

F.

Human rights situation
27. The human rights situation continued to be characterized by sexual and
gender-based violence, harmful traditional practices, challenges to freedom of
speech and weak institutional capacity to promote and protect human rights. No
progress was witnessed with respect to implementing the recommendations of the

16-13484

7/21

S/2016/706

Truth and Reconciliation Commission, including those aimed at addressing
impunity for war or economic crimes.
28. During the reporting period, UNMIL documented 80 reported cases of rape. Of
those, 70 survivors were girls, 8 were women and 2 were boys. The actual incidence
of rape is assessed as higher. Capacity constraints within the criminal justice system
continued to hinder efforts to bring perpetrators to justice. Harmful traditional
practices continued to be reported, and often the perpetrators were no t prosecuted.
Consideration of a domestic violence bill submitted to the Legislature in September
2015 stalled owing to disagreements about provisions that would criminalize female
genital mutilation, a commitment made by the Government during the universa l
periodic review of the Human Rights Council on 25 September 2015. The bill was
passed in the House of Representatives on 21 July, after the removal of the
provisions criminalizing female genital mutilation. Consequently, the Independent
National Commission on Human Rights and the Ministry of Justice are advocating
for separate legislation to criminalize female genital mutilation. On 1 March, the
Government and the United Nations launched a joint programme on the prevention
and response to sexual and gender-based violence and harmful traditional practices,
which will require donor support for its effective implementation.
29. Other harmful traditional practices, including forced initiation into secret
societies and trial by ordeal and other punishments for those accused of witchcraft,
continued to be reported, and the perpetrators of such practices are rarely held
accountable. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, with support from UNMIL, continued
to conduct training aimed at sensitizing traditional leaders abo ut the human rights
violations inherent in some traditional practices.
30. In June, the Government dropped the criminal libel and sedition charges
against Vanderlark Patricks, a prominent civil society activist, and Simeon Freeman,
a leading member of the opposition party Movement for Progressive Change, who
alleged that the Government had been complicit in the death, under unclear
circumstances, of a former executive of a national energy company. My Special
Representative continued to advocate for the rep eal of legislation that infringes the
right to freedom of expression and criminalizes free speech, in violation of the
Constitution of Liberia and its international treaty commitments.
31. In April, the final two commissioners were appointed to the Indepen dent
National Commission on Human Rights. Some civil society organizations, however,
accused the President of violating the law, given that one of the appointees was
reportedly not included on the initial list of nominees. Meanwhile, the Commission
developed its complaints procedures which, once approved, should improve its
operations.
32. Following the standing invitation extended by the Government to special
procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council in September 2015,
Liberia engaged with the Special Rapporteur on the right to education and the
Independent Expert on the enjoyment of human rights by persons with albinism. In
May, the Government of Liberia submitted its common core document, containing
general information common to all treaties to which it is a party. This constitutes an
important step towards meeting its reporting obligations.

8/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

G.

Economic situation
33. The global decline in commodity prices and the effects of the Ebola epidemic
continued to affect Liberia’s economy. Economic growth, which was zero per cent
in 2015, is projected to increase to 2.5 per cent in 2016. The fiscal space continued
to shrink, however, resulting in a $70 million reduction in the 2015/16 national
budget of $622.7 million. The proposed national budge t for 2016/17 of $556 million
represents an 11 per cent decrease from the 2015/16 fiscal period. The public sector
investment plan, which includes $20 million for the 2017 elections and $10 million
for implementing outstanding activities under the Governme nt plan for the
transition of security responsibilities from UNMIL, represents less than a third of
the required $209 million.
34. The value of the Liberian dollar continued to depreciate against the United
States dollar, reaching 96 Liberian dollars per United States dollar, compared with
84 Liberian dollars per United States dollar in the first quarter of 2015. On 3 March,
the President requested authorization from the Legislature to print additional
currency. The request is currently pending approval. T his could increase spending in
the short term, but poses the risk of further deflation in the value of the local
currency against international currencies. In May, the President indicated that she
plans to increase the share of government expenditures, inc luding salaries, to be
paid in Liberian dollars in order to enable the Central Bank of Liberia to restore its
foreign currency reserves, in compliance with International Monetary Fund
requirements.
35. On 25 April, the Government undertook a midterm revie w of its development
framework, the Agenda for Transformation, which recommended prioritizing
interventions focusing on infrastructure and the agriculture sectors. Although some
achievements were attained, notably improvements in the electric power grid an d
the establishment of county service centres, the Agenda has fallen short with regard
to the economic growth projected for 2015/16. The depressed prices of primary
export commodities, as well as the impact of Ebola, have reduced gross domestic
product to 0.3 per cent from the projected growth of 4.6 per cent.
36. On 14 June, the Legislature ratified the protocol of accession to the World
Trade Organization (WTO), and Liberia’s accession was effective as at 14 July. The
Government and WTO are formulating Liberia’s post-accession plan. The terms and
conditions of accession are intended to facilitate the country’s efforts to diversify,
modernize and integrate into the global economy. As part of the accession
negotiations, Liberia concluded six bilateral market access agreements on goods and
three on services.

III. Development of national security and justice capacities
A.

Security transition
37. On 1 July, the President, high-level officials and international partners marked
the conclusion of the security transition at a ceremony held in Monrovia. The
President noted that a number of activities in the transition plan had yet to be
implemented and reaffirmed the Government’s determination to implement key
priority activities before the conclusion of her tenure. The security transition

16-13484

9/21

S/2016/706

process involved successful joint cooperation at the strategic and technical levels
between the Government, the United Nations and international partners.
38. In accordance with the Government’s transition plan, security tasks such as
explosive ordnance disposal, maritime patrolling and VIP protection responsibilities
were handed over to the Government in May. Some activities under the transition
plan, including those relating to logistics for law enforcement agencies, the
enactment of legislation on the police and immigration services, remain outstanding
owing to insufficient funding, procurement delays and pending legislation. My
Special Representative has been engaging with the Government and international
partners to prioritize the completion of critical tasks, especially the establishment of
civilian oversight boards for the police and immigration, firearms training for
immigration personnel and the deployment of public defenders. The Government
has allocated $10 million in the 2016/17 national budget to implement critical
security transition activities, but it has not yet fully disbursed funds that were
previously committed for the implementation of those tas ks.

B.

National security strategy and architecture
39. Some progress was made in developing the national security architecture. The
Government has recommenced the review of the national security strategy, which
had been suspended since 2014 owing to the Ebola crisis, and has initiated
discussions on the regulation of private security companies. Both processes are
being supported by UNMIL. Meanwhile, 8 county and 58 additional district security
councils were established during the period under review, bringing their numbers to
12 and 80, respectively. Under the National Security Reform and Intelligence Act of
2011, these councils serve as early warning mechanisms.
40. Gaps in legislation and policy for the security sector continued to persist,
including a draft uniform code of military justice that is pending submission to the
Legislature. UNMIL has provided technical and advisory support to the Ministries
of National Defence and Justice in establishing a framework of criminal
accountability for military personnel under the civilian justice system, which was
finalized through a memorandum of understanding signed in May. The coming into
force of the police and immigration acts, currently being revisited by the Legislature
after their initial passage in April, is pending. Meanwhile, work commenced on the
drafting of related regulations and administrative instructions, including regulations
on the establishment of policy management boards, civilian complaint review
boards, disciplinary boards and rights and conditions of service boards.
41. On 24 May, the Senate approved a report by its defence, intelligence and
veteran affairs committee on Liberia’s vulnerabilities to terrorism and other security
threats and recommended ensuring adequate budgetary provisions for the national
security sector and the adoption of the national security action plan. On 11 July, the
Senate decided to consider terrorism as a threat to Liberia’s security. The Liberia
National Commission for Small Arms made progress in the management of
Government-owned arms and ammunition. The enactment of legislation to regulate
firearms owned by private individuals, however, is currently being fine -tuned. With
the support of UNMIL, the national police continued to conduct the marking of its
arms and ammunitions, in compliance with the ECOWAS Convention on Small

10/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

Arms and Light Weapons, Their Ammunition and Other Related Materials, of 2006,
and also began efforts to decentralize its small arms control unit.

C.

Liberia National Police
42. As at 1 August, the strength of the national police stood at 5,106 officers, of
whom 951 were women. No additional deployments were made during the reporting
period.
43. In March, a six-month training course on basic policing skills, investigations,
human rights and police procedures began for 108 new recruits, of whom 37 were
women. The national police training academy also conducted training for 42 middle
management officers, of whom 2 were women, in order to strengthen internal
management, incident management and crisis response capacity. UNMIL continued
to support the national police in enhancing its leadership and its command, control
and communication capacities. UNMIL provided three training programmes
targeting 65 senior officers, of whom 9 were women. The training, mentoring and
equipping of the national police have also led to improvements in its capacity to
investigate and preserve crime scenes and collect forensic evidence in cases of
sexual and gender-based violence, however, owing to bottlenecks in the justice
system, only 7 of 202 cases that resulted in indictments have been fully prosecuted.
44. The transnational crime unit has not been fully operationalized,
notwithstanding continued advocacy by the United Nations for the review of its
memorandum of understanding, in addition to the implementation of
recommendations for its management board, as provided for in the Government’s
transition plan. Among the challenges were lack of national ownership and
protracted capacity and financial shortfalls.

D.

Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
45. As at 1 August, the strength of the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
stood at 2,596 officers, of whom 751 were women. In May, 250 recruits, of whom
38 were women, graduated and were deployed to bord er counties. Seven senior
officers obtained diplomas from the Ghana Institute of Management and Public
Administration in May. With the support of UNMIL, 20 managers, of whom 5 were
women, were trained in change management, command, control and
communication, strategic leadership and customer service. UNMIL also provided
advice to 19 trainers of immigration personnel on curriculum development and
course delivery. Another 196 officers, of whom 18 were women, were trained on
document fraud detection, passenger profiling, security threat identification and the
irregular movement of migrants. Fifteen human resources officers were deployed
outside of Monrovia in May to improve internal management and accountability
systems.
46. In order to strengthen border security, UNMIL supported the training of
50 border patrol officers, of whom 18 were women. A committee was also
established to screen prospective officers for firearms training.

16-13484

11/21

S/2016/706

E.

Judicial, legal and corrections institutions
47. As at 1 August, there were 1,333 pretrial detainees nationwide, representing
64 per cent of the prison population. The high percentage is attributed to weak
internal oversight capacity within the justice system and outdated legislation, and
limited progress was made in implementing measures to address systemic
challenges. As a consequence, many citizens continued to rely on traditional justice
mechanisms for dispute resolution. UNMIL continued to engage with the Chief
Justice and the Minister of Justice to encourage the implementation of outstanding
reform measures. The Mission established a working group focused on criminal
justice reform comprising the Ministry of Justice and representatives of the
judiciary and UNMIL. In April, training began for 60 lay magistrates, of whom 6
were women.
48. During the period under review, there were two prison escapes, down from six
recorded during the previous period. UNMIL continued to support the Bureau of
Corrections and Rehabilitation with training on security, intelligence and
investigations, and also provided prison superintendents with guidance on prison
management. Cooperation between the national police and corrections services
continued to be strengthened, with support from UNMIL. The national police
provide perimeter security for the maximum security prisons in Monrovia and
Zwedru, given that budgetary constraints and lack of firearms training prevented the
Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization from assuming responsibility for those
tasks. Meanwhile, prisons were 55 per cent over capacity. To reduce pressure on the
corrections system, UNMIL continued to advocate for the use of alternatives to
incarceration.
49. UNMIL provided technical support for the review of the Rules of Court and
Judicial Canons, the code of conduct for lawyers and judges, and supported a
consultative workshop to formulate a witness protection policy. Efforts are also
under way, in consultation with national actors, to reform the traditional justice
system, bringing it in line with international human rights standards so that it serves
as an effective and accountable complement of the formal justice system.

F.

Armed Forces of Liberia
50. As at 1 August, the Armed Forces of Liberia comprised 2,236 personnel, of
whom 91 were women. On 30 April, the armed forces assumed full responsibility
from UNMIL for explosive ordnance disposal. To date, 31 sappers (soldier
engineers) have received level I and II training in basic explosive ordnance
destruction procedures.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
A.

Military component
51. As indicated in my previous reports, UNMIL has been progressively drawing
down since 2006, bringing the mission from its peak authorized strength of
15,250 to the current authorized strength of 1,240. As at 1 August, the force’s
strength stood at 1,235 personnel, of whom 77 were women. The military

12/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

component consists of one infantry battalion based in Monrovia, the associated
enablers, a force headquarters and 60 military observers.
52. Pursuant to Security Council resolution 2239 (2015), UNMIL withdrew
2,350 troops by 30 June, including an infantry battalion and engineering and support
companies, and reduced the personnel within the remaining support units. All
assigned force security transition handover tasks have been completed. A new
military concept of operations was finalized in July, which takes into account the
revised security role of UNMIL as of the conclusion of the security transition. This
includes the mandate to support the Liberian security agencies in protecting
civilians in the event of a deterioration of the security situation that could risk a
strategic reversal of peace and stability in the country, taking into account the
Mission’s reduced capabilities and areas of deployment. The quick reaction force
established within UNOCI in accordance with Council resolution 2162 (2014)
remained for over-the-horizon support to UNMIL in the event of a serious
deterioration of the security situation in Liberia, without prejudice to its pri mary
responsibility for providing security in Côte d’Ivoire. As part of the drawdown and
reconfiguration of the military component, military observers were consolidated in
the remaining UNMIL field offices in Gbarnga, Greenville, Harper, Voinjama and
Zwedru, in addition to Monrovia, where they work closely with their civilian and
police counterparts on monitoring and reporting. As the reconfiguration remains
under review, further adjustments to the UNMIL field presence, particularly in
Maryland and Sinoe Counties, could be expected.

B.

Police component
53. As at 1 August, UNMIL police strength stood at 570 police personnel, against
an authorized ceiling of 606 police personnel, including 191 individual police and
immigration advisors and 379 police personnel in three formed police units
deployed in Gbarnga, Monrovia and Zwedru. Of those personnel, 11.23 per cent
were women. The drawdown of UNMIL police was achieved by 30 June as
scheduled through a robust planning framework, with 500 formed police pe rsonnel
and 53 individual police and immigration advisors ending their mission since my
last report. A revised concept of police operations was finalized in July, reflecting
the Mission’s revised security and protection of civilians mandate as at 1 July,
taking into account the conclusion of the security transition.

C.

Civilian component
54. As at 1 August, 983 civilian personnel, including 138 United Nations
Volunteers, were serving with UNMIL. In total, 25.8 per cent of civilian personnel
were women.

D.

Support considerations
55. UNMIL continued to consolidate its field presence, with five offices remaining
in Gbarnga, Greenville, Harper, Voinjama and Zwedru, as well as a mission
headquarters and logistics base in Monrovia. The configurati on and operation of the
Mission and the need for field offices remains under review, which could result in

16-13484

13/21

S/2016/706

further adjustments to the UNMIL field presence, in particular in Maryland and
Sinoe Counties. Meanwhile, significant progress has been achieved in c o-locating
UNMIL and the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, with preparations
advanced for the United Nations Development Programme and the International
Organization for Migration to move into UNMIL headquarters in November.
56. In order to minimize costs to the Organization, the drawdown of military and
police personnel and the associated movement of heavy equipment were mostly
completed before the rainy season and in line with scheduled rotations. UNMIL has
in place strong measures to ensure that the closure of camps is environmentally
responsible and is working in close cooperation with the Ministry of Environment in
that regard. Treatment facilities have been put in place to reduce the impact of
wastewater on the local infrastructure.
57. Between July 2015 and June 2016, UNMIL closed 32 mission sites, some
28 of which were handed over to the Government. Most of the camps handed over
included equipment that was given to the Government, including prefabricated
accommodations, communications towers, water and fuel tanks and electrical
installations, after careful assessments for each item and the Government’s
agreement to accept them. The depreciated value of the donated items in all the
camps was $1,070,435.25 and, although all items were usable at the time they were
given, their continued use will depend on how they are maintained. Throughout the
process of closing its camps, UNMIL has coordinated closely with the Government
and has prioritized environmental compliance.

E.

Conduct and discipline
58. As at 1 August, no cases of sexual exploitation and abuse involving UNMIL
personnel were reported. During the period under review, the Mission continued to
undertake intensive measures to implement my policy of zero tolerance of sexual
exploitation and abuse. This included a campaign launched by UNMIL and the
Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection against sexual exploitation and
abuse in Bomi, Bong, Grand Gedeh, Lofa, Margibi, Maryland, Montserrado and
Sinoe Counties, using representatives from government, civil society and religious
organizations who carry out awareness-raising and advocacy activities and facilitate
victim assistance efforts.
59. UNMIL continued to provide mandatory training on sexual exploitation and
abuse and other conduct-related issues for its personnel. The Mission is preparing an
action plan to coordinate efforts to address misconduct, including sexual
exploitation and abuse. UNMIL provides assistance and support to victims of sexual
exploitation and abuse.

F.

Security and safety of United Nations personnel
60. No major security incidents against United Nations personnel were recorded
during the reporting period, although there were two residential fires,
13 non-weapons-related crimes and seven weapons-related crimes. Four United
Nations personnel died, one from suicide and three from natural causes, including
one from Lassa fever. There were 75 road traffic accidents involving United Nations

14/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

vehicles, 10 of which resulted in injuries and 1 of which caused the death of a
civilian pedestrian.
61. United Nations facilities, assets and operations were affected by eight fires,
seven burglaries, eight thefts, three intrusion-related incidents, three attempted
thefts and one attempted burglary. During the reporting period, there were also two
peaceful demonstrations.

V. Financial aspects
62. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/278, appropriated the amount of
$197.2 million for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2016
to 30 June 2017. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of
UNMIL beyond 30 September 2016, the cost for maintaining the Mission would be
limited to the amounts approved by the Assembly.
63. As at 4 August 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
the United Nations Mission in Liberia amounted to $81.6 million. The total
outstanding assessed contributions for all peacekeeping operations as at that date
amounted to $4,852.5 million.
64. As at 31 July 2016, amounts owed to troop- and formed police-contributing
countries totalled some $6.4 million. Reimbursement of costs relating to troops and
formed police units has been made for the period up to 30 April 2016, whereas
partial reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment has been made
for the period up to 31 March 2016, in accordance with the quarterly payment
schedule.

VI. Observations
65. Liberia reached a historic milestone on its path to lasting peace, on 30 June,
when the Government fully assumed its sovereign responsibilities for maintaining
stability and protecting civilians. I welcome this development as an indication that
the country has turned a corner in the direction of self -reliance in its security affairs.
I commend the efforts of the Government of Liberia to successfully achieve the
security transition, and I note the attempts at passing legislation on police and
immigration services and firearms and ammunition control. I urge all actors to move
expeditiously towards their enactment. The improved capacity and professionalism
of the national security institutions, demonstrated by their protection of the
population independently of UNMIL in the weeks since assuming all security
responsibilities, is very encouraging. In this connection, I strongly encourag e the
Government’s continued outreach and communication to enhance public confidence
in the ability of the national security services to protect the population.
66. Efforts must continue to be in line with the commitments made in the Agenda
for Transformation and the national security strategy of Liberia. These include the
need to engage communities, improve operational effectiveness, reduce corruption
and increase public confidence through the oversight, accountability,
professionalism and legitimacy of the security sector. The transformative reforms
under way in Liberia are accompanied by long-term challenges and will require
increased investment by the Government and its partners, who have sometimes been

16-13484

15/21

S/2016/706

reluctant to meet resource gaps. Predictable funding is essential for the reforms to
take root and to ensure the availability of the capacity and resources necessary for
the Government to meaningfully deploy the security forces throughout the country
and sustain recurring expenses.
67. Given that protecting human rights is fundamental for consolidating peace,
rule of law must be equally applicable and accessible to all citizens. Judicial
capacities will thus require strengthening, and the Government must take more
resolute action against corruption and exclusion and build the population’s
confidence in their leaders and national institutions.
68. I welcome the Government’s efforts to address recent corruption allegations.
The President has rightly identified this scourge as a major threat that continues to
undermine public and investor confidence. It is critical to address corruption
irrespective of political or familial affiliation while ensuring full respect for due
process and fundamental human rights during all stages of investigation. I am
concerned that recent allegations involving senior Liberian officials have had a
negative impact on the working relationship between the Executive and the
Legislature, which is blocking progress on critical reform bills. All elected officials
entrusted with furthering the interests of the Liberian people should put the
country’s needs first, including by overcoming disagreements and collaborating to
advance the important work that remains to be done.
69. I welcome improvements in the overall peace and security situation of Liberia,
concession-related disputes continue to pose risks to stability, in particular when
promises made to communities with regard to economic and social development
opportunities are not honoured, the environment is degraded and workers’ s alaries
are not paid. I therefore urge the Government to intensify its efforts to hold
concessionaires accountable, pass critical legislation such as the land authority bill
and work towards further administrative decentralization.
70. Furthermore, I remain very concerned about the high rate of sexual and
gender-based violence, in particular against very young girls, and the continued
prevalence of harmful traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation. In that
regard, I note with regret that the Domestic Violence Act in the House of
Representatives, passed on 21 July, excluded the provision prohibiting female
genital mutilation. I welcome efforts aimed at enhancing the protection of women
and girls, including the launch of a joint Government and United Nations
programme on the prevention of and response to sexual and gender -based violence
and harmful traditional practices, and call upon partners to provide funding and
other support to the five-year strategy.
71. As the 2017 presidential and legislative elections approach, I stress to all
political actors and their supporters the importance of adhering to the rule of law
and respecting democratic principles and constitutional order. The National
Elections Commission has a significant task ahead in sustaining engagement with
all 23 registered political parties in support of a transparent and credible electoral
process. I welcome in that regard the reinvigoration of the Inter -Party Consultative
Committee and the Commission’s efforts to engage with the political parties on
electoral timelines and amendments to elections law through this important
platform. I underscore the importance of free speech and a free media to a healthy
democracy and encourage urgent action to repeal libel and sedition laws, whic h are
inconsistent with the Declaration of Table Mountain on press freedom in Africa. All

16/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

actors must encourage broad and inclusive participation, in particular of women and
young people, in all electoral processes.
72. I remain deeply concerned about the undercurrents of religious and racial
intolerance injected into the constitutional review process to date and welcome
those religious and traditional leaders who have articulated positions of plurality. I
urge political leaders to maintain a responsible approach and secure an inclusive
Liberia that protects its diversity. The process presents an opportunity for the people
of Liberia to articulate and take ownership of a shared sense of nationhood, and this
should not be wasted.
73. I also call upon the Government of Liberia to take forward a meaningful
national reconciliation process in order to satisfy the high demand for political and
social conciliation and integration, as well as to appease public perceptions of its
inability or unwillingness to provide justice. The Truth and Reconciliation
Commission set out a series of critical recommendations whose implementation
would help to address impunity and exclusion and address systemic and structural
deficits in the State and society that drove conflict. However, the implementation of
those recommendations, made public in 2009, remains thwarted by an absence of
political will, weak institutional capacity, insufficient resources and a lack of
effective coordination.
74. The serious economic downturn Liberia is facing underscores the importance
of shifting growth models, from one that is narrowly focused on capital
infrastructure investments, concessions and extractive industries to one more
diversified, sustainable and focused on local production and employmen t
opportunities. Otherwise, an increasingly constrained fiscal space will limit
opportunities for development and service provision and ensure persistent high
unemployment, in particular among young people, thereby threatening stability. I
therefore welcome the accession of Liberia to the World Trade Organization, which
provides an important opportunity for least-developed countries to engage with the
global economy within the framework of the rules-based trading system.
75. I commend the continued efforts to strengthen response and preparedness with
regard to the Ebola virus disease, as demonstrated by the swift and effective action
to contain the most recent outbreak and the declaration, for the fourth time, that
Liberia is Ebola-free. It is of paramount importance that this high level of attention
on the Ebola virus is sustained, including through early-warning monitoring and
surveillance systems at the national and community levels, in order to prevent
renewed outbreaks.
76. I note with satisfaction that UNHCR remains on track to reach its target of
facilitating the voluntary return of 25,000 Ivorian refugees to their homes in 2015,
notwithstanding the serious challenges posted by heavy rains and poor
infrastructure. Achieving conditions conducive to sustainable return requires the
continued action of the Government of Côte d’Ivoire, and I therefore welcome
efforts it has made to listen to, and address, the concerns of refugees about security,
land and other issues in areas of return in western Côte d’Ivoi re. UNMIL and
UNOCI and their respective United Nations country teams will continue to support
the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia to stabilize their shared border.
77. I congratulate Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf for once again being in the vanguard — the
first woman elected by her peers as Chair of ECOWAS, an organization that played a

16-13484

17/21

S/2016/706

critical role in restoring peace to Liberia and that remains the preeminent forum for
regional security and economic cooperation. Liberia hereby enjoys an opportunity to
develop mechanisms at the national level in areas where ECOWAS provides essential
leadership, such as security sector reform and early warning and response. Under
Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf’s leadership, ECOWAS will undoubtedly also advance its
ongoing efforts to collaboratively mitigate the threat posed by violent extremism in
West Africa.
78. As indicated in my previous reports, the conclusion of the security transition
should trigger a reimagining of United Nations engagement in Liberia. In
accordance with the request made by the Security Council, in its resolution 2239
(2015), I will deploy an assessment mission to Liberia in September to consult with
the Government and other stakeholders and transmit my recommendations in a
special report on the future of UNMIL and a possible successor United Nations
presence, in November. In the meantime, I recommend that the Security Council
extend the mandate of UNMIL for a period of three months, until 31 December
2016, with its current mandate and authorized strength.
79. I would like to thank my Special Representative for Liberia, Farid Zarif, as
well as all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel for their continued
commitment to peace and stability in Liberia. My appreciation also goes to the
troop- and police-contributing countries, donor countries, regional and multilateral
organizations, non-governmental organizations, the Peacebuilding Commission and
United Nations offices, funds, programmes and specialized agencies, all of which
continue to provide invaluable support to Liberia. I wish to recognize in particular
the contribution made by the African Union, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union
in restoring and sustaining peace in Liberia.

18/21

16-13484

S/2016/706

Annex
United Nations Mission in Liberia: military and police
strength as at 1 August 2016
Military component
Country

Military observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Argentina

–

–

–

–

–

Bangladesh

4

4

–

8

4

Benin

1

1

–

2

–

Bhutan

–

–

–

–

2

Bolivia (Plurinational State of)

1

–

–

1

–

Bosnia and Herzegovina

–

–

–

–

2

Brazil

1

1

–

2

–

Bulgaria

1

–

–

1

–

China

1

3

124

128

Ecuador

–

–

–

–

–

Egypt

5

1

–

6

1

Ethiopia

3

2

–

5

–

France

–

–

–

–

–

Gambia

3

–

–

3

14

Germany

–

–

–

–

2

Ghana

7

3

55

65

26

India

–

–

–

–

Indonesia

1

–

–

1

–

Jordan

–

–

–

–

1

Kenya

–

–

–

–

13

Kyrgyzstan

–

–

–

–

2

Malaysia

2

1

–

3

–

Myanmar

2

–

–

2

–

Namibia

1

1

–

2

3

Nepal

2

2

15

19

9

Niger

2

–

–

2

–

Nigeria

9

5

691

705

Norway

–

–

–

–

6

Pakistan

4

7

88

99

–

Poland

–

–

–

–

3

Republic of Korea

–

–

–

–

6

Republic of Moldova

1

–

–

1

–

Romania

–

–

–

–

1

Russian Federation

1

–

–

1

–

Rwanda

–

–

–

–

–

16-13484

Formed police units

140

120

119

Police Officers

15

4

21

19/21

S/2016/706

Military component
Country

Military observers

Staff officers

Troops

Total

Serbia

1

–

–

1

–

Sri Lanka

–

–

–

–

3

Sweden

–

–

–

–

9

Switzerland

–

–

–

–

2

Thailand

–

–

–

–

1

Togo

1

1

–

2

–

Turkey

–

–

–

–

2

Uganda

–

–

–

–

5

Ukraine

3

2

160

165

1

United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

–

–

–

–

2

United States of America

3

5

–

8

–

Yemen

–

1

–

1

1

Zambia

1

–

–

1

16

Zimbabwe

1

–

–

1

14

Total

2

40

160

11

20/21

Formed police units

379

Police Officers

191

16-13484

S/2016/706

16-13484

21/21
