S/2016/510

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
8 June 2016
English
Original: French

Letter dated 8 June 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit to you the Special Report of the Secretary -General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission on the African Union -United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). This report is submitted pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2228 of 29 June 2015 and the African Union Peace and
Security Council Communiqués of 22 June 2015 (516th meeting) and 31 July 2015
(529th meeting). It presents the outcome of a recent assessment of the situation in
Darfur and of progress made towards the implementation of the UNAMID
benchmarks for the period of 1 July 2015 to 15 May 2016.
I should be grateful if you would bring this report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
For her part, Ms. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, is taking appropriate steps to bring the report to the attention of the
members of the African Union Peace and Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

16-08424 (E)

080616

*1608424*

S/2016/510

Special report of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission on the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
[Original: English]

I. Introduction
1.
In Security Council resolution 2228 (2015) of 29 June 2015 and the
communiqués of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union of 22 June
2015 (516th meeting) and 31 July 2015 (529th meeting), the two Councils extended
the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) for a period of 12 months and reiterated their end orsement of the
mission and reiterated their endorsement of the mission’s revised strategic priorities,
as set out in paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 2148 (2014), namely:
(a) mediation between the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory movements
on the basis of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, while taking into account
the ongoing democratic transformation at the national level; (b) the protection of
civilians, the facilitation of the delivery of humanitarian assistance and the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel; and (c) support for the mediation of
community conflict, including through measures to address its root causes, in
conjunction with the United Nations country team. The two Councils further
stressed that any refinement of UNAMID should be based on progress against the
benchmarks as set out in the report of the Secretary-General of 16 October 2012
(S/2012/771) and subsequently refined in his reports of 25 February 2014
(S/2014/138) and 15 April 2014 (S/2014/279, annex).
2.
The present report presents the outcome of an assessment of the situation in
Darfur and progress made towards the implementation of the benchmarks for the
period from 1 July 2015 to 15 May 2016. The assessment was conducted jointly by
the African Union Commission, the Secretariat of the United Nations, the United
Nations country team and UNAMID, and provides recommendations on the
mission’s future mandate. The assessment was further informed by a troop -to-task
analysis of military and police personnel, which presents recommendations on how
to improve the operational effectiveness of UNAMID. Finally, the report provide s
an update on the status of in tripartite discussions on the exit strategy of UNAMID
between the African Union, the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan
and makes recommendations on the way forward.

II. Overview of conflict dynamics, humanitarian situation and
political developments
A.

Conflict dynamics
3.
In the absence of progress towards a comprehensive political agreement that
addresses the root causes of violence, the conflict in Darfur has persisted. Fighting
between the Government of the Sudan forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul
Wahid (SLA/AW) continued in Jebel Marra during the reporting period.
Intercommunal fighting and incidents of violence against the civilian population by

2/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

criminal groups and militias have continued to spread, despite the Government’s
efforts to contain them. With tens of thousands of people newly displaced in 2016
and approximately 2.6 million remaining displaced in Darfur, civilians across the
region continue to bear the consequences of the volatile security situation.
Fighting between the Government of the Sudan and armed movements
4.
Following the first two phases of the Government of the Sudan ’s military
offensive (from February 2014 to June 2015), known as Operation Decisive
Summer, which resulted in the significant weakening of the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) and the Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) in
Darfur, UNAMID received no reports of fighting between Government forces and
those two armed movements during the reporting period, apart from a claim by
SLA/MM of having repelled an attack by the Rapid Support Forces on Wadi
Maghreb, north of Kutum, North Darfur. After confining SLA/AW to a very limited
geographic area in Jebel Marra in early 2015, Government forces focuse d their most
recent military offensive on dislodging the armed movement from the mountainous
area. SLA/AW resisted such an outcome through asymmetric warfare and highly
mobile forces, which utilized their dispersed geographical footprint to limit the
impact of aerial bombardment and the advance of the Rapid Support Forces and
Sudanese armed forces infantry.
5.
In January 2016, the Government announced the beginning of a major military
operation on SLA/AW positions in Jebel Marra, accusing the rebel movemen t of
looting and attacking civilian, military and commercial convoys in the area. Prior to
that announcement, towards the end of 2015, Government officials had described
SLA/AW as a major threat to the Darfur peace process and commenced a gradual
build-up in several localities in Jebel Marra, believed to be under the armed
movement’s control. For their part, SLA/AW elements entrenched in remote areas in
the foothills of Jebel Marra launched occasional ambushes on convoys of
Government forces, especially on the roads between El Fasher, Nyala and Zalingei.
Following one such ambush on a Sudanese armed forces convoy near Dabaneira,
north of Golo, Central Darfur, on 2 January 2016, additional Sudanese armed forces
infantry units and other forces, including the Rapid Support Forces, converged on
Jebel Marra.
6.
The latest phase of the Government’s counter-insurgency operations was
launched on 14 January 2016, with a series of aerial bombardments on supposed
SLA/AW locations near Sortony and Tawila in North Darfur and Nertiti in Central
Darfur. Owing to the intensity of the attacks, SLA/AW took refuge in the
mountainous areas between Nertiti and Rockero, Central Darfur, while the Sudanese
armed forces claimed to have taken several of the armed movement ’s strongholds in
South Darfur, thereby securing major road access into Jebel Marra. From
22 January, with the support of aerial bombardment, Government forces launched a
ground offensive north-east and north-west of Rockero and east and south-east of
Nertiti. Government forces claimed to have seized most of Jebel Marra in the
ensuing fighting. SLA/AW, in turn, claimed to have repelled Government attempts
to capture Kalokitting and reportedly captured the areas of Kutrum and Kalow, east
of Nertiti.
7.
Throughout March and April, ground fighting and aerial bombardment
continued in areas south-west of Rockero and south-east of Golo in Central Darfur

16-08424

3/19

S/2016/510

and north of Kas in South Darfur. After several days of reportedly fierce resistance
from SLA/AW, on 12 April, the Sudanese armed forces announced the capture of
Sorrong, south-east of Golo, which it described as the last rebel stronghold in Jebel
Marra. With the capture of Sorrong, the Government declared an end to the
rebellion in all five states of Darfur. SLA/AW have report edly retreated to Daya and
Torongtonga, located east and south-west of Sorrong. Reports of fighting and aerial
bombardment in Jebel Marra have continued. UNAMID remained unable to verify
the outcome and impact thereof on the civilian population, owing to t he
Government’s continued denial of access to conflict areas in Jebel Marra.
Intercommunal conflict
8.
The causes of intercommunal conflict are inherently linked to those of the
broader Darfur conflict. Historically, this form of violence arose mainl y between
nomadic herder and sedentary farming communities over the ownership and use of
resources, such as land. Since the beginning of the conflict, efforts to address such
violence have failed to provide sustainable solutions, owing to the
sociodemographic effects of drought, the consequences of the war and the erosion
of traditional conflict resolution mechanisms and land management structures. The
ongoing rebellion and counter-insurgency operations in Darfur have significantly
polarized Arab and non-Arab communities, thereby increasing the intensity of
intercommunal fighting, particularly in terms of its impact on the civilian
population. The situation has been further exacerbated by the widespread
proliferation of weapons and the inadequacy of rule of law and judicial institutions,
which contributes to a culture of impunity and the weakening of traditional conflict
resolution mechanisms and reconciliation processes. The arming of militias and the
politicization of such conflicts have increased tensions and led to regular flare-ups
of violence, as state-level efforts to address land use, resource-sharing, the return of
and compensation for internally displaced persons remain insufficient.
9.
In 2015, intercommunal fighting resulted in approximately one th ird of all
conflict-related fatalities and accounted for over 40 per cent of the people displaced
in Darfur. Key land ownership disputes such as the one between the Berti and the
Zayadiya in Malha, Al Kuma and Mellit in North Darfur remained unresolved. Af ter
the resumption of fighting between the Berti and the Zayadiya in July 2015, the
North Darfur State government facilitated the signing of separate cessation of
hostilities agreements between the Berti and the Zayadiya, while additional
Sudanese armed forces troops were deployed to the affected areas to stabilize the
situation.
10. Similarly, following attempts by the Sudanese authorities to reconcile the
positions of the Ma’alia and the Southern Rezeigat tribes on their dispute over land
ownership in Abu Karinka and Adila, East Darfur, a livestock theft incident in Khor
Thaan village, south of Labado, reignited the conflict between them in April 2016.
Following that incident, coupled with the attempts by the Governor of East Darfur
to impose security in the state and to renegotiate the Marawie agreement, which was
proposed in February 2015, the Southern Rezeigat accused the Governor of
supporting the Ma’alia in the dispute. Following an attack on the Governor ’s
residence in Ed Daein by Southern Rezeigat militia the next day, additional
Sudanese armed forces troops were deployed in the buffer zone between the two
communities and to enhance security in the State capital. In the absence of a
reconciliation process to address the land and resources issue, tens ions between

4/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

these communities remained high, resulting in several security incidents in late
April and early May.
11. The proliferation of arms, impunity and the inadequacy of rule of law and
judicial institutions perpetuated a scenario whereby a single act of cattle rustling
easily escalated into a broader and very violent intercommunal conflict. In South
Darfur, fighting between the Salamat and Fallata tribes in Al Nadif, in Buram
locality, in August 2015, led to 83 fatalities on both sides. Despite the signing of a
ceasefire agreement between the two tribes in September 2015, fighting once again
resumed in February 2016, resulting in 35 deaths. Following the latest round of
fighting, Sudanese authorities arrested 80 persons suspected of involvement in t he
clashes. Both parties reiterated their commitment to the September 2015 peace
agreement and called for the wide dissemination of the agreements, particularly at
the grass-roots level.
12. Also as a result of cattle rustling, fighting occurred between t he Beni Halba
and Massalit, and between the Awlad Rahma and Gimir, in areas south and east of
El Geneina in West Darfur. In late November and early December 2015, heavily
armed militia attacked the Zaghawa-inhabited villages in and surrounding Anka,
North Darfur, killing at least seven civilians, burning homes and causing the
displacement of approximately 150 families to the camp for internally displaced
persons in Um Baru, North Darfur. Conflicts over the use of and access to farmland
between farmers and nomadic herders remained prominent throughout Darfur
during the farming season, which coincides with the north-south livestock migration
from May to November each year.

B.

Humanitarian situation
13. During the past year, the Darfur conflict displaced additional civilians, adding
to the existing significant and protracted displacement and affecting people ’s access
to basic services, food security and livelihood opportunities. The conflict
contributed to new explosive remnants of war contamination in 71 villages, where
533 explosive items were located and disposed of. Humanitarian actors estimated
the number of internally displaced persons in Darfur at over 2.6 million, 1.6 million
of whom remained in camps and at least 2 million of whom were in need of
humanitarian assistance. Some 2.7 million people now face crisis or emergency
levels of food insecurity in Darfur. Although some of those displaced have returned
to their homes, including an estimated 70,000 people since the beginning of 2015,
many have chosen to remain in camps or in settlement and urban areas. Safety and
security, land ownership and access to basic social services were the most
frequently cited primary conditions for their return. An additional 300,000 Sudanese
refugees remained in Chad. Almost 50,000 South Sudanese have also recently
arrived in East and South Darfur.
14. Tens of thousands of people were newly displaced as a result of the
resumption of fighting in Jebel Marra since the beginning of 2016. As of 10 May
2016, humanitarian partners had verified some 68,000 people who had to flee their
homes owing to the conflict, of whom close to 65,000 remain displaced. In addition,
there have been reports, which are yet to be verified, of up to 106,000 persons
having been displaced. In North Darfur, the humanitarian response continued for
some 60,000 newly displaced persons at Sortony, Tawila, Kabkabiya and Shangil

16-08424

5/19

S/2016/510

Tobaya. Efforts are currently under way to verify the displacement figures after an
initial registration exercise by the International Organization for Migration was
suspended in February. In Central Darfur, humanitarian actors are still unable to
independently verify reports of displacement. The Government has reported over
15,000 new internally displaced persons in the state. In S outh Darfur, 16,700
persons have been reported displaced, with over 8,000 registered.
15. On 28 December 2015, during a visit to Darfur, the Second Vice -President of
the Sudan, Hassabo Mohamed Abdelrahman, announced Government plans to “put
an end to the displacement in Darfur before 2017” and that internally displaced
persons would be requested to choose between returning to their places of origin or
being re-classified as part of the population of the localities in which they currently
reside. The Government has subsequently indicated that, as part of what has been
described as a voluntary process, internally displaced persons would be provided
with security, education, health care, water and other services and possibly even
land, for those who were dispossessed of it during the conflict. According to the
Government, the measures form the next logical step in the full implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur in the aftermath of the Darfur
administrative referendum and the upcoming expiration of the mandate of the
Darfur Regional Authority.

C.

Political developments
16. In its communiqué of 25 August 2015, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union requested the African Union High-level Implementation Panel for the
Sudan and South Sudan to continue its engagement with Sudanese stakeholders
towards ensuring a credible, inclusive and transparent national dialogue process and
facilitating negotiations for a cessation of hostilities in Darfur and the Two Areas.
17. Following the formation of the new Government of the Sudan, in June 2015,
the ruling National Congress Party maintained its position that the national dialogue
process remained national in character and rejected the holding of a pre -dialogue
meeting under the auspices of the African Union High -level Implementation Panel.
The major opposition political parties and armed movements in the Sudan continued
to call for such a meeting to determine the format of the dialogue process and
establish the necessary preconditions for their participation, particularly with
respect to the security of their members.
18. On 10 October 2015, the President of the Sudan, Omar Hassan al -Bashir,
opened the National Dialogue Conference in Khartoum, nearly two years after
having first announced his initiative to resolve the conflicts and political crises in
Sudan. Even though major opposition parties, armed movements and civil society
boycotted the process, the dialogue was attended by 112 political parties and 30
armed movements, mainly splinter factions of the major movements. Specialized
committees on peace and unity, the economy, freedoms and basic rights, issues of
identity, foreign relations and issues of governance and overall implementation were
formed as part of the dialogue. By late February 2016, it was reported that
consensus within the committees had been reached on sever al issues, including
Sudanese identity and guidelines for the constitutional review process. On the issue
of transitional arrangements, most of the non-National Congress Party participants
reportedly recommended a four-year national reconciliation government to be

6/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

established within three months of the endorsement of the recommendations of the
National Dialogue Conference. The process, which was originally scheduled to
conclude on 10 January 2016, has been extended twice so as to allow the
committees to finalize their discussions and convince key opposition groups and
armed movements to join the process. Having concluded their work, on 9 May, the
committees announced their readiness to present their reports to the President and to
discuss arrangements for the General Conference of the National Dialogue to
approve their recommendations.
19. As a result of the impasse on the way forward with respect to the cessation of
hostilities and the national dialogue process, the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel convened strategic consultations between the Government
and members of the “Sudan Call” coalition (National Umma Party, JEM, SLA/MM,
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement — North (SPLM/North)), in Addis Ababa,
from 18 to 21 March 2016. At the end of the meeting, the Government and the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel signed a road map agreement,
presented to the parties by the latter, providing for, inter alia, the immediate
resumption of the talks on a cessation of hostilities in Darfur and the Two Areas,
leading to a permanent ceasefire agreement, and for an urgent meeting to be
convened between the National Dialogue’s “7+7 Committee” and the “Sudan Call”
coalition, in Addis Ababa, to discuss their participation in the process. The
opposition initially requested more time for internal consultations before signing the
road map, but subsequently rejected it in its present form, arguing that it endorsed
the non-inclusive National Dialogue in Khartoum. On 21 April 2016, at a meeting of
its leadership in Paris, members of the “Sudan Call” coalition reaffirmed their
position of not signing the road map, accusing the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel of siding with the Government and circumventing the
recommendations of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union for the
holding of a preparatory meeting on the National Dialogue. The African Union and
the United Nations have called on the opposition to sign the road map as an
important milestone in determining a practicable way forward towards a cessation
of hostilities and an inclusive, credible National Dialogue.

III. Assessment of benchmarks
A.

Inclusive peace process through mediation between the Government
and non-signatory armed movements on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur
Negotiations between the Government of the Sudan and non-signatory
armed movements
20. Further to the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union of 25 August 2015, from 19 to 23 November 2015, the Af rican Union Highlevel Implementation Panel convened direct and synchronized talks on Darfur and
the Two Areas in Addis Ababa. During the meeting, the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel submitted a draft cessation of hostilities agreement to the
parties, which would facilitate the provision of humanitarian assistance and pave the
way for the participation of the armed movements in the national dialogue process.
Despite their commitment to continue negotiations, the Government and JEM and

16-08424

7/19

S/2016/510

SLA/MM remained in disagreement over key issues related to the role of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur and the African Union High -level Implementation
Panel mediation in future negotiations. Another informal round of talks between the
parties was convened by UNAMID and the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, from 23 to 25 January 2016, in Debre Zeit (Bishoftu),
Ethiopia, but did not result in any progress in this regard. Meanwhile, the sole
armed movement maintaining military operations in Darfur, SLA/AW, continued to
reject any direct talks with the Government during this time.
21. As a follow-up to the meeting held in Debre Zeit, the Joint Special
Representative for UNAMID held consultations with the leadership of JEM and
SLA/MM in Addis Ababa, on 15 April, to discuss issues pertaining to the peace
process. The two movements expressed readiness for further discussions with the
Government of the Sudan, facilitated by UNAMID and the Government of Qatar.
On 22 April 2016, following another meeting in Paris, JEM, SLA/MM and
SPLM/North issued a statement extending for an additional six months their
unilateral cessation of hostilities, initially declared in September 2015. They further
called on the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to facilitate a meeting
between them and the Government of the Sudan aimed at implementing the
cessation of hostilities.
Administrative referendum in Darfur
22. The referendum to determine the administrative status of the region took place
from 11 to 13 April 2016. In accordance with the terms of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, the aim of the referendum was to determine whether Darfur would
be one region or retain the current five-state structure. Non-signatory movements
categorically rejected the holding of the referendum, as part of their continued
rejection of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as a comprehensive peace
agreement, while the officials of the Darfur Regional Authority cautioned against its
timing, noting the lack of consensus among their constituencies in Darfur,
particularly internally displaced persons, and also in view of the possible impact of
the ongoing National Dialogue. Following the announcement of the exact date of the
referendum in mid-January 2016, which coincided with the resumption of fighting in
Jebel Marra, internally displaced persons from various camps in Central, South and
West Darfur organized demonstrations to protest against the referendum process and
the fighting in early February 2016.
23. Voting took place in 1,368 registration and polling centres, across Darfur,
without any major security incidents. The voter eligibility criteria, requiring
residency in Darfur for at least three months, meant that refugees and a number of
internally displaced persons uprooted as a result of the Government’s counterinsurgency operations, were excluded from the process. On 24 April 2016, the
Referendum Commission announced that 97.27 per cent of voters had opted for
Darfur to retain the five-state structure. The Referendum Commission reported that
approximately 90.72 per cent of registered voters (3,585,105 were registered out of
4,588,300 eligible) participated in the process. The voting process was observed by
the African Union Commission and the League of Arab States. The non -signatory
armed movements have rejected the outcome of the referendum.

8/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

Implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
24. Progress in the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur has
been slow. As a result, a number of the provisions of the agreement remained
outstanding after the passing of the stipulated deadlines. Owing to the discord
between the signatory movements within the Darfur Regional Authority, as well as
gaps in funding and insufficient political will, the anticipated dividends from the
institutions of the Darfur Regional Authority, including for reconstruction and return
or resettlement of internally displaced persons and refugees, remained elusive. With
regard to the power-sharing provisions, implementation has focused mainly on the
establishment of the institutions provided for in the agreement and corresponding
political appointments, without significant progress on governance or institutional
capacity-building, including for the Special Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur
and the Darfur Land Commission.
25. The second phase of the Darfur internal dialogue and consultations process,
which was launched in June 2015, was completed in 21 localities in Central, North,
South and West Darfur, followed by meetings of Darfuri stakeholders in Khartoum.
The discussions focused on the root causes of the conflict, including intercommunal
violence, the sharing of power resources, justice and reconciliation and the role of
the local communities. Following the Government’s release of 50 per cent of its
pledged contribution, in February 2016, the process resumed in a further 26
localities, in May 2016.
26. With respect to the final security arrangements, in December 2015 and January
2016, UNAMID, in collaboration with the Sudan Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration Commission, supported by other stakeholders, including the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Food Programme, conducted a
demobilization exercise of signatories of the Darfur Peace Agreement and of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, in Central and West Darfur. A total of 1,482
ex-combatants, including 189 from the Liberation and Justice Movement (LJM) and
1,293 from signatories of the Darfur Peace Agreement, were demobilized, with
technical and logistical support from UNAMID.
27. In April 2016, the Government announced that, with the near full
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, including through the
holding of the administrative referendum and plans for the return of inte rnally
displaced persons to their places of origin and for civilian disarmament, the term of
the Darfur Regional Authority, which expires in July 2016, would not be renewed.
The Government further indicated that specialized commissions provided for under
the Doha Document would continue to exist and possibly report to the Presidency.

B.

Protection of civilians and unhindered humanitarian access and
the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
Physical security
28. Civilians in Darfur continued to suffer from the impact of the conflict,
stemming from the fighting between the Government and SLA/AW, intercommunal
violence and attacks from organized criminal groups and militias. With the
resumption of fighting in Jebel Marra in mid-January 2016, the mission received
numerous reports of indiscriminate attacks on the civilian population, including

16-08424

9/19

S/2016/510

through aerial bombardment resulting in new explosive remnants of war
contaminations and related accidents, which could not be verified owing to access
not being granted by the Government.
29. Intercommunal conflict also resulted in significant displacement and created a
serious rift in the local social fabric in certain parts of Darfur. In East Darfur, for
example, the Ma’alia community was displaced from the state capital of Ed Daein
eastwards to Adila and Abu Karinka following fighting with the Southern Rezeigat
in August 2013. In West Darfur, increased attacks by Arab groups o n Massalit, Fur,
Tama and Burgo caused new displacements, including approximately 2,000
individuals from Shustah village in Beida locality in June 2015, approximately
5,000 from 12 villages in the Mouli area near El Geneina and another 3,000 from 17
villages in Umtajok in Kreinik locality in January 2016. Although most of the newly
displaced persons in West Darfur have returned to their places of origin, the threat
of further intercommunal violence remains.
30. The conflict also continued to have a significant impact on the law and order
situation in Darfur. Organized criminals, including armed nomads and militia
groups, have taken advantage of the security vacuum in the region to commit
various criminal acts, including attacks against and harassment of the civilian
population, murder, rape, armed robberies, abductions and arson. In addition,
internally displaced farmers across Darfur were frequently prevented from accessing
their farmlands by Arab herders and subjected to physical attacks, threats,
harassment and the destruction of crops. In West Darfur, fo r example, internally
displaced farmers near the Krinding I and II, Kreinik and Sisi camps for internally
displaced persons east of El Geneina were prevented from freely accessing their
farmlands by armed Arab men demanding payment for the use of the land or written
forfeiture of their ownership rights during the harvest season.
31. State governors have adopted a series of measures in attempts to curb
criminality, including the deployment of additional security forces to population
centres, instituting a ban on the carrying of weapons and the use of unregistered
vehicles, removing illegal checkpoints and taking punitive action against security
personnel involved in crimes. Such measures have, in the cases of East and West
Darfur in particular, translated into increasing resentment from groups of Arab
descent and increased crimes targeting Government personnel. Furthermore, despite
an overall reduction in criminal incidents in some population centres, criminality
across Darfur, particularly on the outskirts of towns and in more remote areas,
remained high.
Protective environment
Human rights, sexual and gender-based violence
32. Conditions of insecurity, brought about by the conflict, continue to exacerbate
civilian vulnerabilities, resulting in killings, physical injuries, abductions, sexual
and gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual violence. Impunity remains a
serious challenge constituting a threat to the peace process and civilians who, for
the most part, continue to be denied the right of redress. The number of violations of
international humanitarian law has increased since the launch of Operation Decisive
Summer in February 2014. Government authorities have not investigated allegations
of crimes committed against civilians by their security forces, except in a few
instances, instead attributing such actions to armed criminal elements. Victim and

10/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

witness accounts gathered by UNAMID describe the continued burning of villages,
looting of civilian property, including livestock, destruction of sources of livelihood
critical to civilian survival and aerial bombardment. Yet, owing to the perception
that the perpetrators belong to Government forces and to the lack of action from law
enforcement agencies, victims and witnesses are reluctant to report such violations
to the authorities.
33. The lengthy conflict, widespread proliferation of weapons and frequent
intercommunal fighting have all added to the risk of exposure and the vulnerability
of civilians, especially women and girls, to sexual and gender -based violence and
conflict-related sexual violence, including in camps for internally displaced persons.
During the rainy and migration seasons, cases of sexual and gender-based violence
often take place outside of camps, when internally displaced women and girls
engage in livelihood activities such as farming and firewood collection. Such
incidents are accompanied by the looting of property. Despite efforts by UNAMID
to provide security escorts to internally displaced women and girls as they undertake
such activities, threats and violence, including sexual harassment and rape,
continue. Survivors of sexual and gender-based violence are faced with a range of
challenges including social stigma, police inaction and the serious capacity deficit
in the justice sector. Such inaction has made victims reluctant to report incidents of
sexual and gender-based violence to the police.
Rule of law and justice system
34. Formal rule of law institutions continue to lack both the human resources and
the institutional capacity to cover the whole of Darfur, with little or no presence of
government authority in the form of courts, police stations, prosecution offices,
prisons and local administration in many localities. Out of 65 localities, formal
courts are located in only 19 and Government police stations in 29, which means
that only about one third of Darfuris have the possibility of acc ess to criminal
justice institutions. Furthermore, the capacity of the native administration to
facilitate the dispensation of informal or traditional justice has been severely
weakened as a result of its politicization by the Government.
35. Funding constraints resulting from years of inadequate budgetary allocations
and the conflict in the region have also continued to have an adverse impact on the
prison system, leading to multiple institutional, structural, logistical and human
resources-related challenges. Of 13 Government prisons in Darfur, seven are located
in North Darfur, three in South Darfur and one each in Central, East and West
Darfur. Detention conditions that do not comply with the international minimum
standards, including overcrowding and a lack of basic, life-sustaining services,
undermine public safety and trust in the criminal justice system, as well as
prisoners’ rights.
36. In recent years, the Government has implemented additional measures to fight
impunity and strengthen accountability, including the establishment of the Special
Criminal Court on the Events in Darfur and its Special Prosecutor in 2012, together
with amendments to the Sudanese Criminal Act which brought specific offences
under the purview of international humanitarian law, the deployment of new
prosecutors and the inauguration of the Supreme Court Division for Darfur states in
Nyala, South Darfur. Those measures are yet to produce concrete results, owing to
the persistent conflict. The Sudanese judicial system is suffic ient and the Special

16-08424

11/19

S/2016/510

Criminal Court is capable of prosecuting atrocities and serious crimes.
Accountability remains a significant concern, however, with most of the cases
recorded and prosecuted by the Special Criminal Court involving lesser offences of
an ordinary criminal nature.
Status of internally displaced persons in Darfur
37. The Darfur conflict has had a particularly adverse impact on internally
displaced persons. Out of 2.6 million displaced civilians, some 1.6 million remain in
60 camps for internally displaced persons across the region. The remainder are
located in various gatherings outside camps and within host communities. Over
760,000 internally displaced persons are located in South Darfur, approximately
700,000 in North Darfur, 450,000 in Central Darfur, 380,000 in East Darfur and
over 320,000 in West Darfur.
38. Internally displaced persons across Darfur have voiced their rejection of the
Government’s plans regarding the closure of camps for internally displaced persons,
arguing that no voluntary return to their places of origin would be possible in the
absence of a comprehensive peace agreement that provides for security, stability,
justice, access to basic services, compensation and land rights. In particular,
internally displaced persons have highlighted the ongoing fighting in Jebel Marra,
including aerial bombardment, attacks and harassment by Arab militia and
occupation of their land in places of origin as key concerns. In direct contradiction
to the Government’s position, as articulated by the Second Vice-President in
December 2015, internally displaced persons have maintained that the conditions
are not in place for them to begin a new life in their areas of origin or to settle
sustainably elsewhere. After more than a decade, ma ny of the internally displaced
persons, who have been displaced since the conflict began in 2003, are now
accustomed to living in an urban environment and would expect a similar level of
services in their places of origin.
Facilitation of humanitarian assistance and safety and security of
humanitarian personnel
39. Given the significant and increasing needs in Darfur, the provision of
emergency humanitarian relief remained a key priority for humanitarian actors in
Darfur. UNAMID continued to facilitate the work of such actors primarily through
the provision of armed escorts for the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
conflict-affected areas and the creation of a safe and secure environment for
humanitarian personnel. Humanitarian actors relied heavil y on such services,
particularly in the light of security conditions, significant restrictions on access and
the overall lack of an adequate presence of Government police. Humanitarian and
development actors further relied on the mission’s team sites throughout the region
for the implementation of their programmes, including for pre -positioning of
humanitarian assistance where other secure storage facilities were not available, and
for accommodation. The operational constraints faced by UNAMID also had an
impact on the availability of security escorts for humanitarian missions.

12/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

C.

Prevention or mitigation of community conflict through mediation
and, in conjunction with the country team, measures to address
root causes
40. In the face of increasing levels of intercommunal violence over the past few
years, the Sudanese authorities, particularly at the state level, have declared the
maintenance of security as one of their main priorities. As part of their efforts, they
have deployed security forces to hotspots and established buffer zones between
warring communities, enhanced mediation engagement with local communities by
the federal, state and local government to achieve cessation of hostilities and
reconciliation agreements, and, in some cases, arrested individuals involved in
violent acts.
41. Most recently, in April 2016, the Government announced its intention to
implement a civilian disarmament campaign for the collection of illegal weapons,
which will be conducted in two phases: a time-bound voluntary phase, during which
the owner would receive financial compensation; followed by a forcible phase,
during which all carriers of weapons, with the exception of regular forces, would be
subjected to the process. In an attempt to address conflict between farmers and
nomadic herders (with the exception of East Darfur, which has its ad hoc
mechanisms), each state government has established crop protection committees to
prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts between farmers and noma dic herders. In
East Darfur, the deployment of Government forces to Labado improved security and
minor incidents of farm destruction were resolved through traditional mechanisms.

IV. Challenges to mandate implementation
42. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
humanitarian actors continued to face considerable challenges in the implementation
of their respective mandates in Darfur. During this period, UNAMID was the target
of nine armed attacks, as well as other criminal acts (break-ins, burglaries and theft,
robberies, carjackings and assaults), mainly committed by criminal groups or
militia, as well as denials of access and freedom of movement. Further, mandate
implementation was hampered by restrictions, particularly in t erms of access, and
denials and delays in the issuance of visas for international civilian staff and in the
clearance of container shipments at Port Sudan.
43. In an effort to jointly address many of those challenges, the African Union, the
United Nations and UNAMID consistently engaged the Government on the
impediments, within the framework of a high-level meeting between the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Deputy Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan, held in New York on 29 September
2015, and two strategic-level tripartite meetings held in Addis Ababa, on 28 January
2016, and in New York, on 22 March 2016. Communication in this regard improved
with the arrival of the new UNAMID leadership team and the convening of three
technical-level tripartite meetings between the Government and the mission, since
January 2016. During the most recent strategic-level tripartite meeting, held on
22 March 2016, the Government of the Sudan assured the participants of it s
intention to address all outstanding operational issues with the required urgency,

16-08424

13/19

S/2016/510

with progress to be reviewed within a period of two weeks. Despite such assurances,
however, significant operational impediments persist.

A.

Visas
44. Since 1 July 2015, UNAMID has experienced a significant increase in the level
of denials and delays in visa issuance, particularly for international staff in the
mission’s substantive civilian sections. In addition, in October 2015, the Government
changed its previous practice regarding resident visas for UNAMID staff by
decreasing the period of renewal from 12 months to 6 months. As a result, the work
of UNAMID in those areas has been significantly hampered, while the increasing
uncertainty for current and prospective staff has had an impact on the mission’s
ability to attract and retain talent. Currently, the overall vacancy rate for international
civilian professionals is 31 per cent. The sections most severely affected remain
human rights (47 per cent vacancy rate), protection of civilians (50 per cent vacancy
rate), communications and public information (33 per cent vacancy rate), and security
(50 per cent vacancy rate), as well as the Joint Operations Centre (41 per cent
vacancy rate).
45. From 1 July 2015 to 15 May 2016, the Government approved 2,247 visas,
including 97 for civilian staff members, 386 for military and 871 for police. The
remainder were contractors, official visitors and dependents. At the same time, a
total of 39 visas were rejected, including 19 for civilian staff members and one for
police. The rejections included selected candidates for such crucial senior positions
as the Principal Humanitarian Affairs Officer and the Senior Women ’s Protection
Adviser, on two occasions each. Resident visas for the Acting and Deputy Joint
Special Representative and the Head of Office for West Darfur were renewed for
only two months, while applications for the Head of Office in South Darfur and the
Deputy Head of the Human Rights Section were rejected. In March and April 2016,
out of the 97 rejected civilian visas from 2015, the Government approved 17,
mainly for substantive staff, which were included in a prioritized list of 29
submitted by UNAMID to the Government on 24 February 2016. As some of those
staff members had waited for very long periods to obtain their entry visas, several
accepted offers of employment elsewhere and only 12 are in the process of joining
the mission. The other 80 visas rejected in 2015 remain outstanding.

B.

Customs clearance
46. After delays in the clearance of food rations for military and police
contingents in the second half of 2015 resulted in severe shortages and the decrease
of stocks to less than 20 days, the situation was temporarily resolved by late
October 2015. As of 20 May 2016, however, a total of 511 shipments are still at Port
Sudan pending release by the Government. Out of those, 202 containers were for
food rations. Based on the amount of current reserve stocks, UNAMID is expected
to run out of food rations for its contingents by 28 June 2016. Items that remain in
Port Sudan, some of which have been held since April 2015, also include vehicles,
armoured personnel carriers and other military equipment, spare parts, self sustainment and medical supplies and defence material. On 19 May, UNAMID was
informed of the decision of the Ministry of Finance to release 118 of the shipments
(which include 189 containers of food rations, five water tankers and 51 pallets and

14/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

packages). The mission is following up with the authorities in order to ensure the
swift release of the shipments.
47. Delays in the clearance of containers containing military and police equipment
severely impeded the ability of the mission to protect civilians and themselves, to
communicate and to conduct robust patrols. In South Darfur, for example, a
complete battalion is currently without personal weapons, and another military unit
is unable to perform its mandated tasks as most of its armoured personnel carriers
are either in Port Sudan or under repair. Military and police personnel across the
mission area are living with shortages in sustainment supplies, including
ammunition and medical and communications equipment, which has also affected
overall troop morale.

C.

Access and freedom of movement for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
48. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur continued to
face severe restrictions on its access and freedom of movement in Darfur,
particularly on its patrols and verification missions to Jebel Marra and other conflict
areas in the aftermath of intercommunal clashes and attacks on the civilian
population. The vast majority of movement restrictions were imposed by the
Sudanese authorities in violation of the status-of-forces agreement. As justification
for the restrictions, the Government most often cited insecurity and its obligation to
protect UNAMID under that agreement, as well as the lack of necessary clearance.
As a result of such restrictions, UNAMID could not immediately u ndertake critical
security and assessment missions to areas of fighting between Government forces
and armed movements and intercommunal violence, such as parts of Jebel Marra in
Central Darfur, Anka in North Darfur and Mouli in West Darfur. UNAMID also
experienced flight restrictions, which increased following the resumption of fighting
in Jebel Marra in mid-January 2016, particularly for flights to locations of civilian
displacement.

D.

Challenges faced by the country team
49. Humanitarian actors regularly reported the cancellation of planned missions
owing to the denial of or delays in granting travel requests, particularly to areas
most affected by the conflict, as well as other restrictions. Areas of conflict in Jebel
Marra, particularly in Central Darfur, remained largely inaccessible. However, an
inter-agency assessment mission was able to reach Fanga Suk in November 2015 for
the first time since 2011. Assessments also reached Fanga Suk and Rockero town in
April 2016, the latter reached for the first time by international partners since 2005.
Initial food distribution was conducted in Nertiti, Thur and Guldo, Central Darfur,
in April 2016, but no missions to assess needs or provide multisectoral assistance
have been allowed. Since the resumption of fighting in Jebel Marra, over a third of
field-level access requests have been denied. Humanitarian actors were also unable
to secure timely access to people displaced from Mouli and surrounding areas in El
Geneina, West Darfur, in January 2016.
50. Funding constraints also affected the humanitarian response. The humanitarian
response plan for 2015 had a funding shortfall of 42 per cent (over $430 million),

16-08424

15/19

S/2016/510

the fourth consecutive year in which the funding gap has been 40 per cent or higher.
As a result, humanitarian operations have had to be scaled down, particularly in
sectors with higher funding gaps such as protection and return, recovery and
integration. Between August 2015 and April 2016, five international partners were
either closed down by the authorities or left Darfur owing to financial or operational
difficulties. While the 2016 response plan has not yet been finalized, only
$105 million has been received to date.
51. The lack of funding to support the effective implementation of the Darfur
Development Strategy also remained a key issue. In December 2015, the first
instalment of $10 million was received by the United Nations Fund for Recovery,
Reconstruction and Development in Darfur, for 12 joint projects that have
commenced in four localities in Central, North and West Darfur.

V. Troop-to-task review
52. Taking into account the volatile security situation and the continued large scale displacement of persons in Darfur since 1 July, the troop -to-task review
assessed the authorized strength of the military and police components and their
deployment in detail. It recommended that the current numbers of uniformed
personnel be retained in order to enable the mission to maintain a credible footprint
in conflict-affected areas for the protection of civilians. In order to effectively
implement its protection of civilians and facilitation of humanitarian assistance
mandate, the review found that UNAMID should ensure a higher degree of
flexibility in the deployment of its military contingent.
53. With only 14 out of an authorized strength of 16 battalions deployed, the
mission’s military component is currently overstretched. The mission will further
consider options to compensate for the lack of predictable mobility by enhancing
the capacities of team sites with greater operational significance, through the
deployment of troops. To accommodate this reinforcement, other locations will be
considered for reductions in strength or even closure.
54. At the same time, and in line with the conflict analysis above, the review
concurred with UNAMID plans to establish new team sites in Anka, North Darfur,
Adila/Abu Karinka, East Darfur and Um Dukhun, Central Darfur, for which
Government approval remains pending. As a means of achieving the desired
flexibility, the sixteenth battalion would be reconfigured into a highly mobile
reserve capability, while the planned induction of the military utility helicopter unit
would complement the mission’s quick reaction capability.
55. At present, UNAMID has a 26 per cent vacancy rate for individual police
officers, which is the result of delays in the issuance of visas, the repatriation and
non-replacement of police officers from certain police-contributing countries and
bureaucratic delays in their deployment. Given the importance of individual police
officers in engaging with internally displaced persons and local communities,
Government police and humanitarian actors, there is a further need to increase their
field presence. The review recommended the streamlining of posts from mission and
sector headquarters to team sites, which are understaffed, as well as from currently
less operationally significant team sites.

16/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

56. Given the importance of female police officers for interactions with internally
displaced persons, the Secretariat will redouble its efforts to increase the number of
female officers from police-contributing countries. A more flexible deployment of
formed police units across sector boundaries will be initiated to ensure adequate
protection for the internally displaced population. With respect to military and
police integration, a need for enhanced coordination and planning has been
identified, particularly for joint contingency planning based on common threat
assessments.

VI. Exit strategy
57. Further to Security Council resolution 2228 (2015) and the communiqués of
22 June and 31 July 2015 of the Peace and Security Council, the African Union, the
United Nations and the Government of the Sudan continued their discussions on the
development of an exit strategy for UNAMID based on the benchmarks set out by
the Peace and Security Council and the Security Council. The discussions took
place within the framework of a high-level meeting held on the margins of the
General Assembly, in September 2015, and of three strategic-level tripartite
meetings that have been held so far in 2016, in Addis Ababa, New York and
Khartoum.
58. The Joint Working Group, which was set up between the African Union, the
United Nations and the Government of the Sudan in February 2015 to discuss an
exit strategy, reconvened on 18 April in Khartoum, and from 12 to 22 May to visit
the five states of Darfur. In each state, the Joint Working Group was briefed by the
Governors and their governments, by UNAMID and by representatives o f internally
displaced persons. The Group also met with the Chairman of the Darfur Regional
Authority. All meetings took place in a cordial and constructive atmosphere.
59. Following the trip to Darfur, the Joint Working Group held discussions in
Khartoum and evaluated the implementation of the benchmarks and agreed on
recommendations, the implementation of which will provide elements for an exit
strategy that will enable the gradual and phased handover of mandated tasks to the
Government of the Sudan and the country team, taking into account the conditions
on the ground and the availability of financial resources. The Group did not reach a
consensus, however, on the issue of the reconfiguration of the mission and its
drawdown.
60. The outcome of the meeting of the Joint Working Group was discussed at the
twenty-first tripartite meeting, held on 23 May, during which the Government of the
Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations endorsed all the agreed
recommendations of the Group and requested the Group to reconvene to review the
implementation of its recommendations and the three benchmarks, within four
months.

VII. Recommendations
61. Since 1 July 2015, the nature of the Darfur conflict has remained largely
unchanged owing to three factors. First, there has been no concrete progress towards
a comprehensive political resolution to the conflict, since the Government of the

16-08424

17/19

S/2016/510

Sudan and the non-signatory armed movements are unable to agree on the way
forward. Second, as the root causes and the consequences of the conflict remain
largely unaddressed, intercommunal violence continues to be a prominent source of
insecurity and instability throughout the region. Third, while direct clashes between
Government and armed movement forces have subsided, the fighting with SLA/AW
in Jebel Marra has resulted in additional suffering and displacement of the civilian
population in Darfur.
62. The three strategic priorities of UNAMID, and their corresponding
benchmarks, remain valid. Within the framework of those priorities, and given the
situation in Darfur, it is our recommendation that UNAMID focus its efforts on two
issues in particular: first, protecting the displaced; and, second, addressing the
increasing threat of intercommunal violence in Darfur.
63. The protection of internally displaced persons. In a situation of continuing
armed conflict between Government forces and the armed movements, and
widespread intercommunal violence and attacks against civilians, the current
conditions in Darfur are not conducive to a large-scale return of internally displaced
persons to their places of origin. While taking note of the Government ’s
determination to see the displaced return to their areas of origin or resettle in their
current areas of displacement, any returns should be safe, voluntary and based on
the informed consent of the displaced themselves, in accordance with international
human rights law and international humanitarian law. Returns must also be
accompanied by durable solutions involving all relevant actors, including internally
displaced persons and host communities, and based on reliable, up -to-date baseline
data on the needs, protection concerns, demography and intentions of the internally
displaced persons themselves. UNAMID will support the efforts of humanitarian
partners and provide protection to the displaced during this process by prioritizing
its activities and existing resources based on a mapping of the protection situation in
camps for internally displaced persons, areas at risk of further displacement and
potential areas of return across Darfur. UNAMID will implement its protection of
civilians mandate in this context, in accordance with it s current preventive and
responsive initiatives and its protective environment-building initiatives. The
mission will continue to engage with the Government and work in coordination with
the country team and humanitarian actors in line with their respectiv e mandates and
with due respect for humanitarian principles.
64. Tackling intercommunal violence. Various initiatives have been launched by
the Government in order to curb the significant levels of intercommunal violence in
Darfur. Those efforts, however, are not sustainable in the absence of a
comprehensive strategy to address the root causes of the conflict in Darfur. Such a
strategy would entail the conclusion of a comprehensive political agreement,
following extensive consultations with all stakeholder s on key issues such as the
equitable management of land and other resources, that fully recognizes and
upholds the rights of farmers and nomadic herders and empowers traditional and
other local conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms, while strength ening the
capacity of the criminal justice system to maintain law and order and ensure
accountability for crimes.
65. Given the persistent nature of this form of violence and its continued intensity,
UNAMID will further prioritize its mandate implementati on efforts by
strengthening existing activities and devising a mission -wide approach to address

18/19

16-08424

S/2016/510

intercommunal conflicts. Building on its mandated activities relating to the
protection of civilians and support to local dispute resolution, the strategy would be
based on prevention, mitigation and protection, including efforts to address some of
the triggers and causes of such conflicts, albeit, in most cases, temporarily.
Specifically, the strategy would prioritize the allocation of the mission ’s existing
resources to support ongoing mediation or reconciliation processes and strengthen
early warning mechanisms, while concentrating on the protection of civilians. To
achieve more durable solutions, UNAMID would also work with the country team
to enhance the capacity of government and traditional conflict resolution
mechanisms, to encourage reform and to mobilize additional resources for
addressing the root causes of intercommunal violence.
66. Conscious of the fact that the situation in Darfur can only be addres sed
through a mutually beneficial process, the leadership of UNAMID should continue
working with the Government to improve relations in order to create a supportive
and safe working environment for the mission. It is critical that the Government
take all necessary steps to enable UNAMID and humanitarian actors to implement
their respective mandates by removing all outstanding impediments to their
operations and providing full and unhindered access and freedom of movement,
issuing visas for international civilian staff and clearing shipments at Port Sudan.
67. The above-mentioned measures will serve to enhance the impact of UNAMID
efforts to ensure that the people of Darfur are protected and to work towards the
resolution of the conflict. However, it cannot be resolved in the absence of a
comprehensive political solution. We commend the African Union High -level
Implementation Panel and UNAMID for their efforts to revitalize the Darfur peace
process by engaging with the non-signatory movements. Since there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Darfur, all parties to the conflict must
immediately resume direct talks in good faith. We strongly urge SLA/AW to join the
peace process, without any preconditions, in order to achieve a cessation of
hostilities as a first step towards a comprehensive and sustainable peace agreement.
68. Given the current situation in Darfur and the limited progress towards meeting
UNAMID benchmarks, and pending the implementation of the recommendations of
the Joint Working Group, which will be enhanced by the renewed focus of the
mission on the protection of internally displaced persons and addressing
intercommunal violence, as set out above, we recommend that the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union consider extending the
mandate of UNAMID for 12 months, until 30 June 2017, without modifying its
priorities or adjusting its authorized troop and police ceiling.

16-08424

19/19
