UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/25
24 August 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3918th meeting of the Security Council, held on 24 August 1998 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "Letter dated
11 March 1998 from the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/223) and letter dated 27 March 1998
from the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/1998/272)",
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of
the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 5 August 1998 (S/1998/712) submitted pursuant to its
resolution 1160 (1998) of 31 March 1998.
"The Security Council remains gravely concerned about the recent
intense fighting in Kosovo which has had a devastating impact on the
civilian population and has greatly increased the numbers of refugees and
displaced persons.
"The Security Council shares the concern of the Secretary-General that
the continuation or further escalation of the conflict in Kosovo has
dangerous implications for the stability of the region. In particular, the
Council is gravely concerned that given the increasing numbers of displaced
persons, coupled with the approaching winter, the situation in Kosovo has
the potential to become an even greater humanitarian disaster. The Council
affirms the right of all refugees and displaced persons to return to their
homes. In particular, the Council emphasizes the importance of unhindered
and continuous access of humanitarian organizations to the affected
population. The Council is concerned over reports of increasing violations
of international humanitarian law.
"The Security Council calls for an immediate ceasefire. The Council
emphasizes that the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Kosovo Albanians must achieve a political solution to the issue of
Kosovo and that all violence and acts of terrorism from whatever quarter
are unacceptable, and reiterates the importance of the implementation of
its resolution 1160 (1998). The Council reaffirms the commitment of all
98-24703 (E)

240898

/...

S/PRST/1998/25
English
Page 2

Member States to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, and urges the authorities of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian leadership to enter immediately into
a meaningful dialogue leading to an end to the violence and a negotiated
political solution to the issue of Kosovo. It supports in this context the
efforts of the Contact Group, including its initiatives to engage the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanian
leadership in discussions on the future status of Kosovo.
"In this regard, the Security Council welcomes the announcement by
Dr. Ibrahim Rugova, the leader of the Kosovo Albanian community, of the
formation of a negotiating team to represent the interests of the Kosovo
Albanian community. The formation of the Kosovo Albanian negotiating team
should lead to the early commencement of a substantial dialogue with the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with the aim of ending
the violence and achieving a peaceful settlement, including the safe and
permanent return of all internally displaced persons and refugees to their
homes.
"It remains essential that the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Kosovo Albanians accept responsibility for ending the
violence in Kosovo, for allowing the people of Kosovo to resume their
normal lives and for moving the political process forward.
"The Security Council will continue to follow the situation in Kosovo
closely and will remain seized of the matter."

-----
