\ l.

3. A/so expresses its apprccwlion to the Govemments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the cooperation which they have extended to the SecretaryGeneral and to the High Commissioner on mattcr\ conceming the welfare of those refugccs:
4. Notes with appr<'Ciation thc financia] and material
support provided for the studcnt refugccs by Membcr
States, the Office of thc Unitcd Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, other bodics of the U nitcd Nations
system and intergovemmental and non-governmental
organizations;
5. Requests the Sccretary-(jcncral. in co-operation
with the High Commissioner, to continue to organize and
implement an effective programmc of cducational and
other appropriate assistancc for 5tudcnt refugccs from
Namibia and South Africa who havc taken asylum in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia:
6. Urges ali Member States and intcrgovcrnmcntal and
non-govemmental organizations to continuc contributing
generously to the assistancc programmcs for student refugees, through financia] support of thc regular programmcs
ofthe High Commissioner. ofthc projects identified in thc
report of the Secretary-General and of the projects and
programmes, including unfunded projccts, which will be
submitted to the Second lntcmational Confercncc on
Assistance to Refugees in Africa, to be held at Gcneva in
July 1984:
7. A/so urges ali Member States and ali intcrgovernmental and non-govcmmental organizations to assist thc
countries of asylum materially and othcrwisc to cnablc
them to continue to discharge thcir humanitarian obligations towards refugees:
8. Appeals to the Office of the Unitcd Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. the United Nations Dcvelopment Programme and the United Nations EducationaL
Scientific and Cultural Organization. as well as other international and non-govemmental organizations. to continue
providing humanitarian and development assistancc to
expedite the settlement of student refugees from South
Africa who have been granted asylum in Botswana.
Lesotho. Swaziland and Zambia:
9. Calls upon ali agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system to continue co-operating with the
Secretary-General and the High Commissioner in the
implementation of humanitarian programmes of assistance for the student refugees in southern Africa:
10. Requests the High Commissioner, in eo-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to keep the mattcr
under review, to apprise the Economic and Social Council,
at its second regular session of 1984, ofthc current status of
the programmes and to report to the General Assembly at
its thirty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plcnar_1' meeting
16 Dcccmhcr 1983

38/96.

Summary or arbitrary executions

The General Assemhly.
Recalling the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 97 which states that every human bcing
has the right to life, libcrty and security of person and that
everyone is entitled in ful] equality to a fair and public
hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal.
9 7 Resolu!Ion 217 A (111).
98Resolution 2200 A (XXII. annex.

201

Resolutions adopted on the reports of lhe Third Commitke

/lal'1ng regard to thc provisions of the lnternational
Covenant on Civil ami Political Rights. 4 ~ which states
that every human heing has the inhercnt right to lile. that
this right shall bC" protectcd by law and that no one shall he
arbitrarily deprived of !11s lile.
Rccal!ing a/so its resolution 341175 of 17 DC"cemher
1979. in which it reaffirmed that mass and tlagrant violations of human rights are of special concern to the United
Nations and urged the ( 'ommission on Human Rights to
take timcly and effectivc action in existing ami future cases
of mass and ílagrant violations of human rights.
Rccalling fimhcr its resolution 36/22 of 9 Novcmher
1981. in which it condemned the practice of summary ami
arbitrary executions, and its resolution 371182 of 17
Decemhcr 1982.
J)eep/r a/armed at the occurrcnce ()11 a large scale of
summary or arbitrary executions. including extra-legal
executions,
Reca/!ing resolution 1982 '13 of 7 Scptemher 1982. of
the Suh-Commission on Prevention of Diseriminatio11 and
Protection of Minorities 44 in which the Sub-Commission
recommended that effcctivc measures should be adoptcd
to preven! the occurrcnce of summary or arhitrary executions,
( ·onmzccd of the need for appropriatc action to combat
and C"ventually eliminate this practice. which rcpresents a
flagran! violation of thc most fundamental human right.
thc right to lite.
1. !! e/comes Economic and Social ( ·ouncil resolution
1982 35 of 7 Mav 1982, in which the Council decided to
appoint for one year a special rapporteur to examine the
questions related to summary or arhitrary executions and
to submit to the Commission on Human Rights. at its
thirty-ninth session. a rnmprehensive report on the occurrence and extent of thc practice of sueh cxecutions.
together with bis conclusio11s ami rccommendations:
')
lakes note of Economic and Social Council rcsolution 1983/36 of 26 Mav 1983. in which the Council
decided to continuc the· mandate of the Special Rapporteur. Mr. S. A. Wako, for another year and decidcd that
the Commission on Human Rights should consider the
question of summary or arbitrary exccutions as a matter or
high priority at its fortieth session:
J. , l¡1peals to ali Governmcnts to co-opcrate with and
assist the Special Rapporteur of the Commission 011
Human Rights in the preparation of his rcport:
4. Rcquests the Secretary-Ge11eral to provide ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so that he rnay
cffectivcly carry out hi~ mandate:
5. .-lgain requests the Sccretary-General to conti11ue to
use tris best endeavours in cases where the mínimum standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14 and
15 of the lnternational Cove11ant on Civil and Political
Rights appear not to be respected:
h. Requests thc Commission 011 Human Rights at its
fortieth session. on thC' basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Eco11omic
and Social Couneil rcsolutions 1982135 and 1983/36. to
make recomrnendations conccrning appropriate action to
comhat and eventually elimi11ate the practice of summary
or arbitrary executions
100th p/cnun· ml'Ct/1/g
16 f)ffcmhcr 1983
9"See l:CN.4,l'!X.14-t·:C,..\Suh.~ l4X.'4\ ami Corr.l. ,·hap
'.-il'L'l

:\

'\XI.
