A /71/PV.69

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

69th plenary meeting

Thursday, 2 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Sisilo (Solomon
Islands), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
The Acting President: Before proceeding to the
items on our agenda, I would like to remind delegations
that, as Organizationf 1 January, the sponsorship of all
draft resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly
plenary is taking place via “General Assembly Plenary
eSponsorship” in the e-deleGATE electronic portal,
which is maintained by the Secretariat. The requisite
registration form was circulated to all Permanent
Missions to the United Nations in a communication from
the Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly
and Conference Management dated 28 November 2016.
Additionally, a daily announcement has been posted in
The Journal of the United Nations.
As today is the first plenary meeting since the
operationalization of e-sponsorship in the General
Assembly plenary, I would like to remind delegations
wishing to sponsor any of the proposals that are before
the Assembly this morning to do so electronically.
Written forms of sponsorship will no longer be accepted.
Immediately preceding action, I will announce that the
draft resolution or decision will be closed for electronic
sponsoring, after which any other country wishing
to sponsor will be invited to do so by pressing the
microphone button at its desk. All additional sponsors
will be read out by the Secretariat in accordance with
the usual practice.

Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/71/764)
The Acting President: In document A/71/764, the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that 14 Member States are in arrears in the
payment of their financial contributions to the United
Nations within the terms of Article 19 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
I should like to remind delegations that, under
Article 19 of the Charter,
“A member of the United Nations which is in
arrears in the payment of its financial contributions
to the Organization shall have no vote in the General
Assembly if the amount of its arrears equals or
exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it
for the preceding two full years.”
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the information contained in document A/71/764?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of peace
Draft resolution (A/71/L.56)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the General Assembly considered agenda item 14 at its
63rd plenary meeting, on 15 December 2016. Members
will also recall that the General Assembly, at its 67th

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-02821 (E)

*1702821*

A/71/PV.69

plenary meeting, on 22 December 2016, adopted
resolution 71/249, and, at its 68th plenary meeting on
23 December 2016 adopted resolution 71/252 under
this item.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.56.
Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan) (spoke in Russian):
On behalf of the delegation of Turkmenistan, I should
like to thank all delegations for the constructive and
helpful negotiations that have led to the substantive text
of draft resolution A/71/L.56, entitled “International
day of neutrality”.
In September 2015, the international community
committed
to
implementing
the
Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030. The new agenda includes
the three pillars of sustainable development — social,
economic and environmental. As was underscored at
the recent high-level dialogue on the theme “Building
Sustainable Peace for All: Synergies between the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Sustaining
Peace”, achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals is closely tied to sustainable peace. There can
be no peace without development and no development
without peace. Those concepts are inextricably
interrelated and must be addressed holistically, bearing
in mind that peace, justice, inclusion and the expansion
of economic opportunities are all interconnected.
By introducing this draft resolution, on the
establishment of an international day of neutrality,
under agenda item 14, entitled “Culture of peace”, it
is our hope to draw the General Assembly’s attention
to the political efforts of neutral States to achieve
sustainable peace, which warrants future study and
application. On 12 December 1995 and 3 June 2015,
the General Assembly adopted resolutions 50/80 and
69/285, respectively, on the permanent neutrality
of Turkmenistan, reflecting a new stage in the
understanding of the concept of neutrality.

02/02/2017

States as a stabilizing factor helping to consolidate peace
and security. The political phenomenon of neutral States
and their experience, including conflict prevention and
the use of preventive diplomacy, will no doubt help
to strengthen peace and stability and reduce tensions
all over the world. The draft resolution emphasizes
the fundamental role of preventive diplomacy and
highlights the importance of supporting the principles
of the sovereign equality of States, territorial integrity,
self-determination and non-intervention in the internal
affairs of other States.
We express our appreciation to the delegations
sponsoring the draft resolution and look forward to its
adoption by consensus.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take action on draft resolution A/71/L.56, entitled
“International day of neutrality”.
I

give

the

floor

to

the

representative

of

the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/71/L.56: Armenia,
Austria, the Central African Republic, China, Djibouti,
Honduras, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Jordan, Lebanon, the Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sierra
Leone and Sweden.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the

In December 2015, to sum up our country’s 20 years
of neutrality, Turkmenistan hosted an international
conference on the theme of “The policy of neutrality:
international cooperation for peace, security and
development”, in which we emphasized the need
to study neutrality and its role in achieving peace,
consensus and development.

wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution

In introducing today’s draft resolution, the
Government of Turkmenistan views the role of neutral

thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda

2/10

A/71/L.56?
Draft resolution A/71/L.56 was adopted (resolution
71/275).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
item 14.
17-02821

02/02/2017

Agenda items 19 and 73 (continued)
Sustainable development
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/71/L.57)
The Acting President: Members will recall that the
General Assembly considered sub-item (a) of agenda
item 73 at its 54th and 55th plenary meetings, held on
7 December 2016. Members will also recall that, at its
55th plenary meeting, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 71/123 under this item. We shall now proceed
to consider draft decision A/71/L.57.
The Assembly will now take action on draft decision
A/71/L.57, entitled “Accreditation and participation
of intergovernmental organizations in the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation
of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development and its preparatory
meeting”. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
adopt the draft decision?
Draft decision A/71/L.57 was adopted (decision
71/548).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 19 and of sub-item (a) of agenda item 73.
In order for the Assembly to take action on draft
resolution A/71/L.54, it will be necessary to reopen
the Assembly’s consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda
item 19.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (c) of
agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 19 (continued)
Sustainable development
(c) Disaster risk reduction
Draft resolution A/71/L.54
The Acting President: Members will recall that,
at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2016,
the General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item
(c) of agenda item 19 to the Second Committee. In

A/71/PV.69

order to enable the General Assembly to take action
expeditiously on draft resolution A/71/L.54, may I take
it that the Assembly wishes to consider sub-item (c) of
agenda item 19 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.54.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): It
is my honour to address the plenary of the General
Assembly, on behalf of the delegations of Chile and
Switzerland, to introduce draft resolution A/71/L.54
for consideration and adoption, under sub-item (c) of
item 19 of the agenda of the seventy-first session, on
the subject of sustainable development as it relates to
disaster risk reduction.
I wish to take this opportunity to acknowledge
publicly and express our appreciation for the remarkable
work done by the open-ended intergovernmental expert
working group on indicators and terminology relating to
disaster risk reduction, which met in Geneva. Similarly,
we would like to thank the Member States that have
sponsored this draft resolution for their support.
The outcome of this draft resolution is the result of an
extensive negotiation process that began in March 2015
and concludes today with the adoption of indicators and
terminology related to disaster risk reduction. However,
the work does not end here; it is just beginning. The
implementation of the indicators included in the draft
resolution is the next step. Those indicators will enable
us to effectively measure the seven global targets of the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, which,
consistent with the indicators of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, seek to develop policies that
foster resilience and cooperation among nations and
all stakeholders.
I would also like to express the commitment of my
delegation to continuing to support initiatives related to
disaster risk reduction and to seek to develop policies
linked to the implementation of the Sendai Framework.
In conclusion, I wish to express my gratitude to
the Member States that are generously helping my
country to combat the forest fires affecting central and
southern Chile.

17-028213/10

A/71/PV.69

02/02/2017

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/71/L.54, entitled
“Report of the open-ended intergovernmental expert
working group on indicators and terminology relating
to disaster risk reduction”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/71/L.54: Albania, Argentina, India,
Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Ukraine. Further sponsors are the Niger,
Serbia, Guatemala, Maldives, Nigeria and Senegal.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/71/L.54?
Draft resolution A/71/L.54 was adopted (resolution
71/276).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (c) of agenda item 19?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 30
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale dated 6 December 2016 from
the Permanent Mission of the United Arab
Emirates to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General (A/71/665)
Draft resolution (A/71/L.55)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates to introduce
draft resolution A/71/L.55.
Mr. Bin Sulayem (United Arab Emirates): Allow
me to take this opportunity to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this plenary meeting
on agenda item 30, “The role of diamonds in fuelling
conflict”. It is a great honour for me to represent the
United Arab Emirates in the capacity of Chair of the
Kimberley Process in 2016 and to address the General
Assembly today.
4/10

I would like to thank the preceding Chair, Angola,
for its remarkable stewardship of the Kimberley Process
in 2015, its consistent support in advancing progress
this year and its valuable advice to my delegation. I
would also like to take this opportunity to express my
sincere gratitude to all the sponsors of draft resolution
A/71/L.55 for their kind support, and of course to all
the participants of the Kimberley Process, which is a
unique multistakeholder initiative working to ensure
that the diamond industry works in the service of the
producing countries and populations.
Before I introduce the substance of the draft
resolution itself, allow me to briefly recount my
experience as Chair over the past year.
Representing the Governments, the industry and
civil society members involved in the diamond trade, I
was able to visit more than 20 countries, including both
existing and prospective Kimberley Process members.
Our belief is that everything we do in the Kimberley
Process must support and direct work that is largely
in the developing world. During my chairship, I have
been proud to represent the officials who regulate the
diamond trade in the producing countries. My trip to
the Central African Republic, a country that had been
excluded from the Kimberley Process, was particularly
important in terms of helping the country to meet
its Kimberley Process requirements and enabling it
to resume the export of rough diamonds from newly
compliant zones.
I would like to thank all delegations that participated
in the negotiation process held two weeks ago for their
constructive and fruitful cooperation. We are pleased
to report on our collective achievements throughout
2016 and to note where improvements can be made.
The draft resolution notes the progress made by the
Central African Republic regarding the implementation
of the administrative decision and operational framework
for the resumption of exports of rough diamonds,
and welcomes the decision of the Kimberley Process
monitoring team for the Central African Republic to
declare four subprefectures as compliant zones. The
draft resolution also welcomes the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela’s return to participating in the Process
and its commitment to hosting a review visit. Another
measure of progress that we should highlight is that
Gabon was encouraged to begin its admission process.
I would like to conclude by noting three specific
proposals for strengthening the Kimberley Process that
17-02821

02/02/2017

A/71/PV.69

the United Arab Emirates made in its capacity as Chair
for 2016.

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the European Union.

The first is aimed at the fact that the Kimberley
Process suffers from a structural deficit — it lacks
any form of permanent secretariat with professional
skills and resources that can outlive the rotation of
country Chairs. For example, the Kimberley Process
family has worked hard with the Central African
Republic authorities to bring back a legitimate diamond
industry there. But our working groups and teams are
all volunteers, functioning without an administrative
infrastructure. Ideally, we should have been able to
work faster and more effectively, but that cannot be
done without a permanent secretariat. I am pleased that
our proposal to establish such a secretariat has been
welcomed and is included in the draft resolution.

Mr. Babajide (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
European Union and its member States, which act
as a single participant in the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, would first like to congratulate
the United Arab Emirates on its chairship of the
Kimberley Process and welcome the results that have
been achieved in strengthening the Kimberley Process
and confronting future challenges. It is my pleasure to
confirm that the EU has been selected as Chair of the
Kimberley Process for 2018. The EU has been deeply
committed to the creation and success of the Process
since its beginning, in 2003. Throughout the life
of the Process, we have been actively engaged in its
committees and working groups and have collaborated
closely with our Process partners by participating in
and leading review visits. In the course of the EU’s
chairship of the Process in 2018, we will strive to build
on that experience and to forge consensus among all its
participants in order to further strengthen and improve
the Process for the benefit of all involved in the supply
chain, from diamond miners to traders and consumers.

Secondly, civil-society participation is vital to
the success of the Kimberley Process, but many very
experienced non-governmental organizations are
effectively excluded because they lack direct access to
the funding they need to take part. The draft resolution
therefore welcomes the willingness of the Kimberley
Process to further discuss the proposal by the United
Arab Emirates to establish a multi-donor trust fund
or similar mechanism that would provide financial
support for participation in the Process by a wide range
of civil-society organizations.
Thirdly, the accuracy of the information on
Kimberley Process certificates is undermined both
by under- and overvaluation. During our chairship,
we initiated a series of workshops with the goal of
developing a uniform methodology for valuing rough
diamonds. Although no consensus has been reached on a
detailed proposal, the draft resolution includes elements
that could go into making up such a methodology. In
its capacity as a member of the Kimberley Process, the
United Arab Emirates will continue to explore ways
to improve diamond-producing nations’ valuation
capability so that they can obtain the fairest value for
their natural resources.
We are very pleased that those initiatives are
recognized in the draft resolution and will be discussed
further under the incoming Chair. In that regard, on
behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I would like to
congratulate Australia, the 2017 Chair of the Kimberley
Process, and to welcome the European Union as
Vice-Chair for 2017.

In our view, one of the unique features of the
Kimberley Process is its tripartite structure. Industry
and civil society are both essential elements in the
Process and have contributed much to its establishment
and operation. In that regard, the EU calls on all
participants and observers to acknowledge the range of
opinions within the Process and to continue working
together to enhance the scheme’s effectiveness and
credibility. In particular, we rely on a close working
relationship with all of our partners in the Civil
Society Coalition to ensure that the Process continues
to be an effective tool for peacebuilding and conflict
prevention, to monitor its efficacy for diamond-mining
communities across the globe and to continue to
challenge us to do more and better. We will continue
to rely on that relationship to ensure that the Process
continues to be effective in future.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process Working Group
on Monitoring, the EU has actively contributed to
strengthening the implementation of the Process, and
we encourage participants to continue committing to
enhanced scrutiny through Kimberley Process peerreview visits and substantive annual reports. We
would like to express special appreciation to Belarus,
Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,

17-028215/10

A/71/PV.69

India, Lesotho, Sierra Leone, Tanzania and Turkey for
hosting review visits in 2016, and to Botswana, Brazil,
Ghana, Israel, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Mauritius, Norway, Panama and Togo for inviting review
visits in 2017. We note that the Process’s administrative
decision on peer review calls for all its participants to
host a review visit every three years. We firmly believe
that the consistent use of those implementation tools will
strengthen the Process’s ability to tackle the illicit trade
in conflict diamonds, and we call on all participants to
step up their efforts in that regard. In that context, we
have promoted the development of a guidance note on
the organization and conduct of review visits that will
serve as a practical tool for enabling both review-visit
team members and host participants to prepare for the
visits as well as possible.
The EU has served as Chair of the Kimberley
Process Working Group on Monitoring for more than
13 years, during which it has worked to forge consensus
on the handling of delicate issues related to the trade in
rough diamonds. Together with the other members of
the Working Group, we have worked to reinforce the
integrity of the Kimberley Process system and to ensure
that it can emerge from new challenges strengthened
and reinforced. Looking to the future and the rotation
of Chairs of the working bodies of the Process, the
EU congratulates South Africa and Botswana, newly
selected as Chair and Vice-Chair of the Working Group,
respectively. We have full trust and confidence that
their leadership and vision will give renewed impetus
to this important work.
The EU strongly welcomes the significant progress
that has been made in the Central African Republic,
especially through the herculean efforts of the
Kimberley Process monitoring team. The declaration of
four sub-prefectures as compliant zones is a milestone
in the country’s evolution, and we have taken positive
note of its initiative to engage cooperatively with
its neighbours and their ongoing work with several
stakeholders in the international community.
The EU also welcomes the readmission of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to the Kimberley
Process. It is an important step, and we encourage the
Venezuelan authorities to work to ensure compliance
with the minimum requirements. We also welcome the
recent steps taken by the Mano River Union countries
in West Africa to implement the regional approach
initiative, highlighted by the Security Council in its
resolution 2153 (2014), which lifted the embargo on
6/10

02/02/2017

the export of rough diamonds from Côte d’Ivoire.
We particularly welcome the continuing support to
the Mano River Union countries provided by the
technical team of the Working Group on Monitoring
and the Group of Friends of the Mano River Union,
especially their ongoing efforts to formalize the role
of the Mano River Union secretariat and involve other
implementing partners.
In 2016, the efforts continued to prevent diamonds
from fuelling conflict and to ensure that they ultimately
contribute to economic and social development,
particularly in developing countries. In that context,
the EU welcomes the commitment of the Kimberley
Process to the ongoing implementation of the
Washington Declaration on integrating development
and artisanal and small-scale diamond mining, as well
as of the Moscow Declaration on improving internal
controls over alluvial diamond production in the
Kimberley Process.
The EU welcomes the fact that over the past
12 months the issue of the valuation of rough diamonds,
particularly the development of a uniform methodology,
has been made a high priority. We strongly support the
efforts of the Kimberley Process towards creating fair
living conditions for people at the beginning of the
diamond pipeline, namely artisanal and alluvial miners
in developing countries.
Another important initiative that we highly valued
was the direct engagement with the Financial Action
Task Force on its report related to risks in the diamond
supply chain. We would welcome a continuation of
this fruitful engagement as part of ongoing efforts to
further strengthen Kimberley Process implementation.
The EU would like to express its gratitude to the
United Arab Emirates for its stewardship of the Process
last year. We now welcome Australia as the current
Kimberley Process Chair, and also welcome its vision
as Chair for 2017, aimed at further strengthening the
Kimberley Process implementation and ensuring that
the trade in rough diamonds is used for the benefit of
all people. We very much welcome and support the
priorities Australia has outlined for its chairship, and we
will encourage Australia to ensure that the Kimberley
Process renews its engagement with the civil-society
coalition in order to re-establish the tripartite nature of
the Kimberley Process.
The EU looks forward to working closely both with
Australia and India in a troika of Kimberley Process
17-02821

02/02/2017

chairs to deliver on a consistent work programme that
will prepare the Kimberley Process for the challenges
of the future.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Australia would like to
express its appreciation to the United Arab Emirates
for its efforts as Chair of the Kimberley Process in
2016. We thank the United Arab Emirates for its
generous hosting of Kimberley Process meetings and
for organizing additional special forum meetings. We
acknowledge the hard work of all stakeholders who
contributed to the outcomes of the Kimberley Process
in 2016. In particular, we recognize the efforts of the
six committees and working groups of the Process, as
well as special bodies.
The Kimberley Process monitoring team for the
Central African Republic undertook important work in
2016, including through its ongoing efforts to ensure
compliance with the Kimberley Process through
designated compliance zones. We support the continued
collaboration of Mano River Union countries to address
challenges in the West Africa region. We also welcome
Venezuela’s resumption of its participation, and the
progress achieved towards the implementation of the
Kimberley Process by candidate countries in 2016.
Australia is honoured to chair the Kimberley
Process in 2017. We proudly support the Kimberley
Process and the legitimate, transparent and conflict-free
trade of rough diamonds. As Chair, we are committed
to working with all stakeholders across Governments,
industry and civil society to ensure the continued
effectiveness and integrity of the Process.
Australia congratulates the European Union on
assuming the role of Vice-Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2017, in advance of assuming the role of
Chair and host in 2018. We also congratulate India on
its willingness to take over the roles of Vice-Chair in
2018, and Chair and host in 2019.
Our chairship will focus on strengthening the
implementation of the Kimberley Process, including
ways to further enhance the security of certificates
and rough diamond shipments. We will also conduct
a comprehensive review of the Kimberley Process
to develop options to further strengthen the scope,
integrity and implementation of the Process to ensure
its continuing, central relevance.
As Chair for 2017, Australia will continue the
practice of holding special forums to canvass broader

A/71/PV.69

matters pertinent to the diamond trade. Themes for
such dialogues include sustainability reporting, alluvial
and artisanal diamond mining, synthetic diamonds
and valuation. We will also hold a special session
to share lessons learned from cooperation between
the indigenous community and the mining sector
in Australia.
We look forward to engaging with all Kimberley
Process stakeholders and to welcoming delegates to
Australia this year.
Mr. Burity (Angola): At the outset, I would like
to express my delegation’s appreciation and gratitude
to the United Arab Emirates, the outgoing Chair of the
Kimberley Process, for its distinguished leadership
and hard work in facilitating and coordinating the
negotiations on draft resolution A/71/L.55, before the
Assembly today, which resulted in a text that we were
able to adopt by consensus during the negotiations.
The agenda item before us today is of great
importance not only because it seeks to protect the
legitimate trade in diamonds, but also because it
symbolizes the international community’s resolve to
individually and collectively do its part to ensure that
never again will resources such as diamonds bring
suffering and sorrow to humankind.
Back in 2003 in Kimberley, South Africa, the
international community took action to curb the trade
in conflict diamonds by establishing a distinct and
revolutionary international scheme, which Angola has
been proud to support since its inception. The Kimberley
Process is indeed a remarkable multi-stakeholder
approach in which Governments, the diamond industry
and civil society work together to monitor and control
the rough diamond trade, and which is now a model for
other efforts to combat natural-resource-based conflict.
I strongly believe that Angola would not have had to
face three painful decades of civil war — one of the
longest conflicts in the history of humankind, mainly
fuelled by illicit rough diamonds — if such a powerful
mechanism had been implemented earlier.
Angola firmly supports the Kimberley Process
principles and objectives, and its Certification Scheme,
for it has been proven to contribute to effectively
preventing the trade of illicit rough diamonds in the
legitimate diamond market, as well as to preventing such
illegal transactions from promoting armed conflict and
unlawful activities that threaten international peace

17-028217/10

A/71/PV.69

and security in many parts of the world, especially
in Africa.
In the spirit of the Kimberley Process and its
oversight of rough diamonds, the draft resolution
before us today, along with other United Nations legal
instruments, demonstrates the firm resolve of the States
Members of the United Nations and the international
community to prevent the creation of links between the
illegal trade of rough diamonds and armed conflicts. It
also reaffirms a strong commitment to the Process as
an international vehicle and emphasizes its continuing
role in regulating the diamond trade.
The Kimberley Process demonstrates that when
Governments work together with the private sector
and civil-society organizations they can achieve
meaningful outcomes. Their joint efforts to promote
the legitimate trade in diamonds truly help countries
to reduce poverty, promote transparency and economic
development, combat smuggling and money laundering,
and meet the Sustainable Development Goals.
In addition, Angola also emphasizes the importance
of the tripartite nature of the Kimberley Process.
Collaboration with diamond-industry associations,
international organizations and enforcement agencies
within the Process must be enhanced. All those
stakeholders benefit from the open exchange of
information and access to it.
Last but not least, Angola welcomes the
endorsement in Dubai of the Commonwealth of
Australia’s assumption of the 2017 chairship of the
Kimberley Process and the selection of the European
Union as its Vice-Chair for 2017. My delegation looks
forward to working with the 2017 Chair, as well as with
all Kimberley Process participants and observers in
promoting greater cooperation within the Organization.
Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): I thank you, Sir, for
convening today’s important debate on the the role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict. At the outset, I would
like to express our profound gratitude and appreciation
to the United Arab Emirates for its able conduct of the
affairs of the Kimberley Process during its tenure as
Chair in 2016. We commend the United Arab Emirates
for its leadership in contributing towards the ideals
of the Kimberley Process, as well as for being part of
the Kimberley Process architecture, which strives to
transform and reform itself.
8/10

02/02/2017

As a founding member of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme, Botswana remains encouraged by
concerted international efforts to stem the tide against
the so-called blood diamonds or conflict diamonds and
to bring integrity to the diamond industry. To that end,
we reaffirm our commitment to refusing to condone
the illicit trade in rough diamonds and the proliferation
of conflict as a consequence of the diamond trade. We
are therefore convinced that efforts must be made to
safeguard the tripartite nature and character of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.
It is only through mutual respect, collaboration and
cooperation that we can pursue the same goal, the same
objective and the same vision. The participation of civil
society must therefore be respected and recognized as
an integral part of this arrangement. In that regard,
Botswana has consistently sponsored and supported
this annual resolution of the General Assembly.
The fourteenth plenary meeting of the Kimberley
Process has come and gone, and we would like to express
our appreciation to the Government and the people of
the United Arab Emirates for their wonderful hospitality
and support during our stay in Dubai. Looking back at
the Kimberley Process, we continue to be inspired and
encouraged by the story of diamonds, as well as the
very significant transformation that has taken place in
the diamond industry. For us, diamonds are a source of
life. They bring food to the table, help us invest in our
children through education and training, create human
capital and promote inclusive sustainable development.
That is why we will do everything in our power
to help refine and redefine the story of diamonds as
it relates to human life and human nature, while
placing a high premium on integrity and high ethical
standards for sustainable development. We welcome
the report of the fourteenth plenary meeting of the
Kimberley Process (A/71/665, annex) and note with
satisfaction that the Process continues to make
significant strides in regulating international trade
in rough diamonds. The report also notes positive
developments including enhanced implementation of
Kimberley Process requirements, greater participation
in review mechanisms and increased transparency
and accuracy in reported statistics. The report further
underlines the challenges of non-compliance by some
participants on issues that need to be addressed with
the utmost urgency, especially for new participants in
the Kimberley Process or those whose sanctions have
17-02821

02/02/2017

A/71/PV.69

recently been lifted by both the Security Council and
the Kimberley Process family.

Draft resolution A/71/L.55 was adopted (resolution
71/277).

Borrowing from the tag line of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development — “leaving no one
behind” — we cannot afford to expect countries
without the institutional capacity and capability to
adhere to Kimberley Process standards to do so without
establishing a robust process for assisting them. We
are therefore proud to serve as Vice-Chair of the
Working Group on Monitoring and are ready to share
lessons, experiences and best practices on how to run a
professional diamond industry.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 30?

Pursuant to Security Council resolutions and
decisions on the Kimberley Process and the Central
African Republic, we are delighted to welcome the
Central African Republic back into the Kimberley
Process family, as it looks to take its rightful place in
the diamond industry and trade. We in Botswana will
therefore make ourselves available to our sister nation
of the Central African Republic as it prepares for the
diamond trade in the post-conflict era. In reaffirming
our commitment to the Kimberley Process Initiative, we
welcome Australia, as incoming Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2017, as well as the selection of the European
Union as Vice-Chair. I assure them of our delegation’s
continued support, cooperation and good will.

(g) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.55, entitled
“The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”. The draft resolution is now
closed for electronic sponsoring.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/71/L.55: Albania, Brazil, Cyprus, Greece,
Hungary, Lithuania, Montenegro, Namibia, Sweden
and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Additional sponsors are the Central African Republic,
the Netherlands and Armenia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.55?

It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments

Note by the Secretary-General (A/71/107)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 45th plenary meeting on 10 November 2016, the
Assembly took note of the appointments of Austria,
Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Morocco and the United
States of America as members of the Committee on
Conferences for a period of three years beginning on
1 January 2017.
Members will further recall that one seat from
among the Group of Asia-Pacific States, for a period
beginning on the date of appointment and ending on
31 December 2019, and two seats from among the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States, for
a period beginning on the date of appointment and
expiring on 31 December 2018, remain to be filled.
On the recommendation of the Chair of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States, I have appointed
Guyana as a member of the Committee on Conferences
for a term of office beginning on the date of appointment
and ending on 31 December 2018. May I take it that the
Assembly takes note of this appointment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: With regard to the remaining
one seat from the Asia-Pacific States and one seat from
the Latin American and Caribbean States, I urge those
Groups to submit their candidatures as soon as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (g) of agenda
item 115.

17-028219/10

A/71/PV.69

(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/71/752)
The Acting President: As indicated in the note
by the President (A/71/752), the General Assembly is
required during the current session to appoint members
to fill the vacancies in the Joint Inspection Unit that
will arise from the expiration of the terms of office on
31 December 2017 of Mr. Gopinathan Achamkulangare
of India, Mr. Gennady Tarasov of the Russian Federation,
Mr. George Bartsiotas of the United States of America,
Mr. Jean Wesley Cazeau of Haiti and Ms. Sukai Elie
Prom-Jackson of the Gambia.
Members will recall that, at its 29th plenary
meeting, on 14 October 2016, the Assembly decided to
fill one vacancy in the Joint Inspection Unit for a term
of office beginning on 1 January 2017 and expiring on
31 December 2021, which resulted from the resignation
of Mr. George Bartsiotas of the United States of
America with effect from 30 September 2016. This
vacancy was subsequently filled at the 48th plenary
meeting, on 21 November 2016, by Ms. Eileen Cronin
of the United States of America.
In accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and pursuant to Assembly resolution
61/238 of 22 December 2006, and having drawn up
a list of countries from among the regional groups
concerned following consultations with Member
States, I requested that the Gambia, Haiti, India and the
Russian Federation propose candidates to serve for a
period of five years, beginning on 1 January 2018.
As also indicated in document A/71/752, the
candidates, in accordance with paragraph 7 of Assembly

10/10

02/02/2017

resolution 59/267 of 23 December 2004, should have
experience in at least one of the following fields:
oversight, audit, inspection, investigation, evaluation,
finance, project evaluation, programme evaluation,
human resources management, management, public
administration, monitoring and all-programme
performance, as well as knowledge of the United
Nations system and its role in international relations.
As further indicated in document A/71/752,
after holding the appropriate consultations described
in paragraph 2 of article 3 of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and
with the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair
of the United Nations System Chief Executives
Board for Coordination, I submit to the Assembly the
candidatures of Ms. Sukai Prom-Jackson of the Gambia,
Mr. Jean Wesley Cazeau of Haiti, Mr. Gopinathan
Achamkulangare of India and Mr. Nikolay Lozinskiy
of the Russian Federation for appointment to the Joint
Inspection Unit for a five-year term of office beginning
on 1 January 2018 and expiring on 31 December 2022.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Ms. Prom-Jackson, Mr. Cazeau,
Mr. Achamkulangare and Mr. Lozinskiy as members
of the Joint Inspection Unit for a five-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2018 and expiring on
31 December 2022?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (h) of agenda item 115.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

17-02821
