S/2017/445

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 May 2017
Original: English

Implementation of Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the thirty-ninth submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of resolution 2165 (2014),
paragraph 5 of resolution 2191 (2014), paragraph 5 of resolution 2258 (2015) and
paragraph 5 of resolution 2332 (2016), in which the Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions
by all parties to the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the data available to United
Nations agencies on the ground and from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic and other Syrian and open sources. Data from United Nations agencies on
their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from 1 to 30 April
2017.
Box 1
Key points in April 2017
(1) Notwithstanding the ceasefire declared as at 30 December 2016, fighting in
multiple areas resulted in continued civilian deaths and injury and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure.
(2) The United Nations estimates that, as of the end of April, some 624,500 people
were living under siege in the Syrian Arab Republic, the overwhelming majority of
sieges being imposed by Government forces and their allies (82 per cent) and by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Dayr al-Zawr (15 per cent).
Furthermore, the United Nations estimates that some 3.9 million people are in hard to-reach areas. These numbers are subject to change, given the ongoing evacuation
processes in some areas.
(3) On 4 April, there were reports of a chemical weapons attack, in the Khan
Shaykhun area of southern Idlib, that killed 90 people and injured 200. In response,
on 7 April, the United States of America fired 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles at the
Sha‘irat military airbase in rural Homs, asserting that the airbase was used to launch
the reported chemical weapons strike on Khan Shaykhun.

17-08300 (E)

260517

*1708300*

S/2017/445

(4) After reaching a local agreement on 27 March regarding the four towns of
Madaya and Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq, and Fu‘ah and Kafraya, in Idlib,
simultaneous evacuations began on 15 April. While buses of evacuees waited for
hours on either side of the checkpoint in Rashidin while parties addressed
disagreements regarding the exchange, a car bomb struck the convoy originating in
Fu‘ah and Kafraya, killing at least 125 people and injuring 413. No party or group
has claimed responsibility for this terrorist attack. Emergency medical care was
swiftly provided by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in the Syrian Arab
Republic and from Turkey, as well as by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
(5) The Brussels conference on the Syrian Arab Republic and the region
successfully concluded on 5 April, with strong expressions of international
commitment to continue to respond to the Syrian conflict.
(6) From 19 April, displacement in Raqqah governorate reportedly increased
significantly, as non-State armed groups advanced to within 20 kilometres of ISIL held Raqqah city. A total of 66,275 people were displaced in April, including
approximately 39,000 people who were displaced to the Jubb al -Sha‘ir area on
24 April.
(7) The United Nations and health partners received credible reports of 30 attacks
that affected medical facilities and personnel throughout the month of April. The
United Nations received credible information of two attacks against education
facilities and related protected personnel.

II. Major developments
3.
Throughout the month of April, intensified military activity continued, with
fighting, including air strikes and artillery shelling, between pro-Government forces
and non-State armed opposition groups reported in the governorates of Damascus,
Rif Dimashq, Hama, Dar‘a, Qunaytirah, Aleppo, Idlib, Homs and Ladhiqiyah.
Pro-Government forces, Syrian Democratic Forces led by the Kurdish People’s
Protection Units, and the international coalition led by the United States of America
to counter ISIL all continued their offensives against ISIL targets in Raqqah and
Dayr al-Zawr governorates.
4.
On 4 April, the reported use of chemical weapons in an air strike in the Khan
Shaykhun area of southern Idlib killed 90 and injured 200 people. In response, on
7 April, the United States fired 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles at the Sha‘irat military
airbase in rural Homs, asserting that this airbase had been used to launch the
chemical weapons strike on Khan Shaykhun. The Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has determined, from biomedical samples, that
victims of the attack were exposed to sarin, or a sarin -like substance. The OPCW
fact-finding mission in the Syrian Arab Republic is investigating the attack and is
ready to deploy to Khan Shaykhun should the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic facilitate the visit and the security situation permit.
5.
After reaching a local agreement on 27 March regarding the four towns of
Madaya and Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq, and Fu‘ah and Kafraya, in Idlib,
simultaneous evacuations began on 15 April. Buses of evacuees waited for hours on
either side of the checkpoint in Rashidin in Aleppo governorate while parties
addressed disagreements regarding the exchange, and during that time a car bomb
struck the convoy originating in Fu‘ah and Kafraya, killing at least 125 people and
injuring 413. No party or group has claimed responsibility for this terrorist attack.
First responders, including the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and some 15 Syrian NGOs
2/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

and local health authorities, provided care and transferred 275 injured persons to
hospitals across Idlib. Some 30 of these cases were referred for treatment in Turkey.
Another 138 patients were referred for treatment in Aleppo.
6.
Despite the attack, the 15 April evacuation proceeded, with approximately
5,000 persons evacuated from Fu‘ah and Kafraya to a transit point at the Mahalij
shelter in Jibreen, Aleppo governorate, and 2,350 persons evacuated from Madaya
and Zabadani to Idlib. On 19 April, another evacuation was concluded, involving
3,000 additional persons evacuated from Fu‘ah and Kafraya in return for the
evacuation of more than 550 fighters and their family members from Zabadani,
Madaya, Wadi Barada, Sirghaya and neighbouring areas. While the United Nations
has not been involved in the negotiations, agreement or evacuations, it did provide
humanitarian assistance, including food and non-food items such as mattresses,
through the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to those who were eva cuated from Fu‘ah and
Kafraya to the transit point at the Mahalij shelter and to final destination areas in
Rif Dimashq, Homs, Tartus and Ladhiqiyah. For those evacuating from Madaya and
Zabadani, humanitarian partners set up reception centres in Idlib cit y and
Ma‘arratmisrin.
7.
Evacuations from the Wa‘r neighbourhood of the city of Homs subsequent to
the 13 March local agreement between the Government and non-State armed
opposition groups continued throughout the month, with five evacuations taking
place on 1, 8, 18, 24 and 30 April respectively. If the first two rounds of evacuation
on 13 and 27 March are included, a total of 10,254 people were evacuated as part of
the agreement by the end of April. All evacuations are expected to be completed by
mid-May. All but two of the evacuations have been to the Jarabulus district of
Aleppo, with the others going to Idlib. Access into the Jarabulus area by
humanitarian partners remains limited. Concerns have been reported regarding the
conditions in the Zaghra internally displaced persons camp, where most evacuees
are staying, and access to the camp remains restricted.
8.
On 25 April, reports of air strikes south of Malikiyah town, in Hasakah
governorate, which has a significant NGO presence, including a large numbe r of aid
workers, were reported. As a result of the air strikes, some NGOs operating in the
area temporarily suspended their activities. Shelling across the border between the
Turkish military and non-State armed opposition groups was also reported in Afri n,
Aleppo governorate, on 26 and 27 April, and in Ra’s al -Ayn, Hasakah governorate,
on 27 April. The shelling reportedly hit a grain silo and a water station south of Ra’s
al-Ayn town. While there were no civilian casualties, hundreds of people were
reportedly displaced as a result.
9.
From 19 April onwards, increased displacement in Raqqah governorate was
reported, as the People’s Protection Units-led Syrian Democratic Forces advanced to
within 20 kilometres of ISIL-held Raqqah city. The total number of persons
internally displaced from the area in April was 66,275, including approximately
39,000 displaced to the Jubb al-Sha‘ir area on 24 April. As such, the total number of
people who have been displaced since the beginning of the Syrian Democratic
Forces’s Operation Euphrates Wrath exceeds 120,000 people. Freedom of movement
of internally displaced persons remains a concern with regards to the ongoing
displacement in Raqqah, due to the security screening and sponsorship requirement
imposed by the People’s Protection Units -led Syrian Democratic Forces for those
displaced to remain in the area. Health issues have also been a serious concern at
internally displaced person sites, with reports of eight infant deaths at the Karamah
site, 20 kilometres east of Raqqah city, where some 80,000 internally displaced
persons currently live. The United Nations has also received reports of the death of
two children due to a lack of medical care in the Jubb al-Sha‘ir area. Shelter was

17-08300

3/21

S/2017/445

also reported to be a serious issue at the sites, as a majority of the 35,000 reported to
be in camps south-east of Ayn Isa are reportedly staying in open areas.
Figure I
Key dates in April 2017

Box 2
Brussels conference
(1) The Brussels conference on the Syrian Arab Republic and the region
successfully concluded on 5 April, with strong expressions of international
commitment to continue to respond to the Syrian conflict. Overall, the conference
prominently reinforced calls for unconditional support for ongoing humanit arian and
resilience-building activities.
(2) In this regard, participants at the conference highlighted the need for the
United Nations to complement the focus on humanitarian priorities with an
emphasis on strengthening resilience in order to assure a more sustainable
international response to the conflict. The Prime Ministers of Jordan and Lebanon
highlighted the need for international support to shift towards supporting long -term
development, growth and jobs as a basis for effectively managing the ra mifications
of the Syrian conflict in neighbouring countries. The conference co -chairs also
agreed on the necessity of persistent follow-up to the target, set in London, of
1.1 million jobs for the region. Furthermore, participants agreed to continue to wo rk
towards the target of ensuring “No Lost Generation” of children in the Syrian Arab
Republic and the region and to increase efforts to reach the goal of ascertaining that
all refugee children and vulnerable children in host communities enjoy a quality
education, with equal access for boys and girls.
(3) Over 40 donor Governments pledged a combined $6 billion for humanitarian
and resilience-building support for both the Syrian Arab Republic and the region for
2017, with an additional $3.7 billion for 2018. The United Nations-coordinated
response plans for the Syrian Arab Republic and the region, combined, require
$8 billion for 2017 alone.

10. On 23 April, the last informal access route connecting eastern Ghutah with the
Qabun district in Damascus was reportedly closed. The result was an immediate
spike in commodity prices such as sugar, rice and baby formula. On 28 and
29 April, fighting in eastern Ghuta, including the areas of Irbin, Kafr Batna and
Hazzah, between non-State armed opposition groups and the Levant Liberation
Organization, an alliance which includes Jabhat Fath al-Sham (formerly known as
Nusrah Front), reportedly killed more than 120 people.
4/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

11. On 27 April, air strikes reportedly carried out by Israel targeted an arms supply
warehouse allegedly operated by Hizbullah near the Damascus international airport.
12. Members of the International Syria Support Group continued their efforts to
strengthen the ceasefire across the Syrian Arab Republic. In the framework of the
Astana talks, the Islamic Republic of Iran convened an experts’ meeting of the three
guarantor States, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey,
in Tehran on 18 and 19 April. Technical discussions among the three guarantor
States and with a delegation of experts from the United Nations that joined the
trilateral meetings as observers tackled the ceasefire regime and its imple mentation,
as well as confidence-building measures, including the release of
detainees/abductees and the identification of missing persons. A high -level meeting
was called for, to be held in Astana on 3 and 4 May.
Protection
13. Air and ground-based strikes continued to kill and injure civilians in
significant numbers. As in the past, the high level of civilian casualties continued to
raise questions as to whether the principle of distinction and the prohibition on
directing attacks against civilians, as well as the prohibition on the launching of
indiscriminate attacks and the principles of proportionality and precaution in and
against the effects of attacks were respected. Continued attacks resulting in large
numbers of civilian casualties — such as those involving the use of toxic agents or
the detonation of explosives in the middle of gatherings — put civilians at grave
risk, fuelling calls for further violence and pushing the parties to the conflict and
supporting States away from seeking a peaceful solution. Children have been
particularly affected by the fighting and, in some incidents, constituted the majority
of the casualties.
14. The fighting continued to affect civilian infrastructure, including medical
personnel and facilities, schools, markets and places of worship. Based on
information received by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights (OHCHR), civilian casualties in possible violation of international
humanitarian law occurred in various governorates (see annex). OHCHR
documented alleged incidents by many parties to the conflict, including Government
forces and their allies, non-State armed opposition groups and groups designated as
terrorist groups by the Security Council.
15. The United States Department of Defense publicly confirmed that in April, the
United States-led coalition carried out 549 strikes against ISIL targets in the
governorates of Hasakah, Dayr al-Zawr, Homs and Raqqah. Approximately
two thirds of those strikes were reported to have been in Raqqah governorate, and
nearly a third in Dayr al-Zawr governorate.
16. The Russian Federation continued to provide air support for Syrian
Government forces and their allies, as confirmed by the Ministry of Defence of the
Russian Federation in a briefing on 11 April, in which it stated that Russian
Aerospace Defence Forces were continuing to provide support to the Syrian army
and militia detachments in their fight against ISIL and the Levant Liberation
Organization.
17. Although Operation Euphrates Shield was officially declared complete at the
end of March 2017, Turkish air and ground forces continued to support non -State
armed opposition groups fighting under the Free Syrian Army banner in operations
against ISIL, with the reported aim of improving security and eliminating threats
along Turkey’s border with the Syrian Arab Republic.

17-08300

5/21

S/2017/445

18. The United Nations and health partners received credible reports of 30 attacks
that affected medical facilities and personnel throughout the month of Apr il. Of
these, 21 have been verified to date. Of the verified attacks, 13 involved hospitals, 3
involved primary health-care centres, 3 were attacks on health workers and 2 were
attacks on medical points. All facilities went out of service either permanentl y or
temporarily. For example, on 22 April, air strikes in the area of Abdin, Idlib
governorate, hit an underground field hospital and reportedly killed four civilians.
On 25 April, the Shahid Wasim Husainu hospital in Kafr Takharim city, Idlib
governorate, was hit by air strikes, putting it out of service. On 27 April, a surgical
specialty hospital in Dayr al-Sharqi, Idlib governorate, was attacked by four air
strikes, which resulted in the deaths of three patients and the wounding of three
medical personnel. The hospital was heavily damaged and put out of service as a
result of the attack. The next day, on 28 April, the Kafr Takharim Women’s Hospital,
a maternity hospital in Idlib governorate, was damaged by two air strikes. Patients
and staff were evacuated to a basement, with no reports of casualties. Medics
reported that windows were blown in and a hospital laboratory badly damaged. The
hospital serves 2,100 women and children and performs about 550 deliveries each
month. In addition, it provides incubator support for premature babies. The closest
hospital providing similar services is 43 miles away.
19. Educational facilities continued to be affected as well. The United Nations
received credible information of the following attacks to education facilitie s and
related protected personnel. On 1 April, Qunaytirat School, in Qunaytirat village,
Aleppo governorate, was targeted with artillery shelling. On 22 April, Hanbushiyeh
School, Hambushiyah town, Idlib governorate, was struck by artillery shelling. No
casualties were reported. The school was closed after the incident.
Humanitarian access
Box 3
Key points
(1) The United Nations estimates that, as of the end of April, some 624,500 people
were living under siege in the Syrian Arab Republic. The Barza and Qabun areas of
Damascus were added to the list, while Khan al-Shih and Zabadani were removed.
Population estimates and locations were adjusted to reflect evacuation processes.
Furthermore, the United Nations estimated that some 3.9 million people were in
hard-to-reach areas.
(2) No besieged area was reached through United Nations inter -agency cross-line
operations in April, except Dayr al-Zawr (through airdrops). Three inter-agency
convoys were deployed in April to hard-to-reach areas: two to northern rural Homs
and one to Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham in Damascus. The removal of medical
supplies from convoys remains a major challenge, with supplies sufficient for
37,000 people removed in April.
(3) As of the end of April, the United Nations had reached some 192,000 people
under the April/May convoy plan. Other inter-agency convoys could not proceed
due to lack of approvals, including the lack of facilitation letters by the Syrian
authorities; fighting and insecurity; and other restrictions af ter initial approvals.
(4) During the reporting period, some 1,871,000 beneficiaries were assisted by the
United Nations and partners via cross-border operations from Turkey and Jordan.

6/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

(5) The United Nations and partners continue to respond to the humanitarian
impact of fighting and insecurity in Raqqah and north-eastern Syria. While they are
reaching hundreds of thousands in these governorates, restrictions by local
authorities on the ground are hindering response efforts, as are the difficulties i n
getting supplies to the area.

20. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need remained extremely
challenging in many areas of the country as a result of active conflict, shifting
conflict lines, administrative impediments and deliberate restrictions on the
movement of people and goods by the parties to the conflict.
21. Following a comprehensive review by the United Nations, it is was estimated
that, as of the end of April 2017, some 624,500 people were living in 13 areas under
siege. Two locations were added to the list: the Barza and Qabun areas of
Damascus, following a sustained period of encirclement by Government forces and
a severe tightening of restrictions. Two locations were removed from the previous
list: Khan al-Shih in Rif Dimashq, following the implementation of a local
agreement that improved access in and out of the area; and Zabadani in Rif
Dimashq, where evacuations as a result of an agreement rendered the area empty of
a population. Furthermore, population figures were adjusted for other locations on
the basis of the most recent and most accurate information received from the
ground. This included reductions for Wa‘r, Madaya, Fu‘ah and Kafraya as a result of
evacuations that took place over the weeks preceding the publication of the present
report. In addition to besieged locations, some 3.9 million people were in hard -toreach locations.
List of besieged areas, April 2017
Estimated population
(as of end April 2017)

Governorate

Location

Dayr al-Zawr

Dayr al-Zawr

93 500

ISIL

Damascus

Yarmouk

9 800

Government forces and non-State
armed opposition groups

Idlib

Fu‘ah

12 100

Non-State armed opposition groups

Kafraya
Rif Dimashq

Homs
Total

17-08300

Besieged by

Non-State armed opposition groups

Qabun and Barzah al Balad

30 000

Government forces

Madaya/Buqayn

43 300

Government forces

Duma area (Duma, Shaffuniyah, Hawsh
al-Dawahirah)

150 100

Government forces

Harasta area (Harasta, Mudayra, Misraba)

46 300

Government forces

Irbin and surrounding area (Irbin, Zamalka and
Jawbar)

49 300

Government forces

Kafr Batna area (Kafr Batna, Ayn Tarma,
Hammurah, Jisrayn, Saqba, Aftris, Hazzah, Hawsh
al-Ash‘ari, Bayt Siwa, Muhammadiyah)

132 400

Government forces

Nashabiyah area (Nashabiyah, Beyt Nayim,
Salhiyah, Utaya, Hazrama)

16 500

Government forces

Wa‘r

41 200

Government forces

624 500

7/21

S/2017/445

22. Access by the United Nations to those living in besieged and hard -to-reach
locations remains a critical concern. Three inter-agency convoys were dispatched to
besieged and hard-to-reach locations during April. This included the hard-to-reach
areas of Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham; Hulah and Harbinafsih; and Dar al -Kabirah,
Ghantu and Tarmala. Convoys to other besieged and hard -to-reach areas, including
those approved under the April-May inter-agency convoy plan, were unable to
proceed as a result of fighting and insecurity, administrative delays by the Syrian
authorities and restrictions applied by non-State armed opposition groups.
23. During the reporting period, United Nations agencies also undertook single agency deliveries to cross-line and hard-to-reach locations or reached those
locations through their regular programmes. United Nations agencies encountered
difficulties in accessing some locations. For example, despite obtaining the
necessary approvals from the respective Government authorities, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was
not allowed to enter Yalda with a humanitarian convoy as planned for th e month of
April, even though an inter-agency convoy was able to reach the area. UNRWA has
not been able to reach Yarmouk since May 2016. Meanwhile, NGOs — both
international and Syrian — continued to provide medical, education, psychosocial
and protection services, as well as some support in related sectors, in hard -to-reach
locations, under extremely challenging circumstances.
24. Throughout the period, additional humanitarian actors, including the
International Committee of the Red Cross, responded in b esieged and hard-to-reach
areas, in accordance with humanitarian principles.
Figure II
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations: percentage of
people reached each month in besieged areas, including via airdrops to Dayr
al-Zawr city

100%

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

Jan.

Feb.

Mar.

Apr.

25. A combination of insecurity, deliberate interference and restrictions by the
parties to the conflict continued to prevent aid delivery. For example, the majority
of United Nations agencies and the majority of its partners continue to be unable to
access populations in need in ISIL-controlled areas of the country, as all plans to
deliver assistance to these areas have been suspended due to the inability to work
independently and monitor activities. This is preventing the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners from reaching Raqqah city and most of the Dayr al -Zawr

8/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

governorates, as well as pockets of northern rural Aleppo, southern rural Hasakah
and north-western rural Hama.
26. Meanwhile, restrictions continue to be imposed by non -State armed opposition
groups and other local actors. For example, humanitarian organizations have
reported challenges in obtaining approvals from local authorities in Kurdish controlled areas of north-eastern Syrian Arab Republic, causing delays to
programming. In this regard, since 5 April, the Kurdish self-administration has
suspended all regular programming activities by the United Nations and
international NGOs in Hasakah governorate. The suspensions were preceded by a
self-administration request to redirect all supplies from the regular programme to
support the response in Raqqah governorate.
27. At the same time, humanitarian access for Turkey-based cross-border partners
into Idlib governorate is also reportedly facing more challenges, as non -State armed
opposition groups and groups designated by the Security Council as terrorist groups
are placing demands on NGOs operating in the governorate. NGOs are being
informed of new registration requirements and/or told to provide information on
staffing, logistics and finances. Those demands are not being applied consistently
and have led some NGOs to scale down or even temporarily suspend their
operations, pending a resolution of those issues.
28. In April, after four years of closure, the road between Aleppo and Qamishli
was reopened for commercial traffic, following an agreement between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and parties on the ground. However,
humanitarian actors are still awaiting formal approvals from the Syrian authorities
to use the road, which would significantly improve access and the supply of lifesaving items.
Table 1
United Nations inter-agency cross-line humanitarian operations, April 2017

192,100 people reached

XL
People
reached in
hard -to-reach
areas

People
reached in
besieged
areas

157,500

34,600

4.0 per cent

5.4 per
cent

People
reached in
hard -to-reach
areas

Cross -line
convoys

3

17-08300

People
reached in
priority
cross -line
areas

0

People
reached in
besieged
areas

1 of 13
Besieged
locations
reached

Airlifts

Airdrops

41

16

9/21

S/2017/445

29. Life-saving and life-sustaining medical items sufficient for over 37,000
treatments were removed from convoys in April. The treatments and supplies
removed are shown in table 2. Serum drugs, renewable items (razors, scalpel blades
and gauze) and items considered as surgical equipment (forceps, scissors and
needles) were consistently removed by Government security bodies from midwifery
kits, inter-agency emergency health kits, paediatric kits and diarrhoeal disease sets,
in inter-agency and single agency convoys, thus hampering their functionality and
causing severe deprivation to the beneficiaries. Additional medical supplies were
scheduled to be delivered as part of the monthly inter -agency convoy plan, but all
but three of the convoys were unable to proceed. Furthermore, since the beginning
of 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) has submitted se ven single-agency
requests to the Syrian Government to access 14 locations in five governorates. The
Syrian Government approved two requests, while five requests remain unanswered.
Table 2
Medical supplies removed from humanitarian convoys, April 2017
Location

Number of
treatments

Type of supplies

Yalda, Babila, Bayt Saham

5 800

Inter-agency emergency health kit,
pneumonia type A and B kits

Hulah and Harbinafsih

27 111

Antibiotics, vascular medicine, digestive
medicine, pneumonia type A and B kits,
asthma medicine, antispasmodics

Dar al-Kabirah, Ghantu, and Tarmala

4 795

Atropine, analgesic, cardiac drugs, mental
health drugs, syringes, needles and
polyvidone were entirely rejected from the
approved quantities as well as pneumonia
type B kits.

30. The United Nations inter-agency convoy plan for April-May requested access
to 28 locations, including besieged locations, aiming to reach 1,066,650 people. A
total of 764,950 of the 1,066,650 requested beneficiaries (71.7 per cent) were
approved: nine locations were approved in full, while 13 locations were approved
with conditions on how many people in need would be permitted to be reached in
those locations. Six locations comprising over 132,000 people were denied. As of
the end of April, the team had reached some 157,500 people with three convoys.
Convoys to other approved locations in the plan could not be dispatched in April
due to non-approval by the Syrian authorities at the outset; insecurity and fighting;
and delays with the issuance of facilitation letters in some instances.
31. Individual agencies continued to submit requests for single -agency convoys
during the reporting period. For example, during the month of April, the World Food
Programme (WFP) submitted 1,698 official requests to obta in facilitation letters to
transport food assistance to targeted locations across the country, the vast majority
of which were for regularly accessible areas. Of these, eight requests did not receive
approval or response from the relevant authorities, preventing the delivery of food
assistance for 30,000 people in Homs, Dar‘a and Rif Dimashq governorates.
UNHCR submitted 45 facilitation letters for the movement of non -food items and
livelihood kits within the Syrian Arab Republic, mostly to areas accessible under
regular programming. All were approved.
32. The Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing in Hasakah governorate has been temporarily
closed by the Turkish authorities since 27 December 2015 because of security
concerns. This has interrupted land deliveries of United Nations humanitarian
assistance to Hasakah governorate through borders surrounding the governorate.
10/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

Hasakah governorate also remains largely inaccessible by road for United Nations
agencies from within the Syrian Arab Republic due to insecurity and the presence of
ISIL along the routes. However, the road from Aleppo through Manbij to Hasakah
has reopened for commercial traffic. While discussions continue to seek to identify
a land route for life-saving United Nations aid, the United Nations continues with
airlifts from Damascus to Qamishli airport to deliver multisectoral assistance.
Humanitarian response
33. In April, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need through all modalities from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across its borders (see table 3). In addition to the United Nations and
partners, NGOs continued to deliver life-saving assistance to people in need, in line
with previous months. The Government continued to provide basic services to those
areas under its control and in many areas beyond its control. Local authorities in
many areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups also continued to
provide services when possible.
Table 3
Number of people reached by the United Nations and other organizations,
April 2017
Organization

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Number of
people reached

243 198

International Organization for Migration
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

297 046

United Nations Children’s Fund

>1 500 000

United Nations Development Programme

1 811 402

United Nations Population Fund
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

190 807
418 000

World Food Programme

3 760 000

World Health Organization

1 561 851

34. During the reporting period cross-border deliveries continued from Turkey and
Jordan into the Syrian Arab Republic under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014)
2191 (2014) 2258 (2015) and 2332 (2016) (see figure III for details). In line with
these resolutions the United Nations notified the Syrian authorities in advance of
each shipment including with respect to the content destination and number of
beneficiaries of the shipments. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the
Syrian Arab Republic continued its operations monitoring 470 trucks used in
20 convoys by 7 United Nations agencies in April confirming the humanitarian
nature of each and notifying the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The
Mechanism continued to benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments
of Jordan and Turkey.

17-08300

11/21

S/2017/445

Figure III
Number of beneficiaries assisted by the United Nations and its partners per
cluster through cross-border humanitarian deliveries, April 2017
(Thousands)

Key figures

7 agencies
20 cross-border convoys
1,055

470 trucks
559

12
Nutrition

57

53

Water, sanitation Non-food items
and hygiene

Food

Health

35. Inter-agency convoys completed in April 2017 are listed in table 4 below. In
total, the United Nations undertook three inter-agency convoys during the reporting
month, all part of the April-May inter-agency convoy plan. In April, the logistics
cluster on behalf of United Nations agencies completed 16 airdrop rotations to
besieged Dayr al-Zawr city, airdropping food rations for some 34,600 people. In
April, 41 airlift rotations to Qamishli were completed, airlifting a total of 1,516
metric tons of WFP food and other supplies on behalf of other humanitarian actors.
This enabled WFP to provide food assistance for 207,000 people in parts of
Hasakah, Raqqah, Aleppo and Dayr al-Zawr governorates, including nearly 130,000
people displaced as a result of ongoing fighting in Raqqah governorate.
Table 4
Inter-agency cross-line humanitarian convoys, April 2017
Requested
target (number
of beneficiaries)

Targeted people
reached

Type of
assistance

Date

Location

8 April

Yalda, Babila, and Bayt Saham

35 000

35 000

Multisectoral

13 April

Hulah and Harbinafsih

89 000

89 000

Multisectoral

20 April

Dar al-Kabirah, Ghantu and Tarmala

33 500

33 500

Multisectoral

36. While not involved in the evacuation processes, the United Nations and its
partners have been assisting civilians in need who have been evacuated from the
besieged locations of the Four Towns (Fu‘ah, Kafraya, Madaya and Zabadani) and
Wa‘r. In April, the United Nations and partners visited evacuation centres in rural
Homs, Aleppo, Tartus and Ladhiqiyah hosting evacuees from Fu‘ah and Kafraya and
provided follow-up assistance. Meanwhile, cross-border partners have been
responding to those who arrived in Idlib and rural Aleppo from Madaya, Zabadani
and Wa‘r.
37. The United Nations and partners have continued to respond to the
humanitarian impact of fighting in Raqqah governorate. During April, some 221,600
people were reached with food in Raqqah, while over 1,000 tents and other shelter
support were set up in various internally displaced person camps and transit sites.
Furthermore, up to 1,000 cubic metres of potable water were supplied on a daily
basis across various camps and transit sites, while basic relief items, primary health 12/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

care activities, vaccinations and nutritional and educational support continued to be
provided by both partners based in the Syrian Arab Republic and cros s-border
partners. Furthermore, the United Nations and partners launched protection services
in camps and transit sites amid concerns related to restrictions on the freedom of
movement of internally displaced persons during security screening processes (at
checkpoints, assembly points and transit sites).
38. A national polio campaign, supported by WHO and the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) was conducted from 18 to 27 April. Preliminary results
indicate that more than 2.4 million children under five years of age were vaccinated,
compared to a target of 2.7 million. The campaign was conducted in all
governorates except in parts of Raqqah and Idlib. The polio campaign was
suspended in Tall Abyad due to a disagreement with the local authorities.
Vaccination activities in rural Dayr al-Zawr were limited to health centres only, as
ISIL refused the participation of mobile teams. Vaccines were delivered to East
Ghutah in coordination with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
39. During April, UNICEF provided nutrition services for almost 250,000 children
and pregnant and lactating mothers through regular programming and cross -border
and inter-agency cross-line operations. Nutrition services included preventive,
therapeutic and supplementary interventions, including screening and treatment for
cases of moderate and severe acute malnutrition. Around 33,500 children and
mothers were reached in hard-to-reach locations.
40. On 9 and 10 April, UNRWA teams organized two successful missions to Khan
al-Shih to conduct a multisectoral assessment of the services provided to Palestine
refugees, including damage to United Nations installations, and to identify the
overall needs of the refugees remaining in the area. The teams reported serious
damage to UNRWA installations. Two schools and one community-based centre
were completely destroyed or damaged, while two schools, one health centre, one
sanitation office and one Engaging Youth centre needed further rehabilitation.
41. UNHCR, in conjunction with partners, continued to manage 75 functioning
community centres across 11 governorates. Community centres are designed as one stop-shops, at which a wide range of protection services and livelihood support,
income generation, vocational training and life skills development are provided to
internally displaced persons and host communities. In April, some 16,000 displaced
persons received support through these centres.
42. Throughout the month, the Russian Federation sent to the United Nations
information bulletins from the Russian Centre for the reconciliation of opposing
sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, which outlined the provision of bilateral relief
assistance. Other Member States also continued to provide bilateral and other forms
of humanitarian assistance.
Visas and registrations
43. A total of 57 new visa requests were submitted to the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic in April. Of these, 30 applications were approved, 2 were
rejected and 25 remain pending. Five new visa requests submitted in earlier months
were approved in April, while three were rejected. A total of 49 visa renewal
requests were submitted in April. A further 29 visa renewals submitted in earlier
months were also approved, while 2 remain pending.
44. A total of 17 international NGOs are registered with the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to operate in the country. Four international NGOs are in the
process of completing registration. Those organizations continued to face a series of
administrative hurdles and restrictions that affect their ability to operate, including
17-08300

13/21

S/2017/445

in gaining permission to undertake independent needs assessments. Some
217 national NGOs are authorized by the Syrian Arab Republic to partner with the
United Nations. One additional national NGO received such authorization during
April.
Safety and security of humanitarian personnel and premises
45. In addition to the attacks on health facilities mentioned earlier, in early April,
two distribution points for food and basic relief items in the Maydan neighbourhood
of Damascus were temporarily closed due to a spike in mortar attacks.
46. On 30 April, due to the deteriorating security situation in Hasakah,
humanitarian missions to Naruz, Ar Ruj, Mabrukah and Ayn Isa camps were
cancelled.
47. Since the start of the conflict, dozens of humanitarian workers have been
killed, including 21 staff members of the United Nations — of which 17 were
UNRWA staff members — 65 staff members and volunteers of the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent and eight staff members and volunteers of the Palestin e Red Crescent
Society. In addition, many staff members of international and national NGOs are
reported to have been killed. A total of 29 United Nations staff, including one
UNDP staff and 28 UNRWA staff, are detained or currently missing. In addition to
the detained and missing, two United Nations staff have been conscripted for
military service since 1 January, this despite United Nations officials being exempt
from military service according to the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations of 1946.

III. Observations
48. Over the past six months, owing to military advances and local agreements
that profoundly affect the lives of vulnerable civilians, there have been significant
changes to the front lines in the Syrian Arab Rep ublic. This has led to some
benefits, as civilians who had previously been under the control of ISIL are now
accessible and can be provided with humanitarian assistance. However, for many
hundreds of thousands, life continues as before, under conditions th at are difficult to
fathom.
49. Although the number of people in besieged areas has been reduced by about
20,000, to 624,500, in 13 areas, this does not represent an increase in the protection
of civilians. In many instances, the end of sieges followed pro longed periods of
heavy fighting and restricted humanitarian assistance. Tens of thousands of people
also leave besieged areas after local agreements are reached. Such local agreements
do not appear to meet international standards or humanitarian safeguard s and may,
in some circumstances, be characterized as forced population transfers to
opposition-controlled areas, in which civilian infrastructure continues to be attacked
regularly.
50. There were 30 credible reports of attacks on hospitals and medical fa cilities in
April alone, including 21 confirmed reports. This is an indicator of the unacceptable
conditions in which a large portion of the Syrian population continues to live. With
the reported chemical attack in Khan Shaykhun on 4 April and the continue d attacks
against education facilities, markets and places of worship, the ongoing protection
crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic is without comparison in recent history. I
continue to reiterate my call for the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic to be
referred to the International Criminal Court, and I call on all Member States to
support the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the

14/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
51. The United Nations has the ability to deliver assistance to 350,000 people each
week with inter-agency cross-line convoys. It would be possible to reach all those in
besieged areas every month, if only access were fully allowed and facilitated.
However, the United Nations capacity to deliver is deliberately underutilized week
after week. Restrictions by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in allowing
aid to reach those most in need, despite having a two-month access plan and
agreements to deliver from authorities in principle, continue to result in only a
trickle of cross-line convoys each month, which is simply not enough to stem the
acute suffering. Restrictions have been growing in other areas as well, as areas
controlled by non-State armed opposition groups in Idlib and the north-east of the
country have increasingly constrained access. The international community must do
better to reach those in need, and I call upon the members o f the Security Council
and the members of the International Syria Support Group to individually and
collectively use their influence to improve humanitarian access in order to prevent
the situation from growing even worse.
52. In Brussels, I noted the need to send a strong, constant message to the Syrian
people that theirs will not be a forgotten war. It is for the sake of ordinary Syrians
that the humanitarian and political efforts of the United Nations will continue.
Nothing is more important or more urgent than ending this conflict without further
delay. The suffering of the Syrian people will end only when a political solution can
be achieved. The United Nations process in Geneva, building on advances on the
Astana track of talks, remains the primary avenue for the attainment of a political
settlement between Syrians within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012. I remain committed to achieving progress
within this framework.

17-08300

15/21

S/2017/445

Annex
Incidents affecting civilians recorded by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
April 2017a
Rif Dimashq and Damascus governorates
• On 3 April, around 10.30 a.m., air strikes hit a residential area in oppositioncontrolled Saqba, reportedly resulting in the death of five civilians, including
one woman.
• On 3 April, also around 10.30 a.m., air strikes hit a residential area in
Hamuriyah, reportedly resulting in the death of three civilians.
• On 3 April, around 2 p.m., a medical centre in the opposition -held city of
Jisrayn was reportedly hit by air strikes and partly damaged.
• On 3 April, around 5 p.m., air strikes hit a residential area in the oppositionheld part of the city of Duma, reportedly resulting in 22 civilian casualties,
including three children and two women. At least 50 civilians were also
reportedly injured in the attack, including 10 children and eight women.
• On 4 April, at noon, air strikes hit a five-storey building located in a
residential area of Saqba, causing its collapse and reportedly killing
10 civilians, including a pregnant woman, while injuring an undetermined
number of others.
• On 4 April, around 5 p.m., air strikes hit the Jawz residential area in Saqba,
reportedly resulting in the death of eight civilians, including two women and
two children.
• On 4 April, around 5 p.m., air strikes hit a residential area in Hamuriyah,
reportedly killing seven civilians, including four children (one girl and three
boys).
• On 4 April in the afternoon, air strikes on a residential area of Duma
reportedly resulted in the death of two civilians.
• On 4 April, air strikes on a residential area in Kafr Batna reportedly resulted in
the death of two civilians.
• On 17 April, a ground-based strike hit a residential area of opposition-held
Duma, reportedly killing a child.
• On 21 April, air strikes conducted between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. on the city of
Duma reportedly resulted in the death of two civilians in residential areas and
of two civilians in agricultural areas surrounding the city.
• On 26 April, a ground-based strike hit the residential Abu Rummanah area in
Government-controlled Damascus, allegedly resulting in the death of two
women.
a

16/21

In line with resolution 2258 (2015), the present description of developments on the ground, and
the incidents during the month that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights has been able to corroborate, relates to compliance with resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. The information is
provided without prejudice to the work of the Task Force on the Ceasefire of the International
Syria Support Group. The reporting is not a comprehensive listing of all violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and abuses of international human rights law that
took place in the Syrian Arab Republic during the reporting period.
17-08300

S/2017/445

• On 16 April, a mine exploded in the southern outskirts of Madaya, reportedly
killing a child and injuring five others.
Dar‘a governorate
• On 1 April, two children were reportedly killed in a landmine explosion in the
opposition-held town of Da‘il.
• On 3 April, air strikes launched around 9.15 p.m. on the area of Dar‘a al-Balad
allegedly killed a civilian as he was reportedly working on electric al repairs.
• On 4 April, around 1 a.m., air strikes hit a residential area of the oppositionheld town of Simlin, reportedly killing four members of a displaced family
from Inkhil.
• On 6 April, around 10.30 p.m., air strikes hit the opposition-held
neighbourhood of Tariq al-Sadd in Dar‘a, allegedly killing a family of five: a
pregnant woman, her husband and their three children — two boys and a girl.
• On 8 April, air strikes hit the opposition-controlled area of Nasib, located on
the Jordanian border, reportedly killing three children (including a girl) and
wounding an undetermined number of other civilians, primarily women and
children.
• On 9 April, at 1.30 a.m., a hospital in Da‘il was hit by air strikes, which
reportedly resulted in the killing of a male nurse and injury to three other
civilians, including two female nurses. The hospital was damaged.
• On 11 April, a civilian was killed when ground -based strikes hit the Khalid ibn
al-Walid Army-controlled town of Tasil.
• On 14 April, an aid worker was allegedly killed in an air strike that hit the
opposition-controlled area of Dar‘a al-Mahattah in Dar‘a city.
• On 26 April, around 1 a.m., air strikes hit a residential area of Simlin and
reportedly killed a family of four, including a boy and a girl, and injured an
undetermined number of civilians.
• On 28 April, Khalid ibn al-Walid Army fighters reportedly summarily
executed eight civilians in Tasil, allegedly due to their affiliation with other
armed opposition groups.
• On 29 April, Khalid ibn al-Walid Army allegedly publicly decapitated a
civilian in Tasil after they accused him of “sorcery”.
• On 30 April, air strikes hit residential areas in Dar‘a al-Balad and reportedly
killed nine civilians, including two women and three children (one boy and
two girls), and injured an undetermined number of civilians.
• On 30 April, air strikes hit a residential area in the city of Busra al-Hariri,
reportedly causing the death of two civilians, including the head of the Busra
al-Hariri local council.
• On 30 April, air strikes on a residential area in Na'imah allegedly killed a
civilian woman and her five-year-old child.
Aleppo governorate
• On 1 April, air strikes hit the building of the Radwan humanitarian association,
located in Urum al-Kubra town, in western rural Aleppo, allegedly killing four
children and injuring three civilians.

17-08300

17/21

S/2017/445

• On 3 April, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the village of Yaqid
al-Adas, in northern rural Aleppo, and allegedly killed five civilians, including
three children.
• On 8 April, at dawn, air strikes hit residential areas in the opposition-held
town of Darat Izzah, in western rural Aleppo, reportedly killing a mother and
her child and injuring at least seven other civilians.
• On 22 April, a woman and her two children were allegedly killed when air
strikes hit residential areas of Darat Izzah town in western rural Aleppo.
• On 27 April in the morning, air strikes hit residential areas of Kafr Naha town
in western rural Aleppo and allegedly killed two civilians while injuring nine
others, including seven children and two women.
Idlib governorate
• On 2 April, air strikes hit the opposition-held city of Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man,
reportedly injuring an undetermined number of civilians, causing extensive
destruction and putting the city’s main hospital out of service.
• On 3 April, air strikes hit residential areas in Habit town in the Khan
Shaykhun district, reportedly killing two children and injuring 20 other
civilians.
• On 3 April, air strikes hit the city of Khan Shaykhun, reportedly killing three
male civilians.
• On 4 April, at around 7 a.m., air strikes hit residential areas of the Furn
neighbourhood located in the north of Khan Shaykhun city, reportedly killing
90 civilians, including 28 children and 20 women, after apparent exposure to
toxic agents. Five on-duty civil defence members and three journalists were
injured while covering the attack. At approximately 1 p.m., the main hospital
of Khan Shaykhun, which had received those injured in the earlier attack, was
hit, as was the adjacent civil defence centre. The strikes reportedly caused
some material damage to the facilities. In a statement issued the same day, the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons raised serious concerns
about the alleged use of chemical weapons and indicated that it was
investigating the incident.
• On 4 April, air strikes hit a residential area in opposition-held Salqin, northeast of Idlib, allegedly killing at least 26 civilians, including 14 children a nd
six women. Most of the victims were reportedly internally displaced persons
from Aleppo and Dayr al-Zawr.
• On 4 April, air strikes hit residential areas in Saraqib city, reportedly killing a
civilian woman and her three children.
• In the afternoon of 4 April, air strikes hit residential areas in the al-Sina‘ah
neighbourhood of Jisr al-Shughur, reportedly killing seven civilians, including
a child, and injuring an undetermined number of civilians.
• On 5 April, ground-based strikes hit the besieged town of Al-Fu’ah, reportedly
injuring three civilians, including one woman and a six -year-old child.
• On 6 April, ground-based strikes reportedly hit Al-Fu’ah, allegedly injuring
four civilians, including three children.
• On 6 April, air strikes hit residential areas in the village of Zahiriyah near
Ariha, reportedly killing two girls who were sisters.

18/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

• On 6 April, a civilian was reportedly killed by elements of the Levant
Liberation Organization (which includes the group formerly known as Nusrah
Front) in Khan al-Subul in Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man.
• On 7 April, air strikes hit residential areas in the town of Haysh, located near
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, reportedly killing three male civilians and injuring an
undetermined number of others.
• On 7 April, air strikes hit western parts of Jisr al-Shughur city, reportedly
killing two civil defence members and injuring two others.
• On 7 April, ground-based strikes reportedly hit Fu‘ah, allegedly killing a
14-year-old boy.
• On 8 April, air strikes hit shops and houses along the main avenue of Urum
al-Jawz city in Ariha, reportedly killing 20 civilians, including seven children
and one woman, and injuring at least 20 others.
• On 8 April, several air strikes were reported to have hit the town of Haysh,
allegedly damaging a medical facility in the vicinity.
• On 8 April, ground-based strikes hit Fu‘ah and reportedly injured two male
civilians.
• On 9 April, air strikes hit residential areas in the city of Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man,
reportedly killing two male civilians.
• On 11 April, air strikes hit residential areas in Hambushiyah village in Jisr
al-Shughur, reportedly killing three civilians, including a child.
• On 17 April, a mother and child hospital in Shinan was hit by air strikes that
reportedly injured an undetermined number of civilians in the hospital and
damaged the facility, putting it out of service.
• On 18 April, at dawn, air strikes hit a residential area in the city of Ma‘arrat
Hurmah, reportedly resulting in the deaths of 11 civilians, including nin e
children (five girls and four boys), and injuring an undetermined number of
others.
• On 22 April, four civilians were allegedly killed when an air strike hit the
village of Ihsim.
• On 22 April in the afternoon, an underground field hospital located n ear Abdin
was hit by air strikes, and four civilians were killed.
• On 25 April, shortly after midnight, air strikes struck the area of Jabal
Duwaylah, south-west of Kafr Takharim city, allegedly killing 15 civilians,
including five internally displaced persons.
• On 25 April, around 2 a.m., a hospital in Kafr Takharim city was reportedly hit
by air strikes and consequently put out of service. No casualties were reported
in the attack.
• On 24 April, around 1.30 p.m., air strikes hit a food market in Khan Shaykhun,
allegedly killing seven civilians and wounding an undetermined number of
others.
• On 27 April, at dawn, air strikes hit a hospital in the eastern outskirts of
Ma‘arrat al-Nu‘man, reportedly resulting in the death of three civilians who
were in intensive care, including a woman and a girl. An undetermined number
of other civilians, including medical personnel, were reportedly injured in the
strike, and the hospital was partly destroyed. The facility was hit again by air
strikes later the same day.
17-08300

19/21

S/2017/445

• On 27 April, a funeral procession in Ma‘arr Shurin town was reportedly hit by
air strikes, which allegedly killed seven civilians and injured an undetermined
number of others.
• On 27 April, air strikes hit a civil defence centre near the town of Ma‘arr
Zaytah and started a fire in the facility. Later the same day, the location was hit
by further air strikes, which reportedly killed four civil defence members and
caused significant material damage, including the destruction of several
ambulances.
• On 27 April, air strikes hit a residential area of Sarjah city and reportedly
killed a child.
• On 27 April, air strikes hit Khan Shaykhun, reportedly killing eight civilians,
including a woman and three children, in addition to wounding an
undetermined number of others.
Hama governorate
• On 8 April, an improvised explosive device placed underneath a bus
transporting civilians exploded in Zahra’ neighbourhood in the Government controlled city of Homs, reportedly killing five civilians, including four
women, and injuring nine others.
• On 29 April, around noon, air strikes hit a medical facility in Kafr Zayta city,
reportedly resulting in the death of eight Civil Defence members and in the
destruction of the facility. Around 2 p.m., a second air strike hit the same
location, reportedly killing two civilians.
• On 29 April, around 9 p.m., another medical centre located in the outskirts of
Kafr Zayta was hit by air strikes that reportedly put the facility out of order.
Dayr al-Zawr governorate
• On 3 April, two vehicle borne improvised explosive devices detonated at a
Syrian Democratic Forces-controlled checkpoint on al-Mahattah Street in
Jazrat al-Buhamid town, located in western rural Deir-ez-Zor. The first one
exploded at the checkpoint, and the other detonated 30 minutes later as
civilians gathered around the location. As a result, five civilians, including one
woman, were allegedly killed and at least 15 others injured, including
children.
• On 9 April, two civilians were reportedly killed and at least 17 others injured
by ground-based strikes on residential areas in Wadi Street in the Government controlled Jurah neighbourhood in Dayr al-Zawr city.
• On 13 April, one civilian was allegedly killed and at least two others injured
by ground-based fire on the Government-held part of Dayr al-Zawr city.
• On 17 April, a girl was reportedly killed by ground -based fire in the
Government-held part of Dayr al-Zawr city.
• On 16 April, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the Government controlled Harabish neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr city and reportedly killed
five civilians and injured nine others.
• On 17 April, at approximately 10 p.m., air strikes hit a residential compound
in Albu Kamal city and reportedly killed at least 20 civilians , including nine
Iraqi civilians who had recently fled Iraq, and injured at least 30 others. The
United States-led coalition stated in its public reporting that, on the same day,

20/21

17-08300

S/2017/445

it had conducted a strike that destroyed an ISIL staging area in the vicinity of
Albu Kamal.
• On 17 April, air strikes destroyed the building of the former Agriculture
College in the town of Husayniyah in north-west rural Dayr al-Zawr. Located
in a residential area, the building was being used by ISIL as an office. The air
strikes reportedly killed at least 11 civilians, including women and children,
and injured an undetermined number of others.
• On 18 April, ground-based strikes hit residential areas in the al-Jurah
neighbourhood of Dayr al-Zawr, reportedly killing three civilians, including a
girl under the age of 10.
Raqqah governorate
• On 3 April, air strikes hit a house in Hamrat Ghanam village in eastern rural
Raqqah, reportedly killing four civilians, including two women, and injuring
three others, including two women.
• On 7 April in the afternoon, air strikes hit an Internet cafe and some houses in
the village of Hunaydah in western rural Raqqah and reportedly killed at least
13 civilians, including two boys and a woman, and injured 23 others.
• On 8 April, a boat transporting at least 40 civilians fleeing heavy air strikes
and ground-based strikes was hit as it was crossing the Euphrates River in the
area of Tabaqah. A woman and her six children were allegedly killed in the
attack, with the fate of the rest of the passengers unknown. The Unites Statesled coalition stated in its public reporting that it had conducted 10 strikes near
Tabaqah on 8 April, engaging 10 ISIL tactical units, destroying two defensive
fighting positions and destroying four ISIL vehicles.
• On 22 April, air strikes hit the Al-Hal market area of Tabaqah city and
reportedly killed a family (a couple and three children). The United States -led
coalition stated in its public reporting that it had conducted eight strikes near
Tabaqah on 22 April, engaging six ISIL tactical units and destroying five
fighting positions and two improvised explosive devices.
• On 23 April, a civilian woman and her two children were reportedly killed
when an improvised explosive device detonated in their vicinity in th e
Zuwayqat neighbourhood of Tabaqah city.
• On 24 April, air strikes hit a vehicle that was reportedly carrying civilians
trying to escape the Tabaqah area. At least eight civilians from one family
were allegedly injured, including three women and five children aged between
three months and 15 years of age. The United States-led coalition stated in its
public reporting that it had conducted seven strikes near Tabaqah on 24 April,
engaging three ISIL tactical units, destroying three ISIL command and control
nodes, a fighting position and a heavy machine gun and suppressing two ISIL
tactical units.
• On 25 April, at approximately 11 p.m., air strikes hit three houses of civilians
north of Ajrawi roundabout in the centre of Tabaqah city and reportedly killed
16 civilians, including nine children and five women. The United States -led
coalition stated in its public reporting that it had conducted six strikes near
Tabaqah on 25 April, engaging four ISIL tactical units and destroying four
fighting positions and a fuel truck.

17-08300

21/21
