184

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

1. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution, together with its annex containing
draft additional guidelines for the improvement of the
channels of communication between the United Nations
and youth and youth organizations, to all Member
States, regional commissions and regional and international youth organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council for their comments and
suggestions;
2. Invites Member States to communicate the substance of the present resolution and its annex to national
youth organizations and asks for their comments and
suggestions;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessa~ _action to ob~ain from ~ember States, regional com~1ssi~ns and regi_onal and mtemational youth organizations m consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council their comments on the aforementioned draft
additional guidelines and to submit a report in this regard to the General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session;
. 4. . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Policies and
programmes relating to youth".
105 th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
ANNEX
Draft additional guJdelines for the improvement of the channels
of communication between the United Nations and youth
and youth organizations
A. NATIONAL
l._ Attention should be given to the expansion of advisory

services on youth activities provided by the United Nations to
Governments at their request.
2. Bearing in mind the proposals contained in the note by
the Secretary-General on the role of youth in the promotion
and protection of human rights, 1 0 1 attention should also be
given, in _consultation with Governments, to the promotion of
the. esta_bhshmen~ of n~tional liaison and focal points on youth,
takmg m!o consideration the networks of national correspondents which have been set up to facilitate communication between countries and with the United Nations in allied fields
of social development.
B. REGIONAL
The regional commissions should review their relationships with regional non-governmental organizations in order to
facilitate co-operation with regard to youth activities between
these organizations, especially those active with young people,
and the regional commissions.
4.. The r~gional commissions should be requested to pay
special. attention to the question of the active participation of
youth m the process of development and to consider the need
to co-operate closely with the international programmes of the
International Labour Organisation and the United Nations Development Programme for the provision of services for and by
youth with regard to employment.
5. In the context of paragraph 4 above, the Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions, within their mandates, should
consider the promotion and co-ordination within their respective regions of all activities regarding the integration and participation of youth in development.
6. The regional commissions should consider the possibility
of organizing regional workshops on questions relating to youth.
C. INTERNATIONAL
7. The Administrative Committee on Co-ordination should
continue to make arrangements for the promotion and co-ordination of the activities in the field of youth and the integration
3.

101 E/CN.5/528 and Corr.1.

of those activities into the over-all programmes on social and
economic development.
8. Governments and non-governmental organizations with
youth programmes should be encouraged to contribute material
for publication in the Youth Information Bulletin, which is
issued quarterly in three languages, and also to identify channels through which copies of the Bulletin can be circulated in
order to reach the maximum number of young people.
9. The practice of providing internships for youth should
be expanded to give young people from all regions of the world
the opportunity of serving the United Nations for short periods
of time and thereby learning of its activities at first hand. Those
internships should not be confined to United Nations Headquarters.
10.
The Joint United Nations Information Committee
should be invited to consider the views of youth organizations
representative of all regions of the world on the production and
circulation of United Nations publications of interest to youth.
11. The Secretary-General should maintain under review
the existing channels of communication between the United
Nations and youth and youth organizations, in the light of the
comments received from Governments.

34/167.

Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling its resolutions 32/62 of 8 December 1977,
in which it requested the Commission on Human Rights
to draw up a draft convention on torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in the
light of the principles embodied in the Declaration,
32/63 of 8 December 1977, in which it requested the
Secretary-General to draw up and circulate among
Member States a questionnaire soliciting information
concerning steps they had taken, including legislative
and administrative measures, to put into practice the
principles of the Declaration, and 32/64 of 8 December
1977, in which it called upon Member States to reinforce their support of the Declaration by making
unilateral declarations against torture and other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the significant
progress made in the drafting of a convention on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment during the thirty-fifth session of the
Commission on Human Rights, as reflected in the progress report of the Commission; 102
2. Welcomes Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/35 of 10 May 1979, by which the Council
authorized an open-ended working group of the Commission on Human Rights to meet for a period of one
week prior to the thirty-sixth session of the Commission
to complete the work on a draft convention;
3. Requests the Commission on Human Rights, at
its thirty-sixth session, to continue to give high priority
to the question of completing the draft convention on
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
102
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
1979, Supplement No. 6 (El 1979/36), chap. VIII, sect. A.

VI.

4. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 103 called for under General Assembly resolution 33/178 of 20 December 1978, on replies to the
questionnaire;
5. Calls upon Member States which have not yet
done so to reply to the questionnaire, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/63 and 33/178;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session further information provided in response to the questionnaire,
and to submit all the information available which he has
received on the basis of the questionnaire to the Commission on Human Rights, to the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities and to the Sixth United Nations Congress on the
Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders;
1. Takes note also of the report of the SecretaryGeneral104 on unilateral declarations, called for under
General Assembly resolutions 32/64 and 33/178;
8. Invites Member States which have not yet done
so to deposit the unilateral declarations with the
Secretary-General, as called for under General Assembly resolutions 32/64 and 33/178;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
inform the General Assembly, in annual reports, of
unilateral declarations already deposited and of such
further unilateral declarations as may be deposited by
Member States;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session the item entitled "Torture and
other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment", for the purpose of reviewing the progress
achieved under this item.
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979
34/168.

Draft Code of Medical Ethics

The General Assembly,
Mindful of the Declaration on the Protection of All
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, unanimously adopted by the General Assembly
in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Noting that, in the report submitted by the World
Health Organization to the Fifth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders, 105 it was suggested that a "Health Charter
for Prisoners" might be elaborated with the co-operation
of the World Health Organization,
Recalling its resolutions 3218 (XXIX) of 6 November 1974, 3453 (XXX) of 9 December 1975 and 31/85
of 13 December 1976, in which it invited the World
Health Organization to prepare a draft code of medical
ethics relevant to the protection of persons subjected
to any form of detention or imprisonment against torture. and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
purushment,
Having considered the note by the SecretaryGeneral106 transmitting to the members of the General
Assembly the report of the World Health Organization
on the development of codes of medical ethics,
108 A/34/144.
104

A/34/145 and Add.1-3.

105 A/CONF.56/9.
108 A/34/273.

185

Resolutio111 adopted on the repons of the Third Committee

Noting with appreciation that the Executive Board
of the World Health Organization has endorsed the
principles set forth in the report of its Director-General
on the development of codes of medical ethics and has
requested its Director-General to transmit that report
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
draft Code of Medical Ethics 101 to Member States, the
specialized agencies concerned and interested intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council for comments and suggestions, and to
submit a report to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session;
2. Decides to consider again the question of the
draft Code of Medical Ethics at its thirty-fifth session,
under the item entitled "Torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment".
106th plenary meeting
17 December 1979

34/169.

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement
Officials

The General Assembly,
Considering that the purposes proclaimed in the
Charter of the United Nations include the achievement
of international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race sex
language or religion,
'
'
Recalling, in particular, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 108 and the International Covenants on
Human Rights, 100
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of
All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution 3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Mindful that the nature of the functions of law enforcement in the defence of public order and the manner in which those functions are exercised have a direct
impact on the quality of life of individuals as well as
of society as a whole,
Conscious of the important task which law enforcement officials are performing diligently and with dignity,
in compliance with the principles of human rights,
Aware, nevertheless, of the potential for abuse which
the exercise of such duties entails,
Recognizing that the establishment of a code of conduct for law enforcement officials is only one of several
important measures for providing the citizenry served
by law enforcement officials with protection of all their
rights and interests,
A ware that there are additional important principles
and prerequisites for the humane performance of law
enforcement functions, namely:
(a) That, like all agencies of the criminal justice
system, every law enforcement agency should be representative of and responsive and accountable to the community as a whole,
101 Ibid.,

annex.

toe Resolution 217 A (III).
1o9 Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
