S/PV.6786

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6786th meeting

Tuesday, 12 June 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Li Baodong . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Briens
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Bouchaara
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Mbeou
Mr. Parham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006)

12-36982 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1236982*

S/PV.6786

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
a briefing by Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to present the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), in
accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of the resolution. The
report covers the period from 21 March to 11 June 2012.
During the reporting period, the Committee held
informal consultations on 1 June. The Committee
also continued to carry out its duties through informal
exchanges and the no-objection procedure envisioned
by paragraph 15 of the guidelines for the conduct of its
work.
During the informal consultations of 1 June, the
Coordinator of the Panel of Experts briefed the Committee
on the Panel’s 2012 final report (S/2012/395). She
stressed that the Panel of Experts had concluded that,
while sanctions were effective in slowing the prohibited
nuclear and ballistic missiles programmes of the Islamic
Republic of Iran by increasing the cost of procuring
certain items, sanctions had not yet compelled that
country to accept a negotiated solution. The Coordinator
noted also the uneven implementation of Security
Council resolutions by States and recommended that all
States be reminded of the need to report incidents of
non-compliance. She reviewed the Panel’s most recent
outreach activities, which included consultations with
States and participation in conferences and seminars.
Pointing to the report’s recommendations and conclusions
and their usefulness for the 193 States Members of the

2

Organization, the Coordinator expressed hope that the
Committee would agree on the report’s publication.
Committee members welcomed the Panel’s final
report, which was characterized by some as being of
very good quality, well-researched and meeting high
methodological standards. Several Committee members
asked that the Committee follow up on the reports by
regularly considering new names of individuals and
entities on the list; issuing notices with guidelines for
implementing the resolution; and publishing the reports
in the quickest possible time frame. Other Committee
members stressed the need for the Panel to continue to
work within its mandate. Several members requested
that the open briefing of the Chair be held soon with
the participation of the Panel. Noting the linkages with
other sanctions regimes, several Committee members
recommended that the Panel explore possible synergies
with other expert groups.
During the reporting period, the Committee agreed
to add two additional individuals and one entity
to the list of persons and entities subject to United
Nations sanctions that were involved in incidents
of non-compliance reported to the Committee and
investigated by the Panel of Experts. On 24 May 2012,
the Committee sent a note verbale to all Member States
informing them of those designations. The Committee
will continue to discharge its mandate, as appropriate.
The Committee has received a number of
communications relating to the implementation of
the relevant Security Council measures. One State
transmitted, on 21 May, a report on the shipments
confiscated by its respective authorities during the first
quarter of 2012 and measures taken
“to prevent transit of any shipments to and from
the Islamic Republic of Iran which are suspected to
contain prohibited items that can be used in Iran’s
nuclear and missile programmes”.
The Committee, assisted by the Panel of Experts, is
following up on this communication.
Another State sought clarification on whether a
certain Iranian individual was the same person as the
individual whose name appears on the Committee’s
consolidated list. A third State inquired whether
certain items would contribute to the development of
technologies in support of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive
nuclear activities. Lastly, a State asked for guidance with
respect to the scope and application of the assets-freeze

12-36982

S/PV.6786

measures imposed by the Council through its resolutions
on the Islamic Republic of Iran. In all of those cases, the
Committee is gathering information from its members in
preparing its responses.
With regard to the incidents reported, on 23 March,
the Committee sent letters to six Member States
concerning a previously reported inspection and seizure,
on 28 August 2010, of a container on board the vessel
MS Finland. The Committee received communications
in connection with this case concerning a transfer of arms
and related materiel from the Islamic Republic of Iran to
the Syrian Arab Republic. In response to the Committee
letter asking for additional information regarding its
involvement in this incident, the Syrian Arab Republic
denied that the items were destined for one of its ports.
Another State informed the Committee that it was still
collecting information regarding the shipment and the
company involved and asked for a deadline extension.
The Committee, with the assistance of the Panel of
Experts, answered a general query sent by the Council of
Bureaux, which represents the International Association
of National Motor Insurers’ Bureaux, regarding the
sanctions measures and their application.
During the reporting period, the Committee received
three notes verbales from a Member State containing
notifications with reference to paragraph 5 of resolution
1737 (2006) and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007)
concerning payments made under a contract entered into
prior to the listing of a person or entity.
On 29 March, the Committee adopted its annual
report for 2011.
The Committee, with the participation of the
Panel of Experts, will hold, in the afternoon of 9 July,
in Conference Room 5, the open briefing that was
previously announced. The purpose of the meeting is
to present the Committee and Panel’s mandates and
activities and to answer questions. Missions to the
United Nations will be officially notified of this event
in due course.
Regarding the Panel’s activities, the Panel submitted
to the Committee a report regarding a previously
reported violation. As previously mentioned, the Panel
also submitted its final report on 9 May, in accordance
with paragraph 2 of resolution 1984 (2011). The final
report will be issued as Security Council document
S/2012/395. I would also like to recall that, by its
resolution 2049 (2012), adopted on 7 June, the Security

Council extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts
until 9 July 2013.
With respect to the issue of national implementation
of sanctions measures, I would like to note that on
30 April, the Panel of Experts transmitted to the
Committee, in accordance with paragraph 1 (b) (i)
of the Committee’s programme of work, a quarterly
assessment of the reports on the implementation of the
resolutions submitted by Member States pursuant to
paragraph 31 of resolution 1929 (2010), for the period
from 1 February to 30 April 2012.
On the same issue, I am happy to note that,
during the reporting period, the Committee received
communications from Viet Nam and Luxembourg
transmitting their respective reports on the
implementation of resolution 1929 (2010). On that note,
I conclude my report.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank His
Excellency Ambassador Osorio for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council. I wish to request that Council
members limit their statements to no more than five
minutes, in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I also
thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today. Over
the past three months, we have had new reminders
that Iran’s illicit nuclear programme remains one of
the gravest threats to international peace and security
before the Council.
Since we last met (see S/PV.6737), the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has reported, yet again, that Iran has continued
to expand and accelerate its prohibited uranium
enrichment activities and heavy water-related work,
in contravention of the Council’s multiple resolutions.
Iran continues to install centrifuges at Natanz and the
Fordow fuel enrichment plant, near Qom, two previously
clandestine facilities. Iran continues to accumulate a
stockpile of low-enriched uranium, enough for several
nuclear weapons if further enriched to higher levels.
Iran continues to enrich uranium to nearly 20 per cent,
a level that is close to weapons grade, in quantities that
exceed its declared needs.
Those technical developments alone are alarming.
But international concern is compounded by Iran’s
repeated denial of IAEA requests for access to the

12-369823

S/PV.6786

locations, documents and personnel required to resolve
outstanding issues related to the possible military
dimensions of Iran’s nuclear programme.
We welcome ongoing discussions between Iran and
the IAEA. But those discussions must produce results,
unlike similar discussions in the past. We regret that,
to date, Iran has not followed through on its reported
agreement to comply with the IAEA’s structured
approach for resolving the Agency’s concerns about
the possible military dimensions to Iran’s nuclear
programme. Success will only be measured and defined
by Iran’s actual actions. It is not enough to merely sign a
document. Iran must take the steps necessary to resolve
the longstanding issues with its nuclear programme,
without further delay.
Those developments remind us of the continuing
importance of the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We fully support the Committee’s decision last
month to impose targeted sanctions on two Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps individuals and one entity
involved in arms smuggling. That action also sends the
clear message that there are consequences for those who
assist in the evasion of sanctions. We urge the Committee
to make more such designations in the near future.
We also commend the Panel of Experts on the
sanctions imposed on Iran for its excellent work and
we welcome the Council’s renewal last month of the
Panel’s annual mandate. The Panel recently produced
a well-researched final report (S/2012/395). It has
continued to adhere to high methodological standards
and has carried out its mandate in a professional manner.
We note with great concern the Panel’s recent
characterization of Syria as a central party to illicit
Iranian arms transfers. That finding is all the more
troubling in the light of the recent violence perpetrated
against the Syrian people. Over the past two years, the
Panel has assembled substantial evidence proving Syria’s
role as a repeat violator of United Nations sanctions on
Iran. Syria’s refusal to implement its United Nations
obligations should be a matter of central concern to the
Council.
We also note the troubling information regarding
Iran’s continued launches using ballistic missile
technology, in violation of paragraph 9 of resolution
1929 (2010). Iran’s continued missile activity, as
well as its links to North Korea’s prohibited ballistic
missile-related activities, merits further scrutiny.

4

The United States remains determined to prevent
Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, and we remain
committed to doing so through a comprehensive
dual-track approach that includes both pressure and
diplomatic engagement.
Since the Council’s last meeting, the permanent five
plus one group (P5+1) and Iran have held two rounds of
talks, first on 14 April in Istanbul and then in Baghdad
on 23 and 24 May. Preparations are now under way for
a third round of talks, in Moscow, next week.
In Baghdad, as part of our agreement in Istanbul,
the P5+1 laid out clear proposals to begin to address the
Iranian nuclear issue through initial confidence-building.
That included proposals dealing with the previously
undeclared enrichment facility at Fordow and all aspects
of Iran’s nearly 20 per cent enrichment.
We also put ideas on the table regarding reciprocal
steps we would be prepared to take. We have said
repeatedly that the window for diplomacy is not
open-ended. We have sought to impress upon Iran the
urgency of the situation and have made clear that we
will not engage in an endless process of talks that do not
produce concrete results.
We remain firm, clear and united in seeking a swift
diplomatic resolution of the concerns about Iran’s
nuclear programme. The P5+1 are ready for serious
negotiations. We hope that Iran will decide to take
concrete steps to address the international community’s
concerns.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Mr. Néstor Osorio, Permanent Representative
of Colombia, for his briefing on the Committee’s work.
During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to actively carry out its assigned tasks. In
view of the heightened sensitivity of the sanctions issue,
it is particularly important for the Committee to act in
a balanced and objective manner, without violating its
mandate. That must continue in the future as well.
We note certain progress in the work of the
Committee’s Panel of Experts. The latest report of
the Panel (S/2012/395) seems more balanced as
compared to previous documents, while the majority of
recommendations fall mostly within the mandate. It is
important that the Experts build their activities on an

12-36982

S/PV.6786

impartial, independent basis while using only reliable
sources and credible information.
Russia fully complies with all Security Council
sanctions against Iran. However, we believe that the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime and, overall, the
collective nature and unified action of the international
community on outstanding issues concerning the Iranian
nuclear programme are being hampered by additional
unilateral restrictions.
In a number of cases, the sanctions can have
an extraterritorial effect, which is categorically
unacceptable from an international legal point of view.
The members of the international community must
scrupulously comply with relevant Security Council
resolutions, and not violate them.
Russia has always called for a solution to matters
linked to the Iranian nuclear programme based upon
purely mutual political, diplomatic methods carried out
incrementally and with respect for the interests of the
participants in the negotiations. The six international
negotiators have made concrete proposals on the
Iranian nuclear programme that have been submitted
to Iran during the negotiating round in Baghdad on
23 and 24 May. We trust that the upcoming meeting
in Moscow on 18 and 19 June will include the start of
comprehensive consideration of the proposals. We trust
that all delegations, including Iran, will come to the
Russian capitol ready for a constructive dialogue, which
will allow us to achieve positive results, including a
gradual convergence of positions and further progress
aimed at the resolution of existing differences.
Of course, we understand that in Moscow we will
not be able to agree on all of the issues concerning the
parties. However we think that the negotiating process
must absolutely continue beyond the upcoming round.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): I also thank Ambassador
Osorio for his briefing.
The Iranian nuclear programme remains one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
The E3+3 group of countries continue to strive for a
diplomatic solution to the issues revolving around Iran’s
nuclear programme. We have engaged in new rounds of
negotiations in Istanbul and Baghdad. We have reached
an agreement with Iran regarding the next round of talks,
which are to take place in Moscow on 18 and 19 June.
In our view, the Moscow meeting should bring about
substantial progress.

Meetings for the sake of meetings are not what
we are aiming at. We call on Iran to engage seriously
in meaningful discussions on concrete steps aimed at
restoring confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature
of its nuclear programme. It is now up to Iran to seize
the moment and take the negotiations forward in a
constructive spirit.
We are seriously concerned about Iran’s lack of
cooperation to date, despite the many efforts made by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
latest round of talks between the IAEA and Iran failed to
produce any concrete results. Granting the IAEA access
to Parchin is still an outstanding issue. We also regret
that, according to IAEA reports, Iran is continuing to
step up its uranium enrichment activities at the Fordow
and Natanz facilities. It remains imperative that Iran
intensify its cooperation with the Agency with a view to
resolving all outstanding substantive issues.
Against that background, it is crucial that the
existing sanctions regime be properly implemented by
all Member States. The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts have
an important role to play in that regard. Last week,
the Security Council voted unanimously to extend
the Panel’s mandate for another year. The fact that all
15 members supported the extension demonstrates their
wholehearted backing for the Panel’s work.
We welcome the latest report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2012/395). We consider it a useful and
well-researched document that should help Member
States in their implementation efforts. The Council
has released that final report to a broader membership.
That is an important step — not only for reasons of
transparency but also in the interests of providing the
United Nations membership with appropriate guidance
on sanctions implementation. We welcome the planned
open briefing in July, at which the Committee Chairman
will explain to the broader United Nations membership
how to implement the Iran resolutions most effectively.
Germany stands ready to engage in a serious
dialogue on the valuable recommendations made in
the report. One important recommendation has been
particularly highlighted. We strongly support the
listing of sanctions violators, since that demonstrates
that anyone who disregards the Council’s resolution
will face consequences. As the Committee Chairman
reported today, the Committee has agreed to the listing
of two individuals and one entity involved in sanctions

12-369825

S/PV.6786

violations. We are keen to see the Committee continue
to operate effectively in such a manner.
It is deplorable that Iran continues to be in violation
of its international obligations. We reiterate our concern
over the weapons exports from Iran to other countries,
especially to Syria, but also to Hizbullah. The Panel
must continue to investigate incidents wherever and
whenever deemed necessary.
Let me reiterate our determination to find a
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We
remain ready to pursue a dialogue with Iran aimed at
restoring international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. It is
in that spirit that we will approach the negotiations in
Moscow next week.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We wish to thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing to the Council.
We also wish to congratulate the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) on the
recent extension of its mandate, as well as to thank
it for the report submitted to the Committee in May
(S/2012/395).
We welcome the Chairman’s report to the Council
on the informal meeting on 1 June. We find that to be
a good step forward in the interests of transparency. In
that regard, we continue to emphasize that any action
of the Committee should enjoy the consensus of its
members and should remain focused on attaining a
peaceful solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
South Africa is encouraged by the ongoing
engagement between the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and Iran over concerns about the Iranian
nuclear programme. We believe that that engagement is
consistent with decisions taken at the November 2011
session of the IAEA Board of Governors. We note that, as
a result of Director General Amano’s visit to Tehran, the
Agency and Iran have agreed to resolve the outstanding
issues through a structured approach. We urge Iran and
the Agency to continue working in a constructive and
flexible manner and to seek continued opportunities for
both parties to engage in discussions on the remaining
differences as soon as possible.
Furthermore, South Africa is encouraged by the
positive atmosphere that appears to have characterized
the recent talks between the E3+3 and Iran. We note that
a further round of discussions will be held in Moscow
and we encourage all those involved in that process to

6

diligently work for progress and a positive outcome,
which is the expectation of the rest of the international
community.
South Africa therefore hopes that the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) will
be able to carefully examine the report submitted by
the Panel of Experts and agree on a way forward in a
manner consistent with calls for a peaceful resolution to
concerns about the nature of Iran’s nuclear activities. It is
our conviction that the process must also avoid creating
further antagonisms, which will only harden positions
among States involved in resolving the concerns of the
international community.
South Africa calls upon Iran to continue to
cooperate with the IAEA and to fulfil its obligations
in order that all outstanding issues can be clarified and
confidence restored in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. A sustainable solution will be one that
restores international confidence in the peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme while respecting Iran’s
right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, consistent
with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons.
In conclusion, South Africa looks forward to active
participation in the Committee, with the objective of
contributing towards a sustainable solution.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Let
me join previous speakers in thanking the Permanent
Representative of Colombia, Ambassador Néstor
Osorio, for his comprehensive briefing. At the same
time, we wish to express our acknowledgement of his
demonstrated leadership at the head of the activities of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2049 (2012), adopted last week, which extended the
mandate of the Panel of Experts that deals with the
sanctions imposed on the Islamic Republic of Iran. As
we have stated on several occasions, we believe that
the Panel of Experts is an indispensable component of
the sanctions regime applied to the Islamic Republic
of Iran. Similarly, it does useful and practical work
in support of the 1737 Committee. Its mandate, under
the guidance of the Committee, to collect, analyse and
verify information provided by States is important.
Allow me to briefly highlight some points on the
90 day report. First, our primary focus must continue

12-36982

S/PV.6786

to be the effective implementation of the resolution
adopted by the Council. The designation during the
reporting period of two individuals and an additional
entity involved in incidents of non-compliance, as
reported to the Committee, show us that the mandate is
being correctly implemented.
Secondly, we commend the outreach activities for
Member States, conducted by the Panel of Experts in the
framework of visits, information on issues relating to
the application of sanctions, monitoring the application
of sanctions and an analysis of trends and best practices,
as well as participation in seminars around the world.
Thirdly, we take note of the final report of the Panel
of Experts, whose recommendations we support. We
hope that the report will be published, in the interests of
transparency.
Fourthly, we note that during the reporting period
the Committee received notifications from Member
States on reports of alleged violations. We wish to
commend the Committee, which, with the support of the
Panel of Experts, responded to those reports at the same
time as it stepped up its outreach activities in order to
prevent future sanctions violations.
Fifthly, we support the holding of an open briefing
of the Committee, with the participation of the Panel of
Experts, on 9 July.
With respect to the current political situation, we
deem highly positive the dialogue and rounds of talks
that began in Istanbul in April, continued in Baghdad
last month and will go on in Moscow this month between
Iran and the 3+3 group.
We strongly support the dual-track approach and
hope for the creation of a favourable environment
and for a genuine commitment to finding a negotiated
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Finally, Guatemala reaffirms the importance of
the balanced application of the three pillars of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons:
non-proliferation, disarmament and the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The Treaty lays the
groundwork for what must be a serious commitment to
ensuring that Iran complies with its obligations under
the agreement, while ensuring also that its right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes is respected.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio

for presenting the 90-day report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). We
commend his stewardship of the Committee and the
professionalism with which the Committee has been
implementing its mandate.
I would like to welcome the submission of the final
report (S/2012/395) by the Panel of Experts, which was
issued as an official document of the Security Council
last week. We also welcome the extension last week of
the mandate of the Panel till 9 July 2012.
We expect that the Panel will continue to work
under the direction of the 1737 Committee and assist
the Committee in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council. We appreciate the
work, including the outreach activities, that the Panel
has been doing and encourage it to continue its work
in strict compliance with the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, in an independent, objective,
transparent and impartial manner. The Panel should
also continue the practice of briefing the Committee
regularly on all its activities.
We also support the Chair’s intention to hold an
open briefing along with the Coordinator of the Panel
of Experts in July 2012 for interested Member States
on their mandates and to answer questions that Member
States may have. We think that the briefing will also
provide an opportunity for the Committee and the
Panel to get the views of the wider United Nations
membership.
India has consistently supported the right of all
nations to peaceful uses of nuclear energy in accordance
with the relevant international treaties to which
they are a party. Iran should fully cooperate with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to restore
the confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of its
nuclear programme. In that connection, we welcome the
recent exchanges between Iran and the IAEA, including
the visit of the Director General of the Agency to
Tehran. We hope that the outstanding technical issues
concerning the Iranian nuclear programme will be
resolved peacefully through Iran’s cooperation with the
IAEA.
We also welcome the talks between the five plus
one group and Iran held in Istanbul and Baghdad during
the last two months. We think that those talks should
continue and hope that the parties will be able to make
progress in the next round, which is scheduled for next
week in Moscow.

12-369827

S/PV.6786

India supports the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council concerning
the Iranian nuclear issue. It is necessary that, in
implementing those resolutions, all efforts be made so
that legitimate trade and economic activities do not
suffer.
Before I conclude, I would like to assure Ambassador
Osorio of my delegation’s continued cooperation to
facilitate the work of the 1737 Committee.
Mr. Mbeou (Togo) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his briefing
on the activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and its
Panel of Experts. I take this opportunity to commend
the Panel — whose mandate was extended by resolution
2049 (2012), of 7 June 2012 — for the considerable
efforts it is deploying.
We note that, since the adoption of resolution
1737 (2006), relations between the Islamic Republic of
Iran and the various bodies established to combat the
proliferation of nuclear weapons have not improved.
Rather, in recent years, indeed in recent months,
the crisis of confidence has actually worsened. The
February 2012 report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) stresses that enrichment activities have
continued and that the Iranian nuclear programme may
have been extended to military activities, particularly at
the Parchin site. The findings of the report (S/2012/395)
of the Panel of Experts created pursuant to resolution
1929 (2010) seems largely to confirm the IAEA’s
suspicions.
We regret that the IAEA’s continuously expressed
will to inspect that site has not yet received a favourable
response from the Iranian authorities. That approach
is typical of the cooperation between Iran and the
Agency — a cooperation that the Board of Governors of
the IAEA would very much like to intensify.
Against that background, Togo calls on the Islamic
Republic of Iran to fulfil its commitments under not
only the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons but also its agreements with the IAEA and the
negotiations with the five plus one group. My country
welcomes the continuation of those negotiations on
23 and 24 May in Baghdad. Another similar meeting is
scheduled to be held on 18 and 19 June.
Togo also takes note of the statement made by
the Iranian President to the effect that his country

8

is willing to pursue negotiations and voices the hope
that the Moscow meeting will lead to an outcome that
could constitute a guarantee in the context of renewed
relations between Iran and other partners.
With respect to sanctions, I share the view that,
regrettably, sanctions imposed under the auspices of the
United Nations coexist with a myriad of other sanctions
imposed by States or groups of States. The report of the
Panel of Experts notes that overlap with concern. While
some countries say that they are bound only by United
Nations sanctions, others state that they are applying
both categories simultaneously.
Concerning reports, given that few States have
provided the Council with reports on the implementation
of the resolutions relating to the Iranian nuclear issue,
it would seem to be to the benefit of all countries if
outreach activities were regularly conducted through
visits, inspections and participation in seminars and
workshops. We think that is the best way for the
Committee to get its point across and to highlight the
role of States in implementing resolutions.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Like others, I wish
to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his briefing and
to commend him for the excellent work accomplished
under his leadership by the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), on Iran. I fully share
in the views expressed in his proposals and conclusions.
Concerning the final report of the Panel of Experts
(S/2012/395), let me underline in particular its useful
recommendations. We also welcome the report’s
publication as a measure of transparency and of support
for the implementation of the Security Council’s
resolutions.
We commend the Committee for its designation of
two additional individuals and one entity involved in
non-compliance activities. We share the view that new
designations should be considered on a regular basis
and that the lists referred to in resolution 1929 (2010)
should be updated when appropriate. We also support
the intention of intensifying outreach activities to
encourage Member States to effectively implement the
measures and provisions of the sanctions regime.
The sanctions regime is having an undeniable effect
in slowing Iran’s capability to advance its nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes. It is largely serving its
purpose as a stimulus for the resumption of serious and
credible talks. In that context, we are encouraged by

12-36982

S/PV.6786

the intense and detailed discussions that took place in
Baghdad in May, as well as by the prospect of continued
negotiations in Moscow. Significant differences remain,
however, and it is imperative that discussions be pursued
further and common ground expanded as swiftly as
possible. Likewise, we hope that meaningful cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
can be resumed following Director General Amano’s
recent trip to Tehran, notwithstanding the disappointing
results of the meeting held in Vienna last Friday.
We call on Iran to sign and implement the structured
approach document between the IAEA and Iran, in order
to ensure that cooperation will be provided in full, thus
enabling the Agency to clarify outstanding issues and
draw conclusions on the nature of the Iranian nuclear
programme. Although we agree with the principle that
sanctions are not an end in themselves, they clearly
remain a crucial element of the dual-track approach
that Portugal has supported since the beginning of this
process. Iran has still to show willingness to comply
fully with Security Council resolutions, meaning that it
must suspend all enrichment-related and reprocessing
activities and heavy-water related projects, as well as
grant the IAEA unrestricted access to all its nuclear sites.
Portugal again reaffirms its longstanding commitment
to a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue,
in accordance with the dual-track strategy, bearing in
mind the urgency of fully addressing the international
community’s concerns about the nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. Let me conclude by reiterating our
appreciation and full support for Ambassador Osorio
and for the work of the Committee he so ably chairs.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would first like
to thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio for his work as
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) and for his comprehensive
briefing on the Committee’s activities.
We note the work done so far by the Panel of
Experts created pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution
1929 (2010) under the direction of the Committee, and
welcome the extension of its mandate until 9 July 2013.
It is essential that the Panel of Experts continue its
outreach activities, which play a key role in increasing
the number of national implementation reports from
Member States. We commend the efforts made by
the Committee to enhance the implementation of the
sanctions measures. Azerbaijan welcomes the initial

draft of the Panel’s final report (S/2012/395) and stands
ready to engage in fruitful discussion in that regard.
It is of the utmost importance to the Republic of
Azerbaijan that it prevent the use of its territory as a
transit route for illicit trafficking of items and materials
related to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and
weapons technology. In our view, preventing the spread
of nuclear weapons is the most important security
challenge currently confronting the international
community. But in pursuing those goals, we cannot
deny any country’s right to develop its nuclear industry
for exclusively peaceful purposes under international
supervision.
Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Ambassador of
Colombia, in his role as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), for
his briefing, as well as to express our appreciation
for his efforts in steering the Committee. I would also
like to thank the Panel of Experts created pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010) for the quality of the expertise it
provides to the Committee. We encourage it to continue
its participation, under the direction of the Committee,
in the various conferences and meetings relevant to
the Committee’s mandate, including its dialogue with
Member States, particularly through visits to countries
organized at their request. In that regard, we are pleased
to recall the Panel’s visit to Morocco, which allowed
its members to review with Moroccan authorities the
measures taken to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
The Committee has considered the final report
of the Panel of Experts (S/2012/395). I would like to
reiterate my congratulations to the Panel on the quality
of the report and its efforts to take into account the
Committee’s comments following its consideration of
the previous report. We hope that the Committee will
continue to consider the final report in a constructive
spirit that will enable it to reach a speedy consensus.
We also welcome the unanimous renewal of the Panel’s
mandate and remain convinced that the Committee
will continue to be able to rely on its professionalism
and impartiality. We are also confident that it will be
able to benefit from full cooperation on the part of
Member States. In that spirit, my delegation supports
the Chairman’s intention to organize, with the support
of the experts, an open briefing for all Member States.

12-369829

S/PV.6786

The most recent report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), published on 25 May,
demonstrates that the outstanding issues around the
Iranian nuclear programme have not yet been resolved.
The report also gives an update on the dialogue between
the IAEA and Iran, indicating some progress in the
definition of “a structured approach to the clarification
of all outstanding issues”. We hope that the Agency will
receive all the cooperation it requires for that purpose.

with its mandate as outlined in the relevant Security
Council resolutions and under the direction of the
Committee. It is important that the Panel’s reports
are aligned to the broader, but mutually reinforcing,
goals outlined in the relevant Security Council
resolutions — that is, the effective implementation of
the sanctions and a negotiated and diplomatic solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.

We welcome the resumption of talks between Iran
and the five permanent members of the Security Council
and Germany aimed at making progress towards a
diplomatic solution to this issue. We remain convinced
that dialogue and the diplomatic route are the only
way to arrive at a solution to the problem. The success
of such a dialogue demands a clear, sustained and
good-faith commitment, with no hint of any action that
might complicate the situation.

Now that the Security Council has adopted
resolution 2049 (2012), extending the mandate of the
Panel for another year, we continue to believe that
the Panel’s composition needs to reflect a broader
geographic representation, particularly from developing
countries. We hope that, in appointing members of the
Panel, due consideration will be given to both expertise
and geographic balance. Such measures will help to
broaden awareness of the importance of the sanctions
regime among the wider United Nations membership.

We also believe that settling this issue can be
achieved through strict respect for the Council’s
resolutions and by fully satisfying the demands of the
International Atomic Energy Agency in the framework
of Iran’s complying with its international obligations.
We are convinced of the impartiality and integrity of
the IAEA, the only institution competent in this area,
which should therefore benefit from all the necessary
cooperation, including on all requested information and
access.

We take note of the recent report by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation
of safeguards in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in Iran.
We welcome the useful round of talks held between
Iran and the five permanent members plus Germany in
Istanbul and Baghdad. We hope that the next round in
Moscow will help deepen the diplomatic process for a
negotiated and peaceful solution of the Iranian nuclear
issue.

We take this opportunity to reiterate that the
non-proliferation regime must not be weakened, and that
every State must scrupulously respect its obligations
in that regard. The goal of nuclear disarmament will
continue to be severely tested if commitments made are
not respected. We would also like to emphasize that this
regime is founded on a fundamental balance between the
rights and obligations of States, which no State should
neglect.

Security Council sanctions are but one of the means
to achieve the larger and shared objective of resolving
issues related to Iran’s nuclear and missile programmes.
We reiterate our view that Security Council sanctions
should not be pursued as an end in themselves. They
need to be harmonized with the larger goals set by
the Council to facilitate a negotiated resolution of
outstanding issues. Given the delicate and complex
regional environment, Pakistan, as a neighbouring
country of Iran, does not wish any escalation of tensions
in an already volatile region. We therefore reaffirm the
need for dialogue and diplomacy. Iran, as a party to the
NPT and member of the IAEA, enjoys certain rights
that need to be respected. At the same time, Iran should
fulfil its legal obligations under the NPT and extend full
cooperation to the IAEA to resolve outstanding issues.

Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank Ambassador Néstor
Osorio for the 90-day report of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), covering the period from 21 March to 11 June
2012. We are studying the final report (S/2012/395) of
the Panel of Experts that was presented to the Committee
last month and has since been published. We hope that
the Committee will examine that detailed report, its
conclusions and recommendations in the weeks ahead.
We share the view that the Panel of Experts needs to
undertake its work and activities strictly in accordance

10

We are confident that the Council, the Committee
and the Panel of Experts will remain mindful of the
need to maintain a balance between sanctions and
negotiations.

12-36982

S/PV.6786

Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too, wish
to thank Ambassador Osorio for his 90-day report and
for his effective chairmanship of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

The Panel’s work is far from finished. We therefore
welcome the extension of its mandate for another year.
That is one more signal to Iran of the determination of
the international community to enforce full compliance
with Security Council resolutions.

The final report (S/2012/395) that the Panel of
Experts has just delivered to the Council presents
a comprehensive and detailed picture of the
implementation of sanctions on Iran. It makes clear that
sanctions have an effect. They deter Iran’s acquisition
of ballistic and nuclear materials, thereby slowing its
nuclear programme. They have also compelled Iran to
alter its methods of acquisition and its illicit export and
financing. We should continue to rigorously implement
the sanctions.

The Committee must also fulfil its role. We would
therefore like the Panel’s recommendations to be
followed. The Committee must regularly update its
lists of goods, people and entities that are subject to
sanctions. That is especially true for individuals and
entities guilty of violations. In that respect, we are
pleased that for the first time since its inception the
Committee has designated two additional individuals
and one company with ties to the Al Quds Force of the
Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution and
involved in violations of the arms embargo reported by
Nigeria. That is an important step forward. It is proof that
sanctions violations will not be without consequences
and that all States have an important role to play in the
implementation of sanctions.

The report also sheds light on the persistent violations
by Iran of its international obligations. Those violations
point to ever more complex and harmful methods of
evasion — phantom companies, bogus names, the use of
multiple brokers and exchanges, physical concealment
and false statements. Among other things, the Panel
underlines the continual involvement of members of
the Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution
and of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines in
violations.
I especially want to stress Iran’s violations of the
arms embargo. We are seriously concerned about the
active role played by Syria, outlined yet again by the
Panel. Syria, which is carrying out a bloody repression
of its population, is involved in the majority of cases
of violations of the arms embargo reported to the
Committee. The scale of those violations bespeaks an
ongoing, systematic policy of illicit transfer of arms and
related materials between Iran and Syria. Moreover, it
is also known that Syria is involved in many violations
reported to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on North Korea.
Those are serious violations on Syria’s part of its
obligations to the Security Council.
The independent Panel of Experts, established in
2010 by resolution 1929 (2010), plays a crucial role
in guaranteeing that measures adopted by the Security
Council are implemented and remain effective. I express
our thanks to the Panel for its professionalism and
outstanding work. We welcome the fact that its latest
final report will be available to everyone, and would
wish that to be the case as well with regard to last year’s
report.

The Security Council has yet again received a
worrying report from the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). It
highlights that Iran continues to refuse to comply
with the demands of the Security Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. Iran is actively pursuing
its uranium enrichment programme, to 3.5 and 20 per
cent, and its heavy water projects, in violation of its
obligations under Security Council resolutions, and
without any convincing proof of its civilian application.
In particular, Iran continues to enrich uranium to
20 per cent in its underground facility in Fordo, which it
concealed for years.
On the subject of the military dimension of Iran’s
programme, unfortunately no concrete progress was
achieved by the IAEA at its recent meeting in Tehran
on 8 June on a structured programme document, which
represents an attempt to resolve outstanding issues
about Iran’s programme, especially those relating
to militarization. Despite several recent visits to
Iran by the Agency and, in particular, by its Director
General, Tehran continues to refuse to formally agree
to the document. That is regrettable. In keeping with
the demands of the IAEA Board of Governors in its
resolution of last November, Iran must give the Agency
full access to all relevant documents, people and
sites, including the military facility in Parchin, where
the Agency has claimed that operations were being
conducted in violation of the required verifications.

12-3698211

S/PV.6786

What we ask for, as does the Council and the
international community as a whole, is for Iran to
instil confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme. On 23 and 24 May, the E3+3 Governments
met with Iran in Baghdad. That meeting aimed to build on
the renewed discussions on Iran’s nuclear programme in
Istanbul on 14 April. The E3+3 made concrete proposals
for creating confidence in the exclusively peaceful goals
of the Iranian nuclear programme. Those steps concern
20 per cent enrichment activities conducted by Iran, in
particular at Qom. They would be a first step towards
Iran’s full respect of its international commitments.
We expect Iran to offer a constructive response to our
proposals during the next meeting in Moscow, in order
to engage a genuine negotiating process that will yield
tangible results.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking Ambassador Osorio for today’s briefing to the
Council and for his report on the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and
its Panel of Experts. As his report made clear, the
Committee continues to do important work in support of
the Council’s resolutions.
The latest report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) provides further evidence that Iran’s
nuclear programme continues to develop in contravention
of Security Council resolutions. In particular, it is worth
highlighting the following.
First, Iran is still continuing to enrich uranium up to
20 per cent, and it is further expanding its enrichment
production capacity.
Secondly, Iran has failed to provide substantive
information to the IAEA with regard its announcement
to construct 10 new uranium enrichment facilities.
Thirdly, it has now been six months since Iran said
it was ready to engage with the Agency on the possible
military dimensions to its nuclear programme. Since
then, Iran has failed to take serious practical steps to
address the international community’s genuine concerns.
It has even failed to engage seriously on a process of
agreeing modalities, let alone actions, to follow up on
issues of concern.
Iran has, time and time again, had an opportunity
to engage constructively with the IAEA by providing
unhindered access to Iranian nuclear facilities and by
behaving in a transparent manner, but it has failed to
do so. The international community needs Iran to turn

12

statements of intent into concrete actions. Iran should
urgently provide the Agency with access to the right
people, places and documents. It is only through
sustained cooperation with the Agency that Iran will
demonstrate to the world that it has peaceful intentions.
We welcome the 1737 Committee’s Panel of Experts
final report (S/2012/395). It is a high-quality, credible
product. We are pleased that it will be made publicly
available in full and at an early date, as should have
been the Panel’s previous report, whose publication we
still await and expect. We thank the Panel of Experts for
its ongoing support to the Committee.
The Panel’s report notes that sanctions continue
to slow the development of the Iranian nuclear
programme, but it also states that prohibited activities
continue. Among other things, it notes that sanctions are
hindering Iran from procuring some items for its nuclear
programme, but prohibited activity continues.
It also notes that Iran’s ballistic missile programme
continues with further prohibited launches, and it notes
that Iran is illegally transferring conventional arms,
including two identified shipments to Syria. In other
words, Iran continues to flagrantly violate the Council’s
resolutions.
We welcome the Panel’s recommendations for
next steps for the Committee. We support the two
clear designation proposals that Yas Air and SAD
Import-Export Company be added to the list of
companies for their respective roles in illegal Iran arms
exports.
We agree that the Committee could engage in
more outreach to Member States to encourage reports
of non-compliance and violations. We also agree that
it would be useful to update existing designations
and the control lists, as the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea Committee recently did. We
encourage the Committee to work to take forward those
recommendations.
The United Kingdom looks forward to the open
meeting of the Committee being planned by Ambassador
Osorio. That will be an important opportunity to discuss
the Committee’s work with the wider United Nations
membership. We welcome the announcement that it will
be held on 9 July.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
engaging Iran on the international community’s genuine
concerns regarding its nuclear programme. We continue

12-36982

S/PV.6786

to seek a peaceful, negotiated solution. We believe it is
the twin-track approach — the pressure of sanctions and
growing international isolation — that has brought Iran
to accept dialogue.
The E3+3 group went to the recent talks in Baghdad
united and ready to take concrete steps to build
confidence. We set out in detail the steps we hoped
Iran would take, including on key concerns about the
enrichment of uranium to 20 per cent and on how we
would respond. We are still waiting for Iran to seriously
engage our proposal and to address key concerns, such
as on 20 per cent enrichment. If Iran fails to respond in
a serious manner, it should be in no doubt that we will
intensify the pressure from sanctions, and we will urge
other nations to do the same.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.
I thank Ambassador Néstor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, for his briefing. I appreciate
his efforts to promote the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and I hope
that the Committee will continue to carry out its mandate
in accordance with the principles of realism, caution and
balance. China has always attached importance to those
principles and will continue to take an active part in the
work of the Committee.
On 7 June, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2049 (2012), to extend the mandate
Panel of Experts of the 1737 Committee. China hopes
that the Panel will strictly implement the objectives and
requirements of the relevant resolutions and that it will
continue to work under the direction of the Committee, in
accordance with the principles of neutrality, objectivity
and independence.
The Iranian nuclear issue falls under the scope
of the international regime for non-proliferation and
for peace and stability in the Middle East region. The
relevant resolutions of the Security Council should be
implemented in a comprehensive manner. However,
sanctions are not an end in themselves. China is not
in favour of excessive pressure on Iran or unilateral
sanctions against it.
China is firmly opposed to the use of threats of force
and calls upon all parties to refrain from any actions or
words that may lead to confrontation. Dialogue and
negotiation constitute the only right path towards a

proper settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. Recently,
the 5+1 group and Iran discussed the Iranian nuclear
issue in a serious and useful manner.
China hopes that all parties concerned will further
demonstrate good faith, flexibility and respect; will
accommodate each other’s concerns; will firmly push
forward the diplomatic process; and will gradually
settle their differences through dialogue. To that end,
China will continue to play a constructive role. China
welcomes the numerous rounds of dialogue conducted
between the International Atomic Energy Agency and
Iran and encourages both parties to continue their active
engagement, so as to contribute to an early clarification
of the international community’s concern about Iran’s
nuclear programme and to the achievement of a
diplomatic settlement.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I once again give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to express my gratitude for the statements
and kind words made by my colleagues in response to
the report, which was the product of work done with
the members of the Committee. In that regard, I should
like to thank the Committee’s experts, who do their
work with great seriousness and competence, thereby
contributing to making these reports as transparent and
objective as possible. I should also like to express my
gratitude for the important contribution of the Secretariat
on this subject.
With regard to the Panel of Experts, as all members
have recognized, the group is coordinated by Ms. Salomé
Zourabichvili, who displays a commendable level of
seriousness and professionalism. We are certain that,
with the renewal of its mandate, the Panel will continue
to assist us and inform us on the progress made in
implementing the sanctions regime.
As has been mentioned, I note that there
are members that attach great importance to the
Committee’s work being extended and better known
by the general membership of the Organization. The
open briefing that we have scheduled for 9 July will
be a significant opportunity, not only from the point of
view of transparency and the information that members
should receive but also in urging that there be a very
clear appeal to Member States to contribute to the
smooth operation of the sanctions regime and meet their

12-3698213

S/PV.6786

notification obligations so that the regime can be fully
observed.
Speaking in my national capacity as the
representative of Colombia, I would like to add my voice
to those calling for the talks of the 5+1 group and Iran
on Iran’s nuclear programme and its implications that
have been taking place to be as successful as possible
and for the upcoming meeting scheduled in Moscow to
be fruitful.

14

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ambassador Osorio for the additional remarks and
clarifications that he has provided.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

12-36982
