S/PV.8237

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8237th meeting

Wednesday, 18 April 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zambrana Torrelio
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Woldegerima
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-11342 (E)
*1811342*

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 13 March 2018 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2018/218)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, to participate
in in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank you, Sir, for the
invitation to brief the Security Council on the incident
in Salisbury, in the United Kingdom, on 4 March 2018.
As I have no independent information on this issue, I
will be conveying information kindly provided by the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).
The Council has met previously to discuss the
4 March incident in Salisbury involving a toxic
chemical — allegedly a nerve agent — and the poisoning
and hospitalization of three individuals as a result. As the
Council is therefore aware, and as part of its response to
this incident, the United Kingdom requested technical
assistance from the OPCW Technical Secretariat under
article VIII of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
which states that the Technical Secretariat shall provide
technical assistance and technical evaluation to States
parties in the implementation of the provisions of the
Convention, including evaluation of scheduled and
unscheduled chemicals.
Accordingly, the OPCW Director-General decided
to dispatch a team to the United Kingdom for a technical
assistance visit. The technical assistance team deployed
to the United Kingdom on 19 March for predeployment
and from 21 to 23 March for full deployment. In the
course of its work, the team received information on
the medical conditions of the three individuals affected
and collected blood samples from those individuals,
under full chain of custody, for delivery to the OPCW
2/16

laboratory and subsequent
designated laboratories.

18/04/2018

analysis

by

OPCW-

In addition to those activities, the team conducted
on-site collection of environmental samples, again
under full chain of custody. The team also requested,
and received, splits of samples taken by British
authorities for comparative purposes and to verify the
analysis of the United Kingdom. The team was briefed
on the toxic chemical that had been identified by the
United Kingdom. It reviewed the analytical results and
data from chemical analysis of biomedical samples
collected by the United Kingdom authorities from the
affected individuals and of environmental samples
collected on site.
The OPCW has since stated that the results of the
analysis of biomedical samples conducted by OPCWdesignated laboratories demonstrate the exposure of
the three affected individuals to that toxic chemical. In
addition, the results of the analysis of environmental
samples conducted by OPCW-designated laboratories
demonstrate the presence of the toxic chemical in the
samples. Finally, the results of the analysis by the
OPCW-designated laboratories of the environmental
and biomedical samples collected by the team of the
OPCW technical assistance visit confirm the findings
of the United Kingdom relating to the identity of the
toxic chemical that was used in Salisbury on 4 March.
The technical assistance visit team noted that the toxic
chemical in question was of high purity.
Based on the results of the sample analysis by four
OPCW-designated laboratories, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat prepared a report containing and elaborating
on the information that I have just shared. On 12 April,
that report was transmitted to the United Kingdom and,
at the request of the United Kingdom, to all other States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. The
OPCW has also prepared and made publicly available a
summary of the report.
Speaking at a meeting of the OPCW Executive
Council today, the Director-General underscored that
the reliability and technical capabilities of the OPCWdesignated laboratories have been subject to close and
rigorous scrutiny over the years. He added that the
States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
can be assured of the credibility and integrity of that
network. He further noted that the work of the technical
assistance visit in relation to the incident was carried out
by the OPCW independently without the involvement
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

or support of other States parties and that it was not part
of the United Kingdom’s own internal investigation.
The Secretary-General has expressed his deep
concern about the assessment that a nerve agent was
employed in a targeted manner aimed at inflicting
harm or death. On many occasions, the SecretaryGeneral has also expressed his support for the work of
the OPCW. In that regard, he welcomed the request of
the United Kingdom to independently verify the toxic
chemical that was used in the incident. The use of nerve
agents — or any other chemical weapons — by any
party under any circumstances is unacceptable and is a
serious violation of international law.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her informative briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to thank
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, who
briefed us on the findings of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). On behalf
of the United Kingdom, I would also like to thank the
OPCW and its staff. The Security Council invited
us to keep it updated. I thank you, Mr. President, for
agreeing to this meeting today. We wish to brief the
Council on the most recent stage in the investigation.
I will also cover briefly findings, attribution and a
refutation of some of the public statements that have
been made by Russia against my country. This meeting
is being held immediately after the meeting of the
OPCW Executive Council in The Hague to which the
High Representative referred.
If I may, I would just like to stress that the report
itself has been circulated without any redaction or
amendment to the States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). To underscore that
point, I would like to underscore that the report to
the members of the Executive Council is exactly the
same report as the United Kingdom itself received. As
the High Representative set out, the findings of the
OPCW confirm the United Kingdom’s analysis of the
identity of the toxic chemical. It supports our finding
that a military-grade nerve agent was used in Salisbury.
As our investigation has found and as the OPCW has
verified, the highest concentrations of the agent were
found on the handle of Mr. Skripal’s front door. It is
therefore the chemical that we said it was. That has
been confirmed by an independent mechanism.

S/PV. 8237

I would like to say a word about the use of the term
Novichok. It is a term that we use to describe such
chemicals. We use the Russian term for such nerve
agents. The OPCW report itself does not use the term
Novichok. However, the point that I wish to make is
that it is the chemical that we said it was. There should
therefore not be any lack of clarity on that point.
The report sets out the full forensic chain of custody.
It sets out how there could be no contamination. It
explains how the environmental samples are analysed
by two laboratories and the biomedical samples by two
further laboratories. Finally, the report notes the absence
of any significant amounts of impurities in the chemicals
that were detected. High purity is the description given
in paragraph 11 of the executive summary. That in turn
suggests that a highly sophisticated laboratory — that
is, a State laboratory — made the chemicals.
The identification of the nerve agent used is an
essential piece of technical evidence in the ongoing
investigation. However, the Porton Down analysis
and the OPCW report do not identify the country
or the laboratory of origin of the agent used in the
attack. I would like to explain the wider picture that
has led the United Kingdom to assess that there is no
plausible alternative explanation than Russian State
responsibility for what happened in Salisbury. In our
view, only Russia had the technical means, operational
experience and motive to target the Skripals.
First, if I may turn to the technical means, a
combination of credible open-source reporting and
intelligence shows that in the 1980s the Soviet Union
developed a new class of fourth-generation nerve
agents. In Russia, and then more broadly, they were
known as Novichoks. The key institute responsible for
that work is a branch of the State Scientific Research
Institute for Organic Chemistry and Technology at
Shikhany. The code word for the offensive chemical
weapons programme of which Novichoks were one
part was “Foliant”. It is highly likely that Novichoks
were developed to prevent detection by the West and
to circumvent international chemical weapons controls.
The Russian State has previously produced Novichoks
and would still be capable of doing so today. Within the
past decade, Russia has produced and stockpiled small
quantities of Novichoks.
Russia’s chemical weapons programme continued
after the collapse of the Soviet Union. By 1993, when
Russia signed the Chemical Weapons Convention, it

18-113423/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

is likely that some Novichoks had passed acceptance
testing. That meant that they could be used by the
Russian military. Russia’s declaration under the CWC
failed to report work on Novichoks. Russia further
developed Novichoks after ratifying the Convention.
In the mid-2000s, President Putin himself was closely
involved in the Russian chemical weapons programme.
It is highly unlikely that any former Soviet Republic
other than Russia pursued an offensive chemical
weapons programme after independence. No terrorist
group or non-State actor would be able to produce that
agent in the purity described by the OPCW testing.
That is something that Russia has acknowledged.
Secondly, I would like to refer to operational
experience. Russia has a proven record of conducting
State-sponsored assassination, including on the territory
of the United Kingdom. The independent inquiry
into the death of Alexander Litvinenko concluded in
January 2016 that he had been deliberately poisoned
with polonium; that the Federal Security Service of
the Russian Federation had directed the operation; and
that President Putin probably had approved it. During
the 2000s, Russia commenced programmes to test
means of delivering chemical warfare agents and to
train personnel from special units in the use of such
weapons. That programme subsequently included the
investigation of ways to deliver nerve agents, including
by application to door handles. Within the past decade,
as I said, Russia has produced and stockpiled small
quantities of Novichok under this programme.
Thirdly, there is motive. Sergei Skripal was a
former Russian military intelligence officer from the
Main Intelligence Directorate. He was convicted of
espionage in 2006. It is highly likely that the Russian
intelligence services view at least some of its defectors
as legitimate targets for assassination. We have
information indicating Russian intelligence service
interest in the Skripals, and this dates back at least as
far as 2013 when email accounts belonging to Yulia
Skripal were targeted by Main Intelligence Directorate
cyberspecialists. None of those stocks and production
have been declared in Russia’s chemical weapons
declaration. It is clear that Russia is in breach of its
obligations to declare its chemical weapons programme.
If I may, I would now like to turn to an update on
the Skripals themselves, their medical condition and the
consular situation, before turning to the investigation
itself. The Russians asked us to pass on the offer to
4/16

18/04/2018

provide consular services to Yulia, as well as their
request to see her, and we have done that. Yulia herself
said in a statement on 11 April:
“I have access to friends and family, and I have
been made aware of my specific contacts at the
Russian Embassy who have kindly offered me their
assistance in any way they can. At the moment, I
do not wish to avail myself of their services, but
if I change my mind I know how to contact them.”
According to the medical update from the Medical
Director at Salisbury District Hospital, in the four
weeks since the incident in the city centre, the Skripals
have received round-the-clock care from clinicians, and
they have been able to draw on the advice and support
from world-leading experts in this field. Because of
the Skripals’ right to privacy, I will not go into great
detail about the treatment we have been providing.
However, we can say the following. Nerve agents
work by attaching themselves to a particular enzyme
in the body, which then stops the nerves from working
properly. That results in symptoms such as sickness,
hallucinations and confusion. The hospital, in treating
the patients, was able to stabilize them, ensuring
that the patients could breathe and that blood could
continue to circulate. They then needed to use a variety
of different drugs to support the patients until they
could create more enzymes to replace those affected
by the poisoning. The hospital also used specialized
decontamination techniques to remove any residual
toxins. Both patients have responded exceptionally well
to the treatment that we have been providing, but both
patients are at different stages in their recovery.
Turning to decontamination and the investigation,
as we have said before this has been one of the most
comprehensive and complex investigations into the use
of chemical weapons ever undertaken. It has involved
250 police detectives. They have been supported by
a range of experts and partners, and they have gone
through more than 5,000 hours of video footage.
They have interviewed more than 500 witnesses.
The British Government announced on 17 April that
decontamination work in Salisbury is starting this
week, and it will take some months to complete. In
total, nine sites, including three in the city centre, have
been identified as requiring specialist decontamination.
That will involve a complex process of testing, the
removal of items that could be contaminated and that
might, in turn, harbour residual amounts of the agent.
It also involves chemical cleaning and retesting. All
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

waste will be safely removed and incinerated. Each site
will not be released until decontamination is complete.
We have heard a number of allegations against
the United Kingdom and against the findings from
the Russian Federation. If I may, I would like to deal
briefly with some of the most egregious.
One accusation that we have faced today and in
recent days was that Yulia had not been poisoned — that
the British Government had in fact drugged her, put her
in a coma and then injected her with the poisons that
were found. That is more than fanciful; it is outlandish.
That sort of thing may happen in Russia, but I can
assure the Council that it does not and will not happen
in the United Kingdom.
Secondly, the Russian Foreign Minister, Mr. Sergei
Lavrov, has claimed that traces of the toxic chemical BZ
were found in the samples analysed by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and
this disclosed the location of one of the independent
laboratories that the OPCW used. The OPCW itself
has not disclosed the identity of the labs, nor have they
published any information about BZ samples in the
executive summary that they released to the public. So,
it is an interesting question: How and why does Russia
think it knows who tested the samples and what result
they found? By making that confidential information
public, Russia has in turn breached the confidentiality
that States parties owe the OPCW under the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC).
On the substance of that allegation, the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW explained in his statement today
that a sample separate from the samples taken from the
Skripals and their environment was sent along with
the samples taken from Salisbury to the designated
laboratories for testing. That is called a control sample,
and it is a routine procedure carried out in these tests
so that the OPCW can test whether the labs’ findings
are accurate. The Director-General has confirmed
unreservedly that there was no BZ in any of the samples
taken by the OPCW in Salisbury. I believe that Russia
is fully familiar with this procedure, so I would be
grateful to know what motive Mr. Lavrov had in setting
out this obfuscation.
Russia continues to be asked to be involved in the
United Kingdom’s independent investigation. It is quite
clear both that it is suspected of involvement and that
its behaviour has undermined its credibility on this.
As I said before, this is an arsonist and firefighter

S/PV. 8237

trying to investigate his own fire. Russia has failed to
establish any good reason under the CWC or otherwise
why it should be involved in the United Kingdom’s
independent police investigation. I repeat what I
said at the first Council briefing in which I took part
concerning Salisbury (see S/PV.8224). We did go to the
Russian Federation before we went to the OPCW to ask
if this was a rogue attempt by one of its agents, and if
so to cooperate with us in trying to get to the bottom
of it and resolve the case. The Russian Federation did
not agree to that request. Rather, it refused to take
it seriously.
On 13 April, the Russian Federation transmitted to
the United Kingdom a list of questions under article
IX of the CWC. We will respond as soon as possible
and certainly within the 10 days stipulated in the
Convention. We will respond to Russia, which made
the request, but we will share our response with all
States parties. Furthermore, if the CWC allows, I will
of course share it with members of the Council. Russia
said that its requests were urgent, and it has asked us
for an answer by no later than 17 April, which we have
not done because we have 10 days to respond. However,
we regret that Russia did not consider it urgent when we
asked it for an explanation on 12 March. Our questions
remain unanswered.
That concludes the briefing I have to offer the
Council today. We are at the disposal of the Council
to answer any questions. We are also very willing to
continue to keep the Council updated if the Council
would like that. We are happy to do that in person, or
possibly, so as not to disrupt the timetable, in writing.
I should mention also that we held an open briefing for
all Member States yesterday at the General Assembly,
and there were a number of questions that we were able
to answer.
Mr. Zambrana Torrelio (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing, of which we take due note.
Secondly, we welcome the speedy recovery of those
affected by the incident in question.
Bolivia believes that the use of chemical weapons
by any actor in any circumstance is despicable as an act
that undermines international peace and security, and
we therefore reiterate our concern about the challenges
being posed to the non-proliferation regime. Any

18-113425/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

use of toxic chemical weapons, agents or products as
weapons is completely reprehensible to humankind and
is contrary to the provisions of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, as well as international law. The Chemical
Weapons Convention is a multilateral instrument
adopted by 192 States. It is important that this model
multilateral agreement continue with the same integrity
and independence.
It is essential to maintain the credibility of that
international instrument in the face of allegations of the
use of toxic chemical weapons, agents or products, and
to that end any investigation must be conducted strictly
in accordance with the provisions of the Convention.
In that regard, we believe that all provisions of the
Convention should be used in any investigation to
address the concerns raised by the relevant parties in
accordance with the procedures set out therein. This
research must be broad, impartial and objective in order
to reach evidence-based conclusions.
Finally, it is essential that the countries concerned
use the appropriate diplomatic channels in order to
comply with the principles of mutual respect and
bilateral cooperation so that this situation can be resolved
through as much dialogue as possible, especially with
a view to strengthening the non-proliferation regime.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I thank
High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. I
thank my British colleague for keeping the Security
Council updated.
Last week, the Council met five times to discuss the
chemical weapons attack in Douma. Today we are here
yet again to talk about chemical weapons. This time it
is about a military-grade nerve agent used against two
people on British soil. In the constant push of meeting
after meeting here in this Chamber, it is easy to lose
track of what this means. We are rapidly confronting
a frightening new reality. If chemical weapons can
appear in a small English town, where might they
start appearing next? None of us will be immune from
this threat unless we immediately start rebuilding our
consensus against chemical weapons.
I will not engage in an argument over self-evident
facts. I will not trade accusations of shameful behaviour
with those who have no shame. I will not waste the
Security Council’s time. I will only say this — the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
has released an independent report that confirmed the
United Kingdom’s lab analysis of the toxic chemical
6/16

18/04/2018

that was used in Salisbury. Three people were seriously
injured. Hundreds were exposed. This act was brazen
and in complete defiance of the international consensus
against the use of chemical weapons.
As we have stated previously, the United States
agrees with the United Kingdom’s assessment that
Russia is responsible for the chemical weapons in
Salisbury. Whether it be through Russia’s direct
act or the result of its irresponsibly losing control of
the agent, which could be worse, our support for our
British friends and colleagues is unwavering. Douma
and Salisbury are just the two latest incidents involving
the use of chemical weapons around the world. They
offer us a reminder that these are weapons of terror.
They are indiscriminate. They have no place in the
civilized world.
We hope our colleagues on the Security Council
will join us as they have before in delivering a clear
condemnation of the use of a Russian nerve agent on
another Member’s soil, because unless we stop this now,
there will be more death and more scenes that nobody
wants to see. There is nothing more troubling than
the idea that the use of a weapon of mass destruction
becomes routine.
Last year, it was Malaysia and Khan Shaykhun.
Last month, it was Salisbury. Last week, it was Douma.
If we do not come together soon and take a firm
unequivocal stance against this deadly trend, the next
attack will come, and it could very well come closer
to home for one of us. Then, of course, it will be too
late — too late for the victims, too late for the wounded
survivors, too late for the women and children. This is a
matter of basic morality. We cannot in good conscience
allow this to continue.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United Kingdom for this very timely update
on the circumstances of the chemical-weapons
attack in Salisbury on 4 March. I also thank the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Mrs. Nakamitsu, for her very clear briefing.
The day after the hostile act of 4 March, France
expressed its full solidarity with the United Kingdom,
and I wish to reiterate it here today. We unreservedly
shared the British analysis that, on the one hand,
it is highly probable that the Russian Federation is
responsible for the attack and, on the other hand, there
are no other plausible explanations for the attempted
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

assassination of Sergei Skripal and his daughter. We
have drawn the necessary conclusions.
I commend the United Kingdom’s commitment to
transparency and the way in which it has conducted this
matter, in full accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. I recall in this
regard that the Convention requires States to conduct
their own investigations of an event occurring on their
national territory and that the Technical Secretariat
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) is to play an independent and
impartial assistance role. These provisions have been
fully followed and respected in the matter before us
today. I also reiterate our full support for the DirectorGeneral and the Technical Secretariat teams, whose
commitment and professionalism I commend.
The OPCW results, as they have been presented to
us, now speak for themselves. They confirm the British
conclusions. A high-quality chemical agent, Novichok,
considered to be militarily produced, was indeed used in
Salisbury against Sergei Skripal and his daughter. The
characteristics of this chemical agent, independently
identified by each of the OPCW laboratories, and in
particular its high level of purity, testify to a knowhow that only a State could master. Its manufacture and
handling require equipment and expertise that cannot
be improvised.
In the light of these elements, possible motives and
precedents on British territory, the United Kingdom
legitimately asked the Russian Federation to answer a
series of questions. These questions have all remained
unanswered for over a month now. We therefore call on
Russia once again, since it claims to want to cooperate,
to respond to the British questions without delay. Russia
must provide all necessary clarifications on the possible
development of such a chemical-weapons programme.
The increase in number of chemical attacks
appalls the conscience of the world, violates the
law and threatens our security. It is not only a major
affront to the international community and to the
Security Council; it also raises the risk of a terrible
regression for all of us. Indeed, let us make no mistake.
In Salisbury, Douma and elsewhere, the oldest and
strongest foundations of our collective security have
been deliberately violated, and thus put at risk, while
the forums charged with speaking out and enforcing the
law are systematically hampered. That is the heart of
the matter.

S/PV. 8237

Let us make no mistake. Those who obstruct
our action, who violate and deceive with respect
to their commitments, who deliberately carry out
disinformation campaigns and distort the facts with a
view to dividing and disorienting public opinion are
responsible for a serious normalization of the use of
chemical weapons. Furthermore, they contribute to the
risk of undermining the non-proliferation regime at a
time when they should be its guarantors.
France, which suffered first-hand the devastating
effects of chemical weapons during the First World War,
will never allow their use to go unpunished, whether
in Syria, Europe or elsewhere. Any time a chemical
weapon is used, regardless of where and by whom, all
light must be shed on that use and those responsible
must be held accountable. However, that is not enough.
We must do everything we can to curb the serious
threat of the normalization of the use of chemical
weapons. That should be our shared priority. That is the
whole purpose of the partnership we launched in Paris,
which 28 States and organizations have chosen to join,
including four this past week alone. Faced with such a
threat to our collective security, there can be no room
for impunity. That is also the whole point of our action
on the Syrian dossier.
The repeated use of chemical weapons undermines
international law and challenges our ability to safeguard
the values, principles and rules that underpin the United
Nations and our work. Because the very foundation of
our security is threatened and because we must live
up to our commitments and responsibilities, there is
no other acceptable or possible option than to come
together to restore the essential taboo prohibiting the
use of chemical weapons. Let us walk that demanding
path together. The international community can rest
assured of France’s commitment to that end, alongside
all its partners.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing.
China has been closely following the developments
related to the Salisbury incident since it took place in
the United Kingdom in March. We support addressing
the issue within the framework of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
in accordance with the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. I wish to reiterate that China
is firmly opposed to the use of chemical weapons

18-113427/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

by any State, any organization or any individual
under any circumstances. That is our categorical and
consistent position.
We take note that the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has recently issued a report on technical assistance
provided with regard to the Salisbury incident. At the
same time, we also note that the parties concerned have
yet to agree on mutually acceptable conclusions. Further
investigations are required to determine the nature of
the incident and the parties to be held accountable.
China believes that a comprehensive, objective and
impartial investigation should be conducted, and on
the basis of solid evidence, conclusions that can stand
the test of facts and history should be drawn. In the
current circumstances, all parties should pursue their
consultations and carry out further investigations to
uncover the truth.
The international community is facing numerous
challenges and all parties should reject the Cold
War mentality, join hands to maintain world peace,
stability and security; remain committed to a new type
of international relations based on mutual respect,
equity, justice and win-win cooperation; and build a
community of a shared future for humankind. Council
members in particular should remain united so as to
jointly fulfil the responsibilities of maintaining world
peace and security.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Poland has already expressed its grave concern
about the use of the nerve agent in the attempt to murder
Mr. Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia Skripal on
4 March in Salisbury, United Kingdom.
The report of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has confirmed the
findings of the British Porton Down laboratory on the
agent used in Salisbury. It clearly indicates that the
reaction of the international community in support of
the United Kingdom was appropriate. We are grateful
to the British Government for sharing, in the spirit of
transparency, the results of the technical assistance
visit. We also thank the OPCW leadership and the
technical assistance visit members for the outstanding
and professional work they have done in that regard.
Let me recall that the European Council has agreed
unanimously with the Government of the United
Kingdom’s assessment that it is highly likely that the
8/16

18/04/2018

Russian Federation is responsible for this incident.
In that situation, we repeat our call on Russia to
address the legitimate questions raised by the British
Government and now corroborated by the results of
the OPCW’s technical assessment visit report, and to
provide immediate, full and complete disclosure to the
OPCW of any programme with relevance to the case.
Poland would like to restate its strong conviction
that those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
must be identified and held accountable. The incident
in Salisbury is yet another example of a violation of
international law and the provisions of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. As we have said many times,
no such act can be left unanswered since it not only
undermines the basic sense of justice, but also leads to
the erosion of the non-proliferation and disarmament
regimes, and in consequence undermines the security
of all of us.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks the United Kingdom for having
initiated this briefing on the letter (S/2018/218) of
13 March from Mrs. Theresa May, Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom, following the events that took
place in Salisbury on 4 March. We also thank Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for her briefing.
Côte d’Ivoire takes note of the findings of the
report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) confirming the identity
of the nerve agent used in Salisbury on 4 March,
which led to the poisoning and hospitalization of three
people. It welcomes the British authorities’ request to
the OPCW to share the report with all States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention and to make its
summary public.
My country is paying particular attention to the
follow-up to the investigation conducted by the British
authorities with a view to conclusively shedding light
on that incident. We call on the various stakeholders
to exercise restraint and to cooperate with the
investigation, in accordance with their international
obligations. My country reaffirms its principled
position condemning any use of chemical weapons,
regardless of the perpetrators, in times of both peace
and war.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the collective
efforts under way to establish an accountability
mechanism with regard to the use of chemical
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

weapons. The international community’s commitment
to combating impunity remains fundamental to
ensuring respect for the non-proliferation regime
and for our shared commitment to achieving a world
free of chemical weapons and all other weapons of
mass destruction.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for providing us with an
update on the current status of the ongoing investigation
into the incident that took place in Salisbury. We would
also like to share the following observations.
Kazakhstan closely follows the developments of the
case, which is undoubtedly a blatant and unacceptable
criminal use of chemical weapons. At the same time,
it is clear that there are no conclusive findings on
those responsible. The case definitely requires further
objective and transparent investigation to determine
the circumstances surrounding the crime.
Regrettably, the subject of the use of chemical
weapons has become a regular item on the agenda of
the Security Council. As it happens, the same subject is
also the Achilles heel of the Council, as it is becoming
increasingly difficult for us to pass judgment since we
are not experts on the chemical substances used in this
particular incident. It is also difficult to maintain the
constructive dialogue and goodwill required to reach
balanced and consensus-based decisions because of
increased politicization surrounding the issue.

S/PV. 8237

We call on parties concerned to exercise restraint and
refrain from hasty actions, without providing full and
irrefutable evidence of the involvement or culpability
of one side or the other.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons now has a even more complicated but
very crucial task — to render all possible assistance
to resolve the tense relations between the States
members of the Convention. The organization must
realize its important role as an objective and impartial
mediator. It is the best and most qualified advocate
for the non-proliferation agenda. Patient dialogue and
constructive cooperation from all sides are the main
factors for achieving best results.
As the main body for ensuring international peace
and security, the Council should not allow divergent
positions on the threat of weapons of mass destruction.
It could lead to escalating conflict and high tensions
that could derail its work.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking the United Kingdom for taking the initiative
to update the Security Council.
I also thank the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
comprehensive briefing.

The confrontational spirit and rhetoric in the
Council are being transferred to other forums and
platforms, including The Hague discourse, where States
parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention are also
becoming divided. It is now a challenge for them to hold
professional and exclusively technical discussions on
highly important issues. Leading countries are unable
to reach a compromise and find common ground for
negotiations that will build mechanisms for countering
the threat of chemical weapons. It is regrettable that
such weapons of mass destruction, which had been
relegated to the past, are being used again.

Sweden has been clear in condemning in the
strongest terms the attempted murder of individuals
with a nerve agent on British soil. We fully stand by
the common position of the European Union on the
matter. We share the assessment of the Government
of the United Kingdom that it is highly likely that the
Russian Federation is responsible and that there is no
other plausible alternative explanation. We reiterate our
strong solidarity with the United Kingdom, our close
friend and European Union partner, and our support
for its ongoing investigation. We welcome the open and
transparent manner in which the United Kingdom has
approached the matter, including by arranging an open
briefing yesterday for all Member States.

As a country affected by the consequences of
weapons of mass destruction, we remain firmly
committed to the fight against the use of chemical
weapons and are ready to take constructive part in the
development of an investigative tool. Kazakhstan counts
on and looks forward to an ongoing, comprehensive,
objective and transparent investigation into the incident,
in accordance with existing norms of international law.

We also welcome the continued cooperation
between the United Kingdom and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
in full compliance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention. We thank the OPCW for its prompt
reaction to the request of the United Kingdom and for
its professionalism. Sweden has full confidence in the
authoritative findings of the OPCW, which confirm the

18-113429/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

identity of the toxic chemical. It is a matter of utmost
concern. We reiterate our call on the Russian Federation
to answer questions posed by the United Kingdom. Let
me take this opportunity to underline our full support
to the OPCW, the independent organization tasked with
overseeing the chemical weapons ban.
Once again we condemn in the strongest terms the
use of all chemical weapons, which is repugnant and
strictly prohibited under international law. We must be
vigilant in our efforts to ensure that the integrity of the
chemical weapons ban is respected.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea thanks
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting at the request
of the United Kingdom. We also thank the United
Kingdom for sharing the findings of the investigation
conducted by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.
We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has closely
followed the developments surrounding the use of a
nerve agent in Salisbury on 4 March. According to the
report issued by the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the results of laboratory
tests of the blood samples taken from Mr. Skripal, his
daughter and the police officer have confirmed that
they were exposed to high purity toxic chemical agents.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea condemns in the
strongest terms the fact that the toxic chemical was
used on human beings. I request that we find a way
to determine without a doubt the person or persons
responsible for using that substance so that the proper
legal action can be taken.
There should be no doubt or speculation surrounding
the identity and culpability of the perpetrators.
Conclusive evidence is required, such as the results
of tests conducted by the OPCW to determine and
confirm the chemical agent to which Mr. Skripal and
his daughter were exposed on 4 March. In that regard,
we congratulate the OPCW on its excellent work and
professionalism. As investigations continue to unravel
the plot and identify the perpetrators, the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea requests that the Government
of the Russian Federation and the Government of the
United Kingdom show restraint and find an appropriate
and reasonable way to manage the situation through
direct contact. We hope that the diplomatic crisis can
be resolved.
10/16

18/04/2018

Equatorial Guinea’s wishes Mr. Skripal, his
daughter and the British police officer affected by the
attack a full and speedy recovery.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Equatorial
Guinea’s complete rejection of the manufacture,
stockpiling, use and distribution of chemical weapons,
wherever and by whomever. Once again, we stress the
importance of establishing a transparent, independent
and professional monitoring mechanism to determine
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons.
Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the United
Kingdom for taking the initiative to convene today’s
meeting. We also thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
her briefing.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) is the appropriate international
body to address the incident in Salisbury. We know
that it has presented its report on the activities carried
out in support of a request for technical assistance by
the United Kingdom in relation to the incident. We
also followed the fifty-ninth meeting of the Executive
Council of the OPCW, where the issue was discussed
in the morning at The Hague. We take note of what
the Director-General of the OPCW said in his opening
statement with regard to questions arising about the
result of the analysis, including assurances that the
OPCW will continue to use the Executive Council
meetings or briefings to inform the States parties about
its activities and clarify certain points that need to be
addressed. Indeed, the issue is very sensitive and its
implication for global peace and security is so grave
that it is vital that the OPCW does so, and we appreciate
its work.
We agree that preserving the credibility and
integrity of the international regime on the use of
chemical weapons is vital to global peace and security.
Of course, we understand that the work of the OPCW
technical team was limited to identifying the toxic
chemical used. As was discussed at the Executive
Council meeting today, the OPCW report did not
identify the country or laboratory of origin of the agent
used in the attack. It will therefore still be important to
ensure that a thorough, professional and independent
investigation is undertaken. We believe that will be
essential for getting to the bottom of the truth and
bringing those responsible to justice.
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

What is clear from the Salisbury incident, and all
the other chemical-weapon attacks that have happened
recently, is that the use of chemical weapons is becoming
normalized and the international norm on the issue is
being seriously undermined. That should be extremely
worrying to us all. The use of chemical weapons by any
actor, under any circumstances, is totally unacceptable,
and we reiterate our strongest condemnation. However,
we know and understand that we can address that
serious challenge only if all of us provide the necessary
cooperation and abide by the rules that we set ourselves
in all transparency and fidelity to the truth.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I would
like to begin by thanking the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
briefing. The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the update provided by the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom on the latest developments in
the follow-up to the shocking chemical-weapon attack
that took place in Salisbury last month. I will make
three points. First, I will reiterate our condemnation of
the attack and reaffirm our solidarity with the United
Kingdom. Secondly, I will welcome the clarity provided
by the independent findings of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Thirdly, I
will urge the Russian Federation to change its course
and cooperate fully.
First, on the unacceptable nature of the attack.
At both the previous meetings on the matter (see
S/PV.8203 and S/PV.8224), we expressed our shock
about the reckless attack with a military-grade nerve
agent on British soil. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
has strongly condemned that attack in the Security
Council and on many other occasions. We stand in full
solidarity with the United Kingdom and fully subscribe
to the conclusions of the European Council on 22 March.
Secondly, last Thursday, at the specific request
of the United Kingdom, the full report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
was shared with all member States of the OPCW. That
report, containing the analysis of environmental and
biomedical samples, was carried out at the request of
the United Kingdom. In doing so, the United Kingdom
has acted in full accordance with OPCW procedures,
as has been confirmed by the Director-General of
the OPCW. We appreciate the transparency observed
by the United Kingdom in the process. The OPCW’s
independent analysis confirmed the findings of the
United Kingdom’s authorities that the attack on Yulia

S/PV. 8237

and Sergei Skripal was carried out with the use of a
specific type of Novichok. That fact is now beyond
dispute. We welcome the clarity that the OPCW report
has provided.
Thirdly, there is a need for Russian cooperation.
The findings of the OPCW report have made it even
more evident than before that it is highly likely that
the Russian Federation bears responsibility for the
attack. There is no plausible alternative explanation. In
that light, it is not helpful that the authorities of the
Russian Federation continue to disseminate alternative,
implausible versions of the events in Salisbury. Nor do
we approve of attempts by the Russian Federation, at
the OPCW and elsewhere, to create procedural hurdles
for the United Kingdom’s authorities to carry out their
follow-up to that chemical attack on their sovereign soil.
We urge the Russian Federation to change its
course and cooperate fully. We urge the Russian
Federation to provide the United Kingdom with all
information relating to unanswered questions about
the course of events in Salisbury on 4 March. We call
on the Russian Federation to cooperate with efforts to
bring those responsible to justice and to provide full
disclosure of its Novichok programme to the OPCW.
In conclusion, any use of chemical weapons constitutes
a threat to international law, peace and security that is
unacceptable. I reiterate our call for full accountability
for that horrific crime.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her
valuable briefing on the outcome of the report published
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on 12 April, concerning the incident
that took place on 4 March in Salisbury, United
Kingdom, with the use of a toxic chemical substance
that led to the poisoning and hospitalization of three
people. I would also like to thank the representative
of the United Kingdom for her detailed briefing on
the latest developments. Allow me to reiterate my best
wishes to the victims of this incident, a father and his
daughter, and to the policemen and civilians affected
by the attack for their quick recovery.
The laboratory analysis of the OPCW confirms
through environmental and biomedical samples the
use during the incident in Salisbury of toxic chemical
substance with a high degree of purity, classified as
neurotoxins. The State of Kuwait reaffirms its firm

18-1134211/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

position condemning the use of chemical weapons by
any party, in any circumstance and in any place. We
also condemn the production, acquisition, stockpiling
or retention of chemical weapons, as well as their
direct or indirect transfer, in line with article I of the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), to which the
State of Kuwait has been party since 1997.
We express our solidarity with the United Kingdom
and support it in all actions and measures to be taken
regarding the investigation of that incident. The State
of Kuwait believes in the importance of abiding by
international law and international norms, and in
upholding the maintenance of international peace and
security, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations. We call on all parties concerned to cooperate
with all the ongoing investigations through the OPCW
and in accordance with the provisions of the CWC.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing,
and we are so very grateful to the British for convening
today’s meeting, which we were eagerly awaiting.
Unfortunately, however, we have not heard anything
new from it today.
When I listen to some of my colleagues, I feel that
we have already moved on from Alice’s Adventures
in Wonderland and are in Through the Looking Glass
instead. Our Western partners are not interested in the
truth, and not just on this matter. They are not listening
and they will not hear. In Russian we say that you are
talking to them about Foma and they are talking to you
about Yerem — in other words, we are talking about
apples and oranges.
Today we heard the same lie that the United Kingdom
has already used to try to mislead the international
community. It is claimed that the United Kingdom has
not received from us the answers to the questions that
it requested. For the Council’s information, I would
once again like to point out that the questions that we
have been asked actually consist of that same 24-hour
ultimatum that boils down to one question: “Why did
you do it?”. Nevertheless, some of Britain’s allies, with
a level of persistence that deserves a better subject, have
repeatedly urged us to answer the United Kingdom’s
questions and cooperate with it. If they have questions
that we have not been asked, perhaps they can pass
them on to us, assuming that Britain is not going to give
us any additional questions. We would be very grateful.
12/16

18/04/2018

Today we heard the same series of unsubstantiated
accusations, now allegedly backed up by the authority
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). Let me say right away that there
is nothing in the OPCW report that supports the
mendacious British version of Russia’s involvement in
the Salisbury incident. The main thing that is not there,
and that the British were dying to see, is any conclusion
that the substance used in Salisbury was produced in
Russia. On the contrary, the speedy analysis conducted
by the OPCW only confirms that such a substance
could have been produced in any laboratory that had
the right equipment. After all, in order to conduct
a comparative analysis one must have a standard for
the toxic compound, and such laboratories exist in the
United Kingdom at Porton Down, and in the United
States and a number of other countries. The formula
for the substance has been known since 1998, when it
was included in the database of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology by the United States Army
Edgewood Chemical Biological Center. Moreover, a
search in the Google Patents online resource for the
key word Novichok produces results for more than
140 patents issued in the United States alone that are
related to the use of and protection from exposure to
that toxic chemical.
Six weeks have already elapsed since the Salisbury
incident on 4 March, and yet the gaps in this story, held
together by the weakest of threads, have not only not
diminished, they have multiplied at startling speed. We
are not surprised by London’s behaviour. At today’s
meeting of the OPCW’s Executive Council, the British
representative, whose statement was as usual based
on lies and disinformation about Russia’s motives,
methods and means, declared yet again that
(spoke in English)
“Russia has a proven record of carrying out
State-sponsored assassination.” Proven by whom?
(spoke in Russian)
Naturally, that was followed by numerous references
were made to the Litvinenko affair, adducing arguments
based on British jurisprudence’s new vocabulary, such
as
(spoke in English)
“President Putin ‘probably approved it’”; “‘the
Russian State may have been involved’”; “‘the
Russian State may have sponsored attacks’”;
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

“there have been numerous suspected Russian
State-sponsored assassinations”.
(spoke in Russian)
Everything that we have seen and heard today is
déjà vu. We went through all of this in the Litvinenko
poisoning affair, with a complete lack of transparency
from the British, who to this day have concealed
any documentation that could have enabled us to put
together a full picture of what had happened to him
at the time. For those who do not know, I can inform
them that the United Kingdom has simply classified
that information.
London’s modus operandi with respect to the
12 April report of the OPCW technical assistance team
was no exception to this. In the one and a half pages of
the document that were made public, the British forbade
the OPCW’s experts not only from mentioning the type
of technical assistance that they had requested but even
from naming the toxic chemical identified by Porton
Down, preferring to conceal all that information in the
confidential section of the report, whose discussion in
an open Council meeting would violate the OPCW’s
confidentiality rules. The reason that was done seems
obvious to us.
Well, if the British will not grant Council members
the right to discuss what they authorized to be included
in the substantive part of the report, we will discuss
what is not there. Above all, what is not there is any
mention of the Russian Federation, which corresponds
to the conclusions that we have already heard from
Porton Down. There is not the slightest mention of
the extremely crucial information on the factors in the
contamination of Sergei and Yulia Skripal and Nick
Bailey. Nor is there any information about the history
of their illness or treatment.
There is no explanation as to how a toxic chemical
that is extremely unstable in liquid form, according to
its alleged creator, Vil Mirzayanov, could have been
detected in a high concentration almost three weeks
after the incident. Nor is there a word about why this
substance, which is allegedly 10 times more deadly
than VX, could affect some victims seven hours after
contact while others succumbed instantly. And why
then — thank heavens — were the effects not fatal?
Perhaps Vil Mirzayanov and the Porton Down experts
are talking about different toxic chemicals.

S/PV. 8237

Moreover, there is no sensible explanation in the
report of how a blood sample from one of the victims
taken 18 days after the incident could have contained
an undecomposed toxic chemical identified by Porton
Down, while this was not observed in the other victim,
who suffered a more toxic level of contamination. That
scenario is not only uncharacteristic for paralytic nerve
agents, it might also be an indirect indication that it
is highly likely that before the sample of the toxic
chemical identified by Porton Down was collected, the
victim was injected with the agent while in an induced
coma, which is why there was no biochemical reaction.
That raises an important question. On 5 April, when
I quoted Boris Johnson on the presence of samples of
A-234 at Porton Down, the Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom (see S/PV.8224) responded
to the effect that the United Kingdom is permitted to
conduct research for defence purposes. Perhaps the
experts at Porton Down have investigated and are in
possession of this and other toxic chemicals that are not
on the relevant Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC)
lists. I believe that as part of the preparations of the
report of the Scientific Advisory Board of the DirectorGeneral of the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW for
the fourth CWC Review Conference, now would be
the time for the Porton Down experts to inform the
scientific community about their research on A-234 for
defence purposes and perhaps on other toxic chemicals
that pose a threat to the goals of the Convention. But
let us not labour under illusions. The line that Britain
has decided to take on the Salisbury incident has made
it clear that that will not happen. The United Kingdom
and its allies simply have no interest in a professional
discussion, while professional chemists and experts
cast ever more doubt the further they go into the official
British version.
Unfortunately, London’s free interpretation of
the provisions of the CWC only raises questions. For
example, the British consistently refer to the fact
that their national investigation is being conducted
in accordance with paragraph 1 of article VII of the
Convention. These references would be justified if it
were not for one “but”, which is this kind of investigation
pertains only to physical and legal individuals who are
under British jurisdiction. I do not believe it is necessary
to point out that Russia is not under British jurisdiction.
That goes without saying. In that regard, we request
a clarification from the British as to whether the
statements from Downing Street about Russia’s alleged

18-1134213/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

involvement in the incident in Salisbury represent an
attempt to put political pressure on the investigative
work or the ultimate conclusions of a Scotland Yard
investigation. Or it normal under the British legal
system for the Government to identify the guilty party
and for its investigative bodies to subsequently tailor
their investigation to fit that conclusion?
I want to once again stress that any doubts about
the good-faith compliance by a State party with its
obligations under the Convention must be resolved,
as laid down in article IX. They must be resolved, and
we know of no other meaning for the English words
“shall” and “should”. We would be grateful for possible
explanations from native English speakers about cases
when those words do not imply obligation. It would
be very helpful for our future practical work in the
Council.
Since our repeated proposals to London to begin
cooperating under article IX have been ignored, and
the requests of Russia’s Prosecutor General, in line
with paragraph 2 of article VII, about providing legal
assistance on criminal cases, have gone unanswered, no
alternative remains to us but to initiate our own request
under paragraph 2 of article IX with a list of questions
for the United Kingdom on the incident in Salisbury on
4 March. A note to that effect was sent on 13 April by
Russia’s Permanent Representative in The Hague to the
British via the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
In that connection, and with the aim of taking
measures to strengthen the CWC, we believe it is
essential that the Director-General of the Technical
Secretariat should prepare and introduce at the
next meeting of the OPCW Executive Council, in
accordance with paragraph 5 of article XV of the
Convention, a draft resolution amending the annex to
the Convention listing chemicals. That would not only
enable the substance A-234, identified by Porton Down,
to be officially classified as a chemical warfare agent,
it would put it and its precursors under the OPCW’s
systematic control. That is what should have been done
long ago by the countries that, as it turns out, had all
of the necessary information, including samples of this
toxic chemical, rather than using the forums of the
OPCW and the Security Council to disseminate their
groundless allegations that the Russian Federation is in
breach of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention.
14/16

18/04/2018

The information campaign, or rather war, that
the British authorities have unleashed on Russia
around the so-called Skripal case is no secret. The
norms of international law and of law in general, the
principles and rules of diplomacy, common sense and
simple basic politeness are being ignored. Against
a background of deafening silence on the part of the
competent British authorities on the merits of the case
and a multitude of politically tinged declarations and
pronouncements that have been aimed at Russia from
the very beginning, new versions of what happened
continue to appear, and significant discrepancies,
plants and open disinformation are surfacing that
London has no intention of refuting in any way. The
fake rumours are spreading. The calculation is that
down the road, thanks to this cacophony of unfounded
accusations and references to respected organizations
such as the OPCW — which allegedly fully confirmed
the British conclusions about Russia’s involvement, and
which, I will say it again, is a total lie — Governments
and society will not be able to sort out the subtleties
of chemical analysis and the numerous inconsistencies
in the accusations that have been made. As a famous
quotation often attributed to Winston Churchill has
it, “There is no such thing as public opinion. There
is only published opinion.” And the British and their
allies have no problem with their lying assertions being
disseminated by the media.
The British asked us two questions. We asked
them 47 questions. Here they are. We received partial
responses to two of them. There are no answers to the
questions that we asked during the previous Security
Council meeting on the issue on 5 April. We will have
more questions. We have promised them that we will
not let this go.
In order to acquaint the Council with the scientific
and factual side of this affair, we will circulate
separately the Russian representatives’ statements at the
OPCW’s fifty-ninth session of the OPCW, along with a
chronology of the events prepared by our Embassy in
London and a copy of my statement today.
While all the shouting is going on, the British
authorities have been busy working systematically to
eradicate any evidence or material proof. The household
pets have been destroyed and clearly no samples were
taken of them. The places that the Skripals visited — the
bar, the restaurant, the bench, the soil in the park and
so forth — are being cleared, while ordinary citizens
continue to live in Salisbury as if nothing had ever
18-11342

18/04/2018

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

happened. Yulia Skripal’s whereabouts are unknown,
and the Consulate has been given no access to her as a
Russian citizen. Let me remind the Council that nobody
has seen Yulia or Sergei since 4 March. Meanwhile, a
crime — an attempted murder, with suggestions that it
might be terrorist in nature — was committed against
Russian citizens.
I would once again like to affirm our principled
position, which is that we will not accept the results of any
national or international investigations without having
at our disposal the entire body of information — whether
that is data from the criminal investigation or full
technical laboratory reports — without the granting
of our right to consular access to Russian citizens and,
most importantly, without the direct participation of
Russian experts in all operations designed to clarify
what took place in Salisbury on 4 March. The only
thing that we believe is unarguable right now is that
London is continuing to conceal information that is
critical to establishing the truth, and will not permit
any transparency on the issue.
The British Embassy in Moscow once again
distinguished itself when a few days ago it put out the
following sensational piece of information, roughly
the same as that given by the British Permanent
Representatives to the OPCW and to the United Nations
in today’s letter to the Secretary-General (S/2018/218).
First, Russia has been producing and stockpiling
Novichok for the past 10 years. Secondly, research into
the use of chemical warfare agents for assassination
purposes has been conducted in Russia. Thirdly,
beginning in 2013, Russian intelligence expanded its
interest in Sergei Skripal.
Brilliant. Bravo.
I will now return to the letter from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom to the United
Nations that she circulated today, including to the
permanent members of the Security Council. As usual,
it is packed with lying, unfounded and slanderous
allegations. As usual, it features vocabulary such as
“highly likely”, “may have been” and “suspected”. The
United Kingdom has previously had the audacity to make
categorical assertions about our chemical declarations
and to discuss the working methods of our intelligence
services. However, this time our British colleagues
went even further. They accused President Putin of
direct involvement in a military chemical programme,
without quotation marks, references or mentions of

S/PV. 8237

“highly likely”. I have always been astonished and
amused by the far-fetched suggestions of our British
colleagues — and not theirs alone — about how the
Russian system of Government works. In London they
clearly believe that the Russian President has a hobby.
Any free time away from his official duties is spent
on chemical-weapon programmes. I do not know if the
people in London or the Permanent Mission here realize
that they have gone beyond the bounds of acceptability
and propriety. I think they should thank our President
for being so restrained.
Why is all this necessary? The answer is banal in
its obviousness. This is an attempt to defame Russia
generally and to cast doubt on its legitimacy and role
in the international arena. I did not say that Salisbury
and Douma are connected lightly. First, because both
are provocations and secondly, because both are being
linked to Russia. This is an unscrupulous incitement
against Russia that is designed to deepen the divide
between Russia and the European Union, something that
is clearly particularly timely for the United Kingdom on
the eve of Brexit. That is all.
In conclusion, it seems that the moment has come to
wield the classics — in this case, our Shakespeare, who
in Henry VI, Part III, said, “Suspicion always haunts
the guilty mind”. Now that is how the British should try
to prettily package their so-called suspicions, because
otherwise they are somehow not very convincing. We
even feel bad for them.
We will eagerly await the continuation of this
gripping serial. If Britain drags in some new information
or sensation in the spirit I have cited today, we reserve
the right to request such a meeting ourselves. The United
Kingdom should not think that it can hide behind its
poisonous web of lies and conjecture. It has not ended
with the report of the OPCW technical assistance visit.
We will continue to demand that it give us the facts.
There is undoubtedly chemistry in this affair — the
chemistry that links it to the Russian word for “swindle”.
Yes, they have pulled off quite a swindle. But we agree
with them on one point. There will be no impunity
and those responsible for this provocation must be
held accountable.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
We would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her
briefing. We are grateful to the representative of the

18-1134215/16

S/PV.8237

Chemical weapons attack in the United Kingdom

United Kingdom for the information that she provided
to us.
Peru has noted with deep concern the incident
caused by the use of a nerve agent in public spaces in
the United Kingdom, which has seriously endangered
the lives of at least three people. We would like to
reaffirm our solidarity with the victims, to whom
we wish a full recovery, and with the people in the
United Kingdom who have been potentially exposed
to the chemical agent in question. Peru condemns
all use of chemical weapons. We believe that such a
practice constitutes a threat to international peace and
security, a heinous crime and a flagrant violation of
the related non-proliferation regime. In the light of the
investigations and the report issued by the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the blood
samples of the direct victims of the attack, we must
emphasize that the Chemical Weapons Convention
prohibits the use of any substance as a chemical weapon.
Lastly, we urge the parties concerned to fully
cooperate with the investigations with a view to
determining responsibilities and penalties as a result of
the incident, in line with the principle of the peaceful
resolution of disputes.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked to make a further statement.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I will be brief. I was
asked a number of questions by the Russian Ambassador.
I have nothing to add to what I said in relation to the report
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) that has just been published and the
way in which the samples were taken. I have nothing to
add to what I said on the consular aspect. I would like
to stress that the investigation in the United Kingdom

16/16

18/04/2018

is indeed independent of the Government. With regard
to selective adherence with regard to the OPCW or the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), we are a State
party in very good standing. On the question of Porton
Down, the United Kingdom does not possess chemical
weapons. Porton Down is a defensive establishment that
conducts research and provides scientific and technical
support to the United Kingdom Government in relation
to protection against chemical weapons. Protective
research is permitted under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. Porton Down is full compliance with the
Convention and is subject to regular inspection by the
OPCW. Any member State is invited and permitted to
conduct an inspection at any time.
We received 16 questions from the Russian
Federation under article IX of the CWC. The rules of
the OPCW and the articles of the CWC make it clear
that we have 10 days to respond, and we will respond.
With regard to President Putin, I am happy to clarify
that I was referring to the early 2000s. With regard to
Litvinenko, the polonium trail literally led all the way
back to Russia.
I would like to repeat something that I have said
before. We respect Russia as a country. We have no
quarrel with the Russian people. But we will always
speak out against reckless and illegal behaviour on the
part of the Russian authorities, whether it takes place in
Syria or in Salisbury.
Finally, when Christmas comes, I would like to buy
my colleague the Russian Ambassador a subscription to
an English book club. But as it is not Christmas, I would
like to return his literary favour today. The Russian
account of the behaviour of the United Kingdom and
what is happening on the ground in both Salisbury and
Syria is a rewrite of George Orwell’s 1984, updated for
the modern day and modern Russian methods.
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m.

18-11342
