TWENTY-FIFTH

YEAR
MEETING:

NEW

14 MAY 1970

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l 540) . . . , . . . , . . : . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . , , . , . . , . . , 1

Adoption of the agenda . , . . , , . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , +. . , 1
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the, Permanent, Representative of ,Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed.to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794) . . I I ‘ , , I . ‘ . , , . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . * . . . . * . . * . . . . * . . . . . * * * . . . . . . . 1
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the .Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the ,President of the Security Council
(S/9795) , ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ , ‘ , . . . ‘ , . . ‘ . . . . ‘ , . . , . . * * . , . . . . . . . * . . . . . . * * * * . . . . . . * . . 1

SIPV. 1540

‘l

,’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively
to resolutions adopted before 1 January 196.5, became fully operative on that
date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FORTIETH

Held in New York on Thursday,
President:

Mr, Jacques KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France).

2. Mr, MWAANGA
(Zambia): I should like to state
very briefly the views of the Zambian delegation on
the serious matter of which the Security Council is
currently seized. We have condemned Israel’s policy
of punitive reprisals against its Arab neighbours in the
past and we wish to condemn in no uncertain terms
Israel’s latest attack on Lebanon in the Mount Hermon
area. We view the incident of 12 May, which was terminated yesterday, with the utmost concern. Not only
does it constitute a clear and undisguised violation of
the cease-fire resolutions, not only does it represent
added disrespect for and utter disregard of the authority
of the Security Council, but it also confronts us with
renewed difficulties, with a new burst of animosity
and hatred along the path to a permanent peace in
the Middle East. It also sets avery dangerous precedent
for our own situation which could have untold consequences.

agenda (S/Agenda/l540)

1.

Adoption of the agenda.

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9794).

14 May 1970, at 10.30 a.m.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. G/mm
(Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel), took places
at the Security Council table; arzd Mr. A, Benhima
(Morocco), and Mr. J. M. Baroody (Salrdi Arabia),
took the places reserved for them.

Pment: The representatives of the following States:
Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Zambia.
Provisional

MEETING

3.

The situatjon in the Middle East:
L&ter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

3. I wish to state the anxiety and disquiet of my
Government that for all the time that the Security Council has been dealing with this matter we have succeeded
only in getting ourselves bogged down in a dangerous
exercise of marking time and waiting for diplomatic
miracles to happen.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon
to the United
Nations
addressed to the President
of the
Security Council (S/9794)

4. It is sad to note that since 22 November 1967,
when resolution 242 (1967) was unanimously adopted,
no appreciable progress has been made, and that the
situation remains as dangerously dead-locked
as
before, if not more dead-locked than before. To say
that no appreciable progress has been made is not to
critic& those who have been engaged in a search for
peace on our behalf. The dedication of tke SecretaryGeneral to the cause of peace in that region is only
too well known and, likewise, the untiring, patient and
skilful efforts of Ambassador Jarring are universally
recognized and admired.

The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 May 1970 from the Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United
Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9795)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In accordance with decisions takep previously by the
Council 11537th meeting], I invite the representatives
of Lebanon, Israel, Morocco and Saudi Arabia to participate in the debate without the right to vote. In
accordance with the practice followed in the past, I
propose to invite the representatives of the parties
directly concerned, that is, the representatives of Lebanon and Israel, to take seats at the Council table. The
other representatives will be invited to take the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber
on the understanding that they will be invited to sit
at the table when it is their turn to address the Council.

5. However, I must state my concern that since the
four major Powers assumed the special responsibility-which
rightly belongs to them-of
assisting
the promotion of a settlement in the area, the situation
has visibly deteriorated. As things stand now, we run
the risk of making the same historical error made during
1

11. There is an old saying that reads: “There is so
much good in the worst of us, and so much bad in
the best of us, it isn’t right for any of us to criticize
the rest of us.“. That simply means that if we look
around we can find a great deal of good in all human
beings and, given that goodness, there is no reason
why we should not be able to achieve a permanent
peace in the Middle East.

the time preceding the June 1967 war: the error of
leaving things to drift towards tension, confrontation
and conflict. To the representatives of the Big
Four-France,
the United Kingdom, the United States
and the Soviet Union-I
should like to make an urgent
appeal for a serious and deliberate effort aimed at
achieving peace in the Middle East.
6. The special role and responsibility of the permanent members in this peace-keeping effort is too obvious to require any detailed elaboration on my part.
Let it suffice to say, gentlemen, that you have the
key in your hands; you have the means to end this
tragic loss of human life, and that, above all, YOU are
capable of influencing the course of events in that
region. I appeal to you to use that influence in the
name of mankind.

12. : Those are the principles which will guide my
delegation in its consideration of any draft resolution
which may be put forward in the course of this debate.
My delegation cannot and will not condone Israel’s
arrogant use of power against its Arab neighbour.
13. Mr. KULAGA
(Poland) (iizterprctc~tion fkm
F,YX&Z): My delegation has refrained from speaking
so far. I confess that it has not been an easy thing
to do, because of the repeated acts of verbal aggression
on the part of the representative of Israel, who, in
that way, supplemented the military, ideological and
political aggression which have become the guiding
principle of Israeli policy. Therefore, we did not speak
during the first part of this debate. We considered that
in a situation of extreme urgency and gravity and in
the face of the delaying tactics which we had been
witnessing, the important thing was to proceed to
action as quickly as possible, since time was a very
valuable factor for the aggressor. By our vote we
indicated quite clearly our condemnation
of the act
of invasion committed by Israel against Lebanon. We
supported the draft resolution submitted by Spain and
seconded by Zambia as a provisional measure dictated
by the urgency of the developments in the situation.

7. Each report emanating from the Middle East
always makes a point of stating that “the latest fighting
is the biggest Middle East battle since the June 1967
War”; and this trend has been maintained at a fairly
regular pace, with no immediate end in sight.
8. The latest invasion of Lebanon by Israel has raised
new and grave violations of the cease-fire. We cannot
but feel a deep sense of sorrow over the loss of human
life and the material damage caused by Israel in
Lebanon. As a humanist State, we regard the death
of a Palestinian, the death of an Israeli and the death
of an Arab as an irredeemable loss to humanity. We
are a small country and, unlike others, we have no
desire to extend our influence in the Middle East.
However, we have a genuine desire to see peaceful
coexistence between all the peoples of the Middle East,
within the framework of resolution 242 (1967). The
unanimous adoption of that resolution acted as a
reasonable basis for this kind of peaceful coexistence.
We do not lack the will to see a just and lasting settlement to this problem: what we seem to lack is the
unanimous will to see this will transformed into practical action.

14. Today my delegation would like to state its position on the substance of the problem. In so doing we
shall base ourselves on two premises. The first is to
concentrate on the question which is now before us,
that is to say, the request of Lebanon for the Security
Council to examine urgently the situation created by
the Israeli invasion. We mention only the Lebanese
request because we share the views already expressed
in this debate with regard to the counter-request, of
Israel, which was submitted to the Council, in the very
words of the representative of Israel himself, not out
of conviction, but for purely tactical reasons. Weintend
to examine the problem before the Council in all its
aspects and with all its consequences, regional and
multilateral. Our second premise is similar to the thesis
put forward by the Ambassador of Morocco, that is
to say, the need to call things by their proper names
and without equivocation. We believe that to be all
the more necessary because yesterday we heard statements, even rather long ones, in which the very subject
of the item on our agenda was hardly mentioned.

9. It is in our interest, and in the interest of all the
people of the Middle East, that we should encourage
and help Ambassador Jarring-whose duties have been
temporarily suspended-to resume his duties without
much delay. We should help him follow up every sign
of hope and every gesture of conciliation that may
appear on the horizon. We should exert our influence
on the parties concerned to co-operate faithfully in
the peaceful settlement of disputes in accordance with
the principles and provisions of resolution 242 (1967).
10. While we remain ready to join with other members
of the Security ‘Council in strongly condemning the
latest Israeli act of aggression against Lebanon, we
remain equally insistent that there should be full respect
for the cease-fire resolutions of 1967. I may recall here
that those resolutions were agreed to by all the parties
concerned. No peace can be ,built on the freezing time
of history. No peace can be built on the basis of the
acquisition, invasion and occupation of territory by
military conquest.

15. Just a few days ago Israeli propaganda presented
to the world a picture of peaceful demonstrations on
the occasion of the anniversary of the creation of Israel.
It stressed in particular that Israeli armed forces were
taking n0 part in those demonstrations.
In the light
of the events of the night of 11 to 12 May, that absence
can easily be explained. The Israeli army had other
things to do: to prepare for the invasion of a part of
2

Lebanon, no doubt as the first act of the twenty-third
year of the existence of Israel. What we have to deal
with is an unmistakable case of aggression. In his statements the representative of Lebanon gave us the
details. In spite of the limited nature of the information
presented to us by the Secretary-General, at least these
facts were confirmed for us. The report of the
Secretary-General speaks about the use of armour,
artillery and Israeli aircraft in Lebanon. The representative of Lebanon spoke to US with an emotion which
it is easy for us to understand, and we should like
to assure him, incidentally, that we commiserate with
him in the loss of human life and the destruction. We
have therefore before us all the typical and unmistakable characteristics of an act of aggression.

“If this draft resolution were to be adopted, the
Security Council would have achieved a singular
accomplishment which even alchemists have never
aspired to: turning the past into the future.” [1537th
meeting, paw. 82.1

18. We could not possibly remain silent about the
new attempt made in that statement to mislead the
Council, for the representative of Israel later acknowledged that Israeli troops were stayingin Lebanon overnight because-with what unexpected humanity: Israel
wanted to avoid possible incidents during the night
-and that after having inflicted losses m human life
and property of which Mr. Tekoah himself ,painted
the picture.
19. In the notes and statements presented to the
Council by Israel, we note, among others, such terms
as ‘,‘aclearing-out operation”, the purpose of the operation was to rid the region of terrorists” and “the Israel
defence forces will leave the region once their mission
has been accomplished”.
20. The analogy between the Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the American invasion of Cambodia inevitably
suggestsitself I would sayin anentirely objective spirit.
The language is the same. Listening to the representative of Israel, I got the impression that the word
‘ ‘fedayeen” was the only thing that madehis war communique different from the communiques of a similar
kind published by the Pentagon. The scaleof the booty
claimed in each case is obviously different, but this
can only reflect the difference that there is between
a major aggressive Power like the United States and
a small aggressive Power like Israel.

16. For our delegation, the Israeli invasion is first
and foremost one of the links in the chain of aggression
committed by Israel every day in the Middle East:
militarily, as demonstrated particularly by the air raids
and the massacreof civilians and children, the systematic raids against the United Arab Republic, Jordan and
Syria; politically, as demonstrated particularly by the
refusal of Israel to withdraw its troops from the
occupied territories; its refusal to carry out the provisions of the resolutions of the Security Council;
ideologically, by the orchestration of an unscrupulous
propaganda campaign in an attempt to win over to
Israel all possible elements, whether it be in the form
of an appeal to the community of race, an appeal to
the community of religion, an appeal to anticommunism, an appeal to anti-Arabism, an appeal to
the natural sympathy for the weak when it appears
desirable to the leaders of Israel to represent their country as small and weak, or an appeal to chauvinism
when the political circumstances require Israel to be
presented in the light of a successor and heir to the
nazi military theory of the blitzkrieg;
and finally,
humanly, as demonstrated by the numerous resolutions
of the General Assembly and of the Human Rights
Commission concerning the treatment of the Palestine
population by the Israeli occupiers. The list is long
and the facts are established in many documents.

21. But the policy is the same. One might wonder
all the more whether Israel was calculating that its
invasion of Lebanon would be less noticeable in the
wave of protest, againstthe American invasion of Cambodia, or whether the Israeli action might have the
purpose of relieving the burden of world indignation
directed against the United States,and thus obtain for
it the reward of the additional Phantomsand Skyhawks
required by the Israeli militarists.

17. But the Israeli invasion of Lebanon is not just
a new manifestation of what the representative of Israel
described as a desire for peace. And if I were not
a Marxist I would say, “God protect us from such
a -desire for peace”. It signifies a qualitative change
in IsraeIi tactics. Hitherto what we have had to deal
with have been acts of aggression denied by Israel,
in spite of all the evidence, in spite of the protests
and in spite of the resolutions adopted by the United
Nations. What Israel seems to want to have believed
in this organ, which bears, as all members know, the
major responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, is the argument that an act
of aggression, provided that it is committed rapidly,
can be claimed not to have taken place because it has
been consummated before the Council has had time
to take any measures. For that is precisely what the
representative of Israel sought when he said, in a formula whose pomposity served only to emphasize its
cynicism:

22. For me, the important thing is not to decide who
is copying whom, or even what are the tactical considerations of the countries I have mentioned. The important thing, the essential thing, is that in both cases
we are witnessing the samephenomenon, aggression;
the same tactics, namely those of justifying the unjustifiable; the same attempt to establisha new imperialist
formula in international law and an attempt to have
world public opinion-and even this Council-t<ake it
seriously. Our discussion of the Israeli invasion of
Lebanon, in the context of its international implications, thus acquires in our eyes-and I stressthis-the
importance of a test. That is why I have taken particular
note of the numerous statements dealing with this
problem, particularly the statement of the representative of Morocco.
23. That is why my delegation considers that the
Council is in duty bound to take energetic and effective
3

houses should not throw stones and that, if he and
his Government wish to be heard when they call upon
others to make efforts for peace, they should temper
their own bellicosity, first of all, by following the example of their Arab brothers directly concerned by accepling resolution 242 (1967), not just as it applies to Israel.
but also as it applies to themselves.

measures to condemn the aggression of Israel and to
put an end to its geographic and qualitative expansion.
The Council is in duty bound to take such measures,
both from the point of view of the substance of the
item before us and from the point of view of its international implications,
24. Our discussion could not fail to touch the very
roots of the problem in the Middle East, namely, that
of the implementation
of the principle of the inadmissibility of the occupation by force of foreign territory,
and hence the withdrawal of Israeli troops from the
territories which it occupied by force, as weli as the
implementation
of resolution 242 (1967).

3 1. To turn to Ambassador Malik’s remarks, he made
the curious allegation yesterday that the United States,
despite the fact that it accepted resolution 242 (1967)
two and a half years ago and has been striving for
its implementation
ever since, does not accept the principles of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war. Of course we accept the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by war, just as we accept
a just and lasting peace, withdrawal of Israeli forces
from occupied territories, the establishment of secure
and recognized boundaries, and all the other parts of
the resolution.

25. Mr. President, speaking yesterday as’the representative of France, you pointed out that:
‘C+ . . if, -from this debate, a strengthening of
resolution 242 (1967) of the Security Council in all
its provisions and its means of implementation
were
to emerge, we would then have made serious progress towards a peaceful settlement.”
11539th
meeting,

para.

32. Secretary of State Rogers and other United Stales
spokesmen have said that the United States supports
the principle of withdrawal of Israeli forces from territories occupied in June 1967 in accordance with
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and is fullycommitted to the principle of the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by war. We continue to do SO
and Ambassador Malik knows it. He also knows that
the United States also believes that the parties to a
settlement should have the possibility of agreeing
mutually, if they should so desire, on insubstantial alterations or minor rectifications of the boundaries which
previously existed between them. Since any such
rectifications or alterations would be subject to the
agreement of both sides, they would in no way do
violence to the principle of the inadmissibility
of the
acquisition of territory by war or the obligation for
Israel to withdraw in accordance with Security Council
resolution 242 (1967).

88-j

26. In so far as the Polish delegation is concerned,
we maintain our attitude towards a peaceful settlement
of the Middle East conflict. We continue to believe
that the primary and essential condition for such a
settlement is the immediate withdrawal of Israeli troops
from all the Arab territories occupied after the aggression of June 1967, and a final cessation of the acts
of aggression of Israel.
27. Mr. YOST (United States of America): Before
turning to the subject on our agenda, I should like
to comment briefly on remarks addressed to me yesterday by the representatives
of Syria and the Soviet
Union.
28. The representative of Syria paid me the compliment of calling me a historian. One of my first ventures
into history during my recent retirement was to try
to determine the origins of the war of June 1967. My
principal conclusion was that, contrary to epithets so
loosely bandied about at this table, there was in that
war, as in a great many others, no single “aggressor”
solely responsible for starting it. On the contrary, there
were several Governments which shared that responsibility and I believe that any impartial historian who
has studied the background would be obliged to admit
that a large share of that responsibility
rested with
the Government
of Syria.

33. When this Council met in August 1969 to corisider
the action brought about by a series of guerrilla-type
attacks on Israel launched from Lebanese territory and
Israeli air strikes on several villages in Lebanon aimed
at the source of these attacks, I not only expressed
the profound regret of my Government for the death
and suffering caused but voiced concern that the
accumulation
of such incidents might-gradually
undermine the hope we all cherish for a lasting peace
in the Middle East.
34. We are brought together again on this occasion
because tragically the situation which gave rise to our
debate last August has not only continued but has been
further exacerbated. Not only have further and recently
more frequent fedayeen attacks been carried out from
Lebanon against Israeli villages, resulting in the death
of a number of Israeli civilians, but Israel, in addition
to air strikes, has mounted a major military operation
into Lebanon in an effort to bring a halt to these attacks.
Once again there have been death, destruction, and
suffering on both sides, to innocent civilians as well
as military and other combatant personnel. We deplore
and deeply regret the loss of life and injuries that have

29. Moreover, I think it is also fair to say that, of
all the States directly involved in that tragic war, Syria
has subsequently made the least effort, indeed practically no effort at aI1, to bind up the wounds and work
towards a peaceful settlement. It has rejected resolution 242 (1967); it has refused to receive the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative;
it has repeatedly
incited and assisted others to break the cease-fire.
30. With all due respect to my Syrian colleague, I
should like to remind him that those who live in glass
4

i

. .. :

,_ 9 . (

I

.,

occurred, whether in Israel or Lebanon. I cannot
emphasize too strongly that my Government continues
to oppose all acts of violence
across frontiers in violation of the cease-fire from any source,

of political crisis within Lebanon during which, as was
pointed out in Lebanon’s letter of 18 March [S/9713]
Palestine refugees have become armed combatants
through no fault of Lebanon. On the other hand Israei
is justifiably concerned over its own security and, in
similar communications
to the Council, has pointed
out the international obligation of a State to prevent
the use of its territory for actions against a neighbouring
State.

35, Despite the efforts that have been made to control
and bring to a halt the cycle of violence on the IsraelLebanon border, it is all too evident that no effective
means have yet been found. All of us can now see
all too clearly how the hope for peace is being undermined and how, with the continuation of the present
situation, the dangers of increased violence mount,
There is no escaping the conclusion that the only way
to end this violence which brings no solution is for
all involved, directly or indirectly, to make an all-out
effort to bring about a peaceful political settlement of
the Arab-Israeli conflict encompassing all States in the
area.

38. As my Government’s spokesmen have said in the
past, the United States has long enjoyed a warm friendship with Lebanon and its people. We continue to
attach very great importance to its independence and
territorial integrity. We could not condone and would
view with great concern any threat to that integrity
from any source. That, of course, is why we voted
for resolution 279 (1970) calling for immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces. We welcome the withdrawal
which has in fact occurred. We also strongly support
the independence and territorial integrity of Israel and
the right of its people to live in peace. That is why
we have repeatedly counseled both Governments to
do all in their power to bring quiet to their border.
The considerable efforts we have exerted to this end
in. recent days regrettably were in vain.

36. As a first step in this direction there must be
an end to attack and counter-attack and a reinstitution
of an effective cease-fire on the Lebanese-Israeli
border. My Government has long held the view that
United Nations observers can, with the co-operation
of those directly concerned, help achieve this necessary purpose. At the outset of our debate the SecretaryGeneral noted his past efforts to this end. On 16 August
1969, he proposed to the Governments of Israel and
Lebanon that “United Nations observers, in adequate
number to observe effectively, should be stationed on
both sides, with the function of observing and maintaining the Security Council cease-fire”
[s/9393]. The
United States strongly supported this proposal. We
continue to support it, We do not pretend to believe
that observers would automatically
end all violence
and bring a solution to the broader question of a permanent peace, but we do believe that it might limit the
number and severity of incidents, reduce tensions and
help to create a climate in which efforts towards a
lasting settlement could go forward with a greater hope
for success. My Government has been disappointed
that past efforts to activate a strong United Nations
observer force along the Lebanese-Israeli border have
been unsuccessful. We welcome the indications that
Lebanon remains interested in such a step and that
Israel also wishes to work for the effecuve reenforcement of the cease-fire. We would urge, therefore, that there should be renewed consultations
between the parties and the Secretary-General in an
effort to work out a mutually acceptable arrangement,
without
prejudice to the legal positions of those
involved, by which UNTSO could carry out an effective observer operation in this sector.

39. Nevertheless, my Government will continue to
use its influence with all parties to the Arab-Israeli
conflict to bring about reduced violence and tensions
and to make much more serious efforts for a lasting
peace. We have accepted a responsibility for helping
those directly involved to find a way out of their dangerous situation, a responsibility which we share with
other major Powers which have an influential role in
the area and with other members of this Council. In
exercising this responsibility we must look beyond the
latest incidents between Lebanon and Israel and concern ourselves with the entire region of conflict.
40. My Government believes that, as a first step, all
in the area should contribute to a reduction in tensions
and in the level of hostilities and facilitate the search
for a lasting settlement in accordance with Security
Council resolution 242 (1967). We believe that there
must be a stricter observance of the cease-fire and
fuller co-operation with the United Nations to increase
the effectiveness of military observer operations. At
the same time, we believe that all States in the area
should make clear by actions as ‘well as words their
desire for the achievement of a just and lasting peace
under the terms of Security Council resolution 242
(1967) and their acceptance of that resolution in all
its parts without reservation. Only through such a
course do we see a solution to the legitimate concerns
of all those who are touched in their daily lives by
the Palestine problem.

37. The more fundamental questions are, of course,
more difficult to deal with, the more so since the present
situation is not of Lebanon’s making but in part results
from cynical disregard of its territorial and political
integrity. Lebanon has outlined inletters to this Councrl
the difficult situation it now faces and with which we
strongly sympathize. It has exerted efforts to control
the situation which gives rise to Israeli reprisals but
these efforts have led to violent confrontations and,
in the end, it has also had to endure this most serious
of Israeli reprisals. This dilemma has led to months

41. We believe that it is incumbent upon all the parties
to the conflict to, re-examine their attitudes towards
what sort of peaceful settlement they are prepared to
accept. We appeal to them to do so and, we trust,
to draw the obvious conclusion that the long-term prolongation, even less an aggravation, of the present con5

46. This did not mean that the delegation of Burundi
was indifferent to your nomination as the new Ambassador of France to the United Nations and to your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for this month.

flict serves the security and the long-term national
interests of no one. Indeed, it places the interests of
all in more and more deadly jeopardy. The only salvation for everyone lies in peaceful settlement and the
only basis for settlement is conciliation and compromise. There can be no peace in the area until each
of the parties concerned is prepared to abandon his
maximum demands and agree on compromise solutions
that serve the interests of all. The same applies to
those outside Powers which have influence in the area.

47. My delegation wishes to take advantage of this
opportunity to renew its warm welcome to you and
to assure you of our sincere collaboration, the result
of the friendship which Burundi and France have cultivated and have just brought to a head, no later than
in the month of April, with a general agreement on
co-operation in university education. As far as you
yourself, Sir, are concerned, not only do you represent
a friendly country but you are also the symbol of an
accomplished diplomat and a great friend of Africa,
a continent that you have only recently left.

42. For its part the United States has followed such
an approach in its efforts to help bring peace to the
Middle East. Not only has the United States put forward new compromise positions in the bilateral and
four-Power forums, notably on 28 October and 18
December 1969, after months of bilateral negotiations
with the Soviet Union, but it has shown a willingness
to heed and accept the suggestions of others on many
points even though they were not identical to our own.
In addition, we have proposed or supported interim
measures designed to reduce and contain the tension
and conflict in the Middle East, such as a cease-fire
linked to Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and
talks on arms limitation. We have exercised unilateral
restraint as well, notably when the Secretary of State
announced, on 23 March 1970, that President Nixon
had decided not to respond favourably to Israel’s
request for additional aircraft.

48. The feelings of admiration that the delegation of
Burundi feels towards the representatives of Colombia
and Finland, who preceded you as Presidents of the
Council, need no further proof. We are particularly
gratified at the way in which they led the debates in
the last two months.
49. Unfortunately, a mere few hours after the solemn
and peaceful meeting which inaugurated your Presidency of the Council, an unusual morning telephone
call awakened us and reminded us that we did not
have the right to sleep in the morning since security
had been disturbed on the Israeli-Lebanese
frontier.
Very speedily and with the wisdom that characterizes
this body, the Security Council adopted the very
reasonable resolution 279 (1970), but one of the belligerents seemed to reject it.

43. We had hoped that such actions on our part would
inspire similar actions by the USSR, permitting us to
move closer towards a solution to the Middle East
situation. I regret to say that so far they have not done
so. The USSR has refused to go along with suggestions
that the cease-fire should be more strictly observed
in the Middle East and has refused to discuss the question of arms limitation. Indeed, it has not only continued to move additional and more advanced weapons
into the area, but has also introduced a large number
of its own military personnel directly into the area of
conflict. Such a development cannot but involve very
grave risks and dangers. We strongly urge that this
trend of events should be halted and reversed.

50. The Republic of Burundi recognizes Israel but
we can never endorse the annexionistic views that it
holds. My delegation
cannot share that newly
inaugurated policy and carefully followed plan of disproportionate reprisals. The policy of the conquest of
territories, and that of the infinite extension of war,
cannot guarantee peace but only disturb it deeply.
5 1. I cannot conclude my statement without offering
the sympathy of my delegation to the people that was
the victim of aggression and without repeating the
demand addressed three days ago to Israel to go home.

44. I appeal to the Soviet Union, to Israel and its
Arab neighbours, and to the Palestine Arabs to join
my Government in a redoubled effort to bring about
a just settlement to. all the problems of the Middle
East. If all of those involved are prepared to work
constructively and positively for peace, and are prepared to make mutual concessions for this purpose
instead of standing rigidly on their maximum positions,
I am confident that progress can be made.

52. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): My delegation gave its
full support to Security Council resolution 279 (1970)
because we believed that it was absolutely right that
the Security Council should, as the very first step,
demand the immediate withdrawal of all Israeli armed
forces from Lebanese territory. Yesterday [1.53%/l
meeting] we heard a communication
received from the
Prime Minister of Israel informing the SecretaryGeneral that all Israeli armed forces involved in the
action against Lebanon had returned to their bases

45. Mr, MAGENGE
(Burundi) (irzterpretntiolz from
Frerzch): Mr. President, the first meeting over which
you presided, which dealt with the problem of Bahrain,
and the agreement at which we very happily arrived
on that matter, as well as the exemplary position
adopted by their Majesties the Sovereigns of Iran and
the United Kingdom were constructive acts which led
me to remain silent and to refrain from making a statement which I felt would be superfluous.

[S/9801].

53. This is a welcome course of events, but however
much we may feel satisfied with that development we
cannot condone the action of a Government of a
Member State of the United Nations in mounting a
6

large-scale tiilitary
incursion inside the territory of
another Member State on the ground of military
reprisal. The consequences of such action in international relations are all too obvious, Such action does
not help contain the conflict, much less resolve it. On
the contrary, it aggravates the deep-rooted feelings of
hatred and enlarges not only the areas but also the
causes of that conflict.

57. We were deeply moved yesterday by the eloquent
appeal made by thk Lebankse repr&ntative
for a
return to sanity in this twenty-fifth year of the United
Nations. Let every Member State be tested for peace.
Surely there would be no better way of commemorating
the twenty-fifth anniversary than by exerting ourselves
to the full towards making the peace efforts of the
United Nations concerning the question of the Middle
East successful.

54. Since the June war of 1967, the Security Council
has condemned punitive military actions on several
occasions. Other violent incidents involving the loss
of life and property have also been deplored. Most
delegations, including my own, have repeatedly stated
their respective positions with regard to various aspects
Of the conflict in the Middle East. In conformity with
those positions, many delegations would undoubtedly
be prepared in this case to vote for one more condemnation or one more reprimand. While that condemnation
Would imply moral judgement by the Security Council,
it would not in itself achieve anything worth achieving.
As far as possible, we should avoid running the risk
of losing track of the goal to which the main thrust
of our efforts should be directed. Our goal has been
clearly set forth in Secul’ity Council resolution 242
(1967), an admirable resolution which scrupulously
safeguards the basic interests of all the parties concerned. That resolution represents a truly United
Nations expression, embodying as it does the fullest
measure of equity arid reason.

58. The PRESIDENT
(inrerprrfatiorz fro/n French):
1 call on the representative of Israel.
59. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): 1 regret to inform the
Council that further attacks in the long series of acts
of aggression perpetrated in recent months from Lebanon against Israeli border towns and villages occurred
again in upper Galilee last night and in the early hours
of this morning. At approximately
2100 hours local
time a unit of irregular forces which had penetrated
from across the Lebanese border opened bazooka fire
on the village of Manara. The fire was returned. Four
of the attackers were killed. Klatchnikov
rifles and
a number of bazookas were found on them.
60. At 2340 hours the village of Kfar Blum was
attacked by Katyusha rockets fired from the direction
of the Lebanese villages of Blaide and Hula.
61. This morning at 0050 hours Katyusha rockets
were fired from the same positions on the village of
Ramot Naftali, causing considerable damage. The fire
was returned in the direction of the attackers in Blaide
and Hula.

55. The overriding duty of all members of the Security
Council in the circumstances is to support and encourage the process of reconciliation and peace. However
protracted
and slow-moving,
the continuing talks
between the four permanent members of the Security
Council in our view represent that process. Those talks
are carried out with a view to assisting the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
in finding
generally acceptabIe means and methods for the effective implementation
of the resolution 242 (1967).

62. At 0230 hours a squad of irregular forces from
Lebanon attacked an Israeli border patrol, wounding
one policeman.
63. These are acts of hostility of the kind that have
brought about the grave deterioration of t:le situation
along the Israeli-Lebanese border and caused the virtual breakdown of the cease-fire. These are acts of
aggression of the kind that compel Israel to take defensive actions to protect its territory and its citizens,
as any other Government would do in similar circumstances. Like any other nation Israel has the right to
life and the right protect its life.

56, In this connexion, 1 might say that we listened
with great care and interest to the exchanges of views
that took place between three permanent members of
the Security Council at our 1539th meeting. Those
exchanges were sharp but instructive-more
instructive, if 1 may say so, than the meagre information
periodically imparted to other members of the Security
Council by the Four on the progress of their talks.
Beneath the heat of yesterday’s debate we could detect,
for the first time, some formal indications of the progress being made in the talks of the Four. We could
learn, for example, that definite proposals on some
vital aspects of the problem had been submitted; that
the positions of the participants with regard to those
vital aspects of the problem had been more precisely
defined; and, lastly, that the talks were being pursued
with all seriousness. Apart from this, we also noted
the statement by the British representative
who
strongly suggested that Ambassador Jarring should be
enabled to resume his mission in the very near future.
My delegation looks Forward to the resumption of the
peace mission with a great deal of hope and expectation,

64. At a previous meeting I indicated why past experience in Security Council discussions on the Middle
East situation bars Israel from initiating debates. Israel
has, however, kept the Security Council fully and constantly informed of the growing intensity of aggression
from Lebanon. The members of the Security Council
are aware of the facts. The international media of information have given wide publicity to the terror warfare
waged against Israel from Lebanese territory. The
indiscriminate murder of Israeli men, women and children by attackers from Lebanon is a matter of general
knowledge. We in Israel and all who are concerned
about the present situation and the future course of
events are following with attention what is being said
around this table, what is passed over in silence and
what will be done at the conclusion of our deliberations
about the shedding of innocent Israeli blood.
7

73. The PRESIDENT
(interpretntiorz
from French):
I call on the representative of Lebanon.

65.
TJRBINA
(Nicaragua) (inter__ Mr.
_ -- ORTEGA
pretation jkvn Spanish): My delegation suPPorted
resoiution 279 (1970) of 12 May 1970, and heard with
satisfaction

the reports officially

submitted

74. Mr, GHORRA (Lebanon): I promised the Council
to keep it informed in due course about the extent
of the loss of life and damage resulting from the Israeli
aggression against southern Lebanon. Further to what
I have already stated here in the Council, I should
like to correct sople of the information
and add the
following.

to the

Security Council by Israel that that resolution had been

complied
with and that the Israeli
immediately been ordered to withdraw.

troops

had

66. I only hope that this willingness to comply with
the resolutions of this Council may turn out to be the
first step towards negotiations and agreements that will
allow LLS to find a comprehensive solution to the problems which have unfortunately beset the Middle East
for a number of years, and which affect the economy
and the normal development of the countries of the
region.

75. In the area that was occupied by Israel, three
civilians were killed, and three other civilians were
injured. I stated before that seven Lebanese soldiers
had been killed and eight injured. The fact is that eighteen Lebanese soldiers were injured. In Kfar Haman,
Kfar Shuba, El Habariya, Fredis and Rachaya el
Fakhar, the Israeli aggressors blew up the water mains,
‘the electrical installations and the telephone installations. They also blew up thirty-nine houses belonging
to the peaceful inhabitants of those villages. Their air
force bombed and destroyed the bridge of Hasbeiya
and the intersection of the main roads between Kfar
Shuba, El Habariya and Kfar Haman. Vast damage
to our roads and agricultural fields also resulted$.

67, I have listened with great attention to the statements made by the parties directly concerned and also
to the statements made by the members of the Security
Council who spoke before me. From all those statements I think I can gather that there do exist mutual
accusations of violations of international law, violations which, if appropriate measures are not adopted
in time, might tend to affect international peace and
security.

76. The Israeli representative has attempted to mislead the Council into believing that the attack was
against bases of the freedom fighters of the Palestinian
people. I have already dealt with that point, but I can
assure the Council that the Lebanese Army was
engaged. It has valiantly fought back against the aggressors. Some of our sons have shed their blood in the
defence of our sacred soil. Israel has wantonly
breached our territorial integrity, brought war to our
land, extended still further the area of fighting and
conflict and threatened still more the precarious peace
in the Middle East. That was to us a very grave matter.
We, as a faithful Member of the United Nations, have
come to this Council, as we have come on previous
occasions, because we believe in the principles of the
Charter and its objectives, We believe in the sense
of fairness and justice of this Council, There is a very
cynical contrast between that and the declarations
made by the representative of Israel himself here when
the Council was dealing with an extremely urgent
matter, the adoption of a resolution calling for the
immediate withdrawal of the Israeli troops from
Lebanon.

68. We all know that to enter the territory of any
State with armed forces constitutes at first glance an
act of aggression, and we also all know that it is an
international obligation incumbent upon States to prevent their territories being used as a base from which
to disturb the peace of another State. Non-compliance
with this international norm or inability to comply with
it has always caused tension and at times even
unleashed bloody wars.
69. A great Latin-American
hero, Benito Juarez,
many years ago stated that among individuals, as
among nations, respect for the rights of others is the
definition of peace. The first right that must be
respected is physical integrity, because both persons
and nations have the primary obligation of preserving
their existence, and respect for that right must be
mutual.
70. My delegation would be very gratified in the present case-for this new conflict is related to or even
forms part of the entire conflict in the Middle East-if
the contending parties were able to overcome their
suspicions and resentments and thus create an
atmosphere conducive to dialogue and negotiation,
through the intermediary of Ambassador Jarring, the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative.

77. The record of the Council
resentative of Israel said:

shows that the rep-

“I already emphasized in my statement this morning that no contribution to peace in the Middle East
can be made by the adoption
of one-sided
resolutions” [1537th meeting, para. SO].

71. We do not believe that partial solutions to resolve
single aspects of a more complex problem can effectively contribute to the establishment of a lasting peace
in the region,

78. Naturally, if the Council had decided to give a
free hand to the aggressors in Lebanon to enlarge their
aggression, to inflict more damage on our towns and
villages and more killings on our people and on our
soldiers, if the Council had condoned that action, the
Council’s action would be a weIcome one for the representative of Israel.

72. Therefore we should be very pleased if in the
resolution to be adopted by this Council the parties
were to be urged to resort to the means established
by international law for the peaceful settlement of disputes, for when possibilities for discussion are closed
off the doors to viojence are thrown wide open.
8

79. We already know the attitude of the Israeli
Government towards the United Nations organs and
the Security Council itself. Allow me to communicate
and register in the records of this Council the contents
of a dispatch that was reported by Reuters on 13 May.
I quote the following from this dispatch:

in any court of justice in’ the world; when a criminal
is condemned there is always an outcry, an outburst
from the criminal against the just decision of the court.
82. Some important statements were made today here
in the Security Council. I am not yet in a position
to comment upon them. I reserve the right of my delegation to do so at a later stage.

“Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir today strongly
condemned the United Nations Security Council as
an ‘incompetent institution’ following its discussion
of Israel’s raid against guerilla bases in Lebanon yesterday.

83. The PRESIDENT
(i~ztopretation ,fi’om Fre~zclz):
Three delegations have asked to be allowed to speak
to exercise their rights of reply: the delegations of
Syria, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
Israel. I shall call upon them in due course, but first
I wish to state that the Secretary-General has informed
me that he has received from the Acting Chief of Staff
of UNTSO a message which I shall request the Secretary of the Council to be good enough to read. I call
on the Secretary of the Council.

“Mrs. Meir said during a visit to Jerusalem’s Wailing Wall, the last remnant of the Second Temple
and Jewry’s holiest shrine-there
at the wall she
lamented-&The
ugly history of the Security Council
shows that it is an incompetent institution and that
there is no hope of expecting any justice from it.’ ”

Mr.
CHACKO
(Deputy
to the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Security Council
Affairs): Mr. President, the text of the message to
which you referred reads as follows:
84.

She added:
“ ‘We do not have to get excited by its decisions
and resolutions.’ ”

“The Acting
Mixed Armistice

80. Mrs. Meir’s opinion is shared by many newspapers in Israel. The Reuters message states:

Chairman of the Israel-Lebanon
Commission informs that:

‘The complete withdrawal of the Israel forces from
Lebanon is officially confirmed by the Lebanese
authorities.

“Israeli newspapers today gave all editorial space
to yesterday’s action and some commented bitterly
about the Security Council’s resolution.

‘Official time of completion of Israel withdrawal
was given as 1030 hours GMT on 13 May 1970.

“Ha&&,
the national religious daily, wrote, ‘It
is the helplessness revealed by the Security Council
which has aggravated tension in the Middle East
over the past years . . .’

‘This time has also been announced by the Lebanese Minister of Defence in a public statement.’ ”
85. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The representative of the
United States has indeed honoured me by opening his
statement this morning with a reply to my statement
of yesterday, ending it with the analogy concerning
the fact that those who live in glass houses should
not throw stones. Unfortunately,
the whole world
today is living in a glass house, including the United
States and if this debate has proved anything, it has
proved what Toynbee wrote on 10 May. I quoted it
yesterday and I repeat it now: “Today America has
become the world’s nightmare” [1.539l/z nzeetirzg, para.
102). So, if there is anybody living in a glass house
it is primarily the United States of America and its
Government.

“The Trade Union Daily Dnv~r said, ‘Israel’s
restraint served only to encourage continuation of
aggression. The Israel Army’s action yesterday was
mainly of a warning nature. In this regard, the Security Council’s resolution was totally superfluous, proving once again the lack of balance which has become
the tradition in the Security Council’s resolutions
concerning the Middle East.’
’ ‘Al-Harnislzmar,
a left-wing daily of the Mapam
Party condemned the Security Council for ‘rebuking
the defenders rather than the aggressors’.”
8 I. I am sad, very sad indeed, to be obliged to repeat
those words in the presence of the Security Council
and its members for whom we have great respect and
in whom we have great confidence. Naturally, if, as
AI-Hrrmishnw
said, the Council had rebuked us-the
Lebanese, the “aggressors’‘-then
the Security Council would have been a wonderful institution to be lauded
for its praiseworthy action. We have unmasked those
tactics many times in the Council, They reveal the
contempt of Israel for the United Nations, for international law, for the Security Council and for its decisions
and resolutions, This is comparable to the situation

86. In Syria there are no department stores being
blown up by bombs, no campuses being occupied by
the national guard, no students being killed for protesting; but that exists in America and perhaps that is
a sufficient reminder to the representative of the United
States that, unfortunately, the Government he represents is living in a glass house.
87. The representative of the United States said that
I had referred to him yesterday as a historian. I did
not, but if he wants to be called a historian I will go
along with him, and indeed he is a historian. Starting
9

tions and thereby increase tensions on the other side
ofthe lines.’ Press accounts of these statements also
seemed so inflammatory to U.S. State Department
officials that they expressed concern to Israeli
authorities.”

from that point, and going back to the events of 1967,
he said that the larger share of responsibility rests on
Syria. Needless to say, when he says so as a representative of a great Power while we are debating and condemning an attack by Israel on peaceful Lebanon, those
words are a green light to Israel to go an attacking
Lebanon, Syria, the United Arab Republic and Jordan.

90. That is what Mr. Yost the historian wrote. It
would take me too long to quote everything-perhaps
he will say I am misquoting-but
I again recommend
the reading of the whole article. He goes on to say:
“No conclusive judgement can be pronounced on these
two lines of argument” meaning thereby: whether the
Israelis or the Arabs were responsible.

88. I shall go b’ack to the representative of the United
States, and I should like to be permitted to call him
by his name-Mr.
Yost-because now I shall speak
of him as a historian. Prior to assuming his functions
as representative of the United States, Mr. Yost had
devoted his time to writing, and produced some very
illuminating pieces of history. In the January 1968 issue
of FO&II
A&%ilirs there is an article written by Mr.
Yost on the six-day war, entitled: “The Arab-ISraeli
War: HOLY it Began”. Now I shall let Mr. Yost the
historian answer Mr. Yost the representative of the
United States, for here is his article. I wish that time
allowed me to read the whole of it, but that is impossible; I highly commend it, as a great piece of history
indeed, to both the Security Council and to the United
Nations. In his article Mr. Yost says:

91. Then, at the conclusion of the article, he mentions
five points in which he details the events that led to
the war of 1967; to the best of my understanding, among
the five summaries that he gave us, in three he puts
the responsibility on Israel, and in two on Syria, the
United Arab Republic and other Arab countries. The
conclusion is very illuminating:
“There will be no peace there, no security for
its inhabitants or for the great powers involved there,
until the krabs recognize that Israel, however unjust
its creation appears to them, is a fact of live. . . . ”

“On the same day, May 11, Israeli Prime Minister
Eshkol was saying in a public speech in Tel Aviv
that his Government regarded this wave of sabotage
and infiltration gravely. ‘In view of the fourteen incidents of the past month alone’ he said, ‘we may
have to adopt measures no less drastic than those
of April 7’.”

I would underline “however unjust”, and on a humane
basis I would ask Mr. Yost: suppose a great injustice
were done to him. Who is the judge of the injustice:
the one who suffers it, or the one who plays the fiddle
while Rome is burning?

89. The drastic measures adopted by Israel on 7 May
against Syria were an attack on civilian villages, using
napalm against schools and villagers and farmers, and
engaging the Israeli air force over Damascus on 7 April,
an attack which was started by Israel. Then he goes
on to say:

92. Mr. Yost reiterated-and
that is not. strange-what Mr. Tekoah had said and what he says time
and time again so that it has become a sort of scratched
record which its owners might do better to change:
he reiterated that Syria did not accept resolution 242
(1967). Well, I read yesterday the statement of General
Weizmann, the Minister of Transport, member of the
Herut Party, whq is not a member of the Knesset;
I read yesterday of Moshe Dayan saying that we should
let the whole world know that we reject re’solution
242 (1967). I also read yesterday another statement
by General Dayan in which he said:

“Indeed there is evidence that Israeli officials were
at
this
time”-speaking
about
May
1967-“diseminating
their warnings rather widely.
The New York Times correspondent, James Feron,
in Tel Aviv reported on May 12: ‘Some Israeli leaders
have decided that the use of force against Syria may
be the only way to curtail increasing terrorism. Any
such Israeli reaction to continued infiltration would
be of considerable strength but of short duration and
limited in area. This has become apparent in talks
with highly qualified and informed Israelis who have
spoken in recent days against a background of
mounting border violence,”

“People abroad ought to realize that, quite apart
from their strategic importance to Israel, Sinai, the
Golan Heights, the Tiran Straits and the hills west
of the Jordan lie at the heart of Jewish history. Nor
has the restoration of historical Israel ended yet.
Since their return to Zion a hundred years ago,
a double process of colonization and expansion of
frontiers has been going on. We have not yet reached
the end of that road. It is the people of Israel who
will determine the frontiers of their own State,”

Mr. Yost the historian goes on to say:
“Nevertheless, it should also be noted that in the
May 19 report referred to above the SecretaryGeneral remarked: ‘Intemperate and bellicose utterances . . . are unfortunately more or less routine
on both sides of the lines in the Near East. In recent
weeks, however, reports emanating froni Israel have
attributed to some high officials in that State statementsSOthreatening as to be particularly idammatorY in the sense that they could only heighten emo-

[~539th meeting, paw. 106.]

93. What does Mr. Yost the historian, what does Mr.
Yost the representative of the greatest and strongest
Power, think of those words and how does he evaluate
them in terms of the Charter of the United Nations?
The Charter is the greatest multilateral
treaty that
humanity has known so far, Here is a resbonsible
10

member of a Government declaring that it is only the
People of Israel that can set the limits to Israel. And
Mr. Yost says that Syria did not accept resolution 242
(1967) But within the context of the deliberations of
the Security Council itself, let me ask Mr. Yost in
:i very straightforward manner what he thinks of resolution 235 (1967), adopted on 9 June 1967, after Israel
attacked Syria, which I have already mentioned in this
d&ate and which states:

pation of Syrian territory in contravention of those
two unanimously adopted resolutions of the Security
Council.
98. If Mr. Yostreally wants to bea historian, I humbly
ask him to read again the records of those debates
in those dramatic days and to see who is the international brigand, who is the robber-baron State and who
ought to be brought to the bar of justice.

’ ‘The Security Council,
“Recalling

99. Let me come to the present. There is a cease-fire.
Last year’s total of violations by Israel against Syria,
including firing on Syrian territory, as reported to the
United Nations military staff, amounted to 509. The
number of violations against Syria from 1 January 1970
until 18 March 1970 amounted to 1,045. I have with
me nineteen reports from General Odd Bull on the
situation in the Israeli-Syrian sector which covered the
period 8 April 1970 to 7 May 1970. I want to put them
on record and to ask the representative of the United
States and the other members of the Council please
to read those reports. Typical of them is the following,
dated 8 April 1970:

its resolutions 233 (1967) of 6 June and

234 (1967) of 7 June 1967,

“Nori~zg that the Governments of Israel and Syria
have announced their mutual acceptance of the
Council’s demand for a ‘cease-fire,
‘6 * I I
Ii 1. C@%nrs its previous resolutions about
immediate cease-fire and cessation of military action;
“2, Dernnn&
with forthwith.”

that hostilities

should cease forth-

“(cz) OP X-Ray. Between 1148 and 1150 four Israel
forces Mirage aircraft crossed the limits of the forward defended localities indicating the cease-fire
lines from west to east and recrossed from east to
west, During overflight ack-ack fire by Syrian
forces ,” [See 5’/7930/Add.639.]

94. That was a resolution adopted unanimously by
the Security Council, including the delegation of the
United States. Two days later, the representative of
Israel was helped by the representative of the United
States, Mr. Goldberg at that time, and the representative of the United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, as I was
reporting to the Council and as the Secretary-General
was reporting to the Council from UNTSO and General
Odd Bull that the Israeli army was penetrating deep
into Syria. It was 11 o’clock at ‘night, 10 June, and
Lord Caradon himself turned and said, “We are not
sure; we have to wait for more reports”.

100. I could go on reading all these reports. The Council will find in them that the Israeli army started the
firing, as reported by General Odd Bull and the military
observers.
101. When the representative of Israel, in his cynical
debased manner, speaks about the destruction of villages, I will answer him with this report from Genera1
Odd Bull, contained in document S/7930/Add.667,
dated 24 April 1970. The report reads:

95. It is now for Mr. Yost the historian to realize
those facts and to know that his Government and the
Wnited Kingdom Government were in military collusion with Israel to let Israel occupy the Golan Heights.

“United Nations military observers at OP Three
. . . reported that at 0604 GMT Israel forces were
firing from Tel El Farass, . . and from map reference
3 10-2650, target being village of Aache” [in Syria].
“Many fires started in this area and one house in
Aache village was burning for three hours. At 0617
GMT one military truck and one military ambulance,
arriving from the east on the main road, stopped
near the burning house and at least five people were
seen rushing out. The vehicles stayed there for about
one hour. Between 0617 and 0639 GMT one Israel
forces tank was moving and firing” [on civilians]
“in Aache village. Machine-gun
and mortar fire
impacts were seen north-west and south of village.
At 0726 GMT an Israel forces helicopter was seen
flying in area of Tel El Farass.”

96. Resolution 236 (1967) was adopted by the Security
Council’ at 2.20 a.m. on 11 June 1967, again unanimously. Yesterday I quoted paragraph 4 of that
resolution, In paragraph 3 the Security Council:
L’Afj%~~zsthat its demand for a cease-fire a $.I discontinuance of all military activities includes .* prohibition of any forward military movements subsequent to the cease-fire”.
In paragraph 4 the Council:
“Cnlls for the prompt return to the cease-fire positions of any troops.which may have moved forward
subsequent to 1630 hours GMT on 10 June 1967”.

102. In all these reports it will be found that the one
party that is initiating fire, destroying houses, bulldozing villages, killing civilians, is the Israelis and Mr.
Yost, the historian, in his fair sense of judging history,
addresses the question to an Arab victim of aggression
about the acceptance or non-acceptance
of a

97. Ambassador Yost has asked me about resolution
242 (1967), which was adopted after those two resolutions, and I ask him, did he, as representative of the
United States, ask Israel what it did with those two
decisions of the Security Council? Israel is now in OCCU11

resolution. I should like to refer to what the representative of Finiand said yesterday and in order to be accurate I shall quote his own words. How accurate indeed
are the words of the representative of Finland. When
speaking about the discussions here, he said that they
were “becoming more and more divorced from the
violent realities of the Middle Eastern conflict”[I539t11
meeting, para. 6.51. Those are very great words indeed
and they apply to what Mr. Yost said today in light
of the facts I have stated.

by force, in other words it is in favour of not allowing
territory seized by an invader to remain in the latter’s
hands. If the interpretation was correct, if that is really
the position of the United States of America, then the
USSR delegation would like to inform this meeting
of the Security Council officially that it is in favour
of continuing the dialogue in our four-Power consultation meetings and that it considers that on this basis
there is a possibility of reaching agreement regarding
the agreed formulas which might form the basis of a
recommendation to Mr. Jarring to resume his mission,
We are in favour of continuing this dialogue on the
understanding that Mr. Yost stated that the United
States supports full withdrawal and the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of foreign territory by force, This
position will provide a basis for continuing thedialogue.
If this is so, then it marks a step forward by the United
States.

103. The resolutions condemning Israel for violations
of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949’ in
occupied territories, and of human rights, as well as
the published reports of Amnesty International
and
the reports of the Red Cross, are all documents of
history, and the historian is supposed to look into them
before he can judge others and suggest that they live
in a glass house when his whole house is made of
glass.

107. The representative of Israel is smiling ironically;
obviously this is not the case.

104. Finally, I give a warning to the representative
of the United States, a warning in the light of United
States aggression in Viet-Nam, in South-East Asia,
and in Cambodia, a warning that should be brought
home to him as the result of the burning sf villages,
campuses, houses, and streets, with explosions all over
the United States. It is nothing but a civil war. I should
like to remind the United States representative, who
is really living in a glass house, about this. The warning
is this. The United States is not only trampling on
peace in the Middle East, but is sapping the very foundation and vital interests of America in the Middle East
and especially
and more categorically
its 0iI
monopolies.

108. Mr. Yost has, however, made a very substantial
reservation in this connexion. He touched on the question of the alteration of the boundaries, that is, the
question of altering the line of 5 June 1967 or the 1949
line-they
are almost the same. He called this “alterations” or “rectifications”.
That is already two
steps backwards. For, according to the United States
delegation, these alterations must be achieved through
negotiations between the parties to the conflict, That
at least was how I understood Mr. Yost’s statement
from the interpretation. But by this the United States,
on the one hand, is giving its blessing to Israel, is
giving Israel carte blunche to demand alterations of
the boundary and, on the other hand, it is betting on
the parties not being able to agree on such a question
among themselves without the participation of the
United Nations, without the pressure of the Security
Council, without the influence of the four Powers which
are participating in the consultations regarding apeaceful settlement in the Middle East. This is the real situation today.

105. We are sure that the Americans concerned with
those interests, and more particularly the oil companies, are not expected to stand with arms crossed
in view of the continuous stupidity being shown by
the United States Government,
for no other reason
than to get votes. In this connexion, I would remind
the Council of what the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia
said to the Council two days ago [153&h meeting].
If the United States Government and those which have
interests in our area cannot achieve any positive action
to stop the international
brigand, the robber-baron
State, Israel, from continuing its criminality,
then the
Arab people-and
let the United States representative
heed my advice-will
be absolutely free to think about
ways to guarantee that its own resources shall be
exploited by the Arabs in the best possible manner.

109. How does Israel understand the question of the
alteration of the boundaries or of the 1967 line? This
is very well known to us all. Only recently, the President of the United Arab Republic, speaking on 1 May
on the occasion of Labour Day, spoke of this directly.
He touched on the question of Israel’s request, actively
supported
by the United
States, for “direct
negotiations” between Israel and the Arab countries,
in other words between the parties to the conflict, In
Pmvdn of 3 May 1970 President Nasser is quoted as
saying that “Israel is trying to secure not peace but
the expansion of its territory” and, furthermore, that
“even before such negotiations began, the Government
of Israel declared that the Golan Heights, the towns
of Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Hebron and the Gaza Strip
could not be the subject of negotiation”.

106, Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (frcrrzslnteclfr.o,7~ Russian): Thank you, Mr, President. From the statement made today by Mr. Yost,
as interpreted into Russian, I gained the impression
that Mr. Yost stated that the United States of America
was in favour of the full withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Arab territories. I would emphasize that this is
how I understood his statement from theinterpretation.
Secondly, I understand that the United States supports
the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of foreign territory
’ United

Nations.

TwatySerirs,

vol. 75(1950),

110. That is how Israel interprets “alterations”
or
or, as one might say in Russian “the
“rectifications”,
delimitation
of the boundaries”. A nice delimitation!
Seizing foreign territory in defiance of the principle,

Nos. 970-973.

12

set forth in resolution 242 (1967), of the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force. And Israel stated
in advance that the Golan Heights, the towns of
Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Hebron and the Gaza Strip
were not even subject to discussion,’ that they already
belonged to Israel. I ask you, Mr. Yost, do you really
believe that it is possible to reach agreement on this
basis when Israel, which has committed the aggression,
has made such expansionist and imperialist claims and
demands. The word.“aggression”
does not please the
representative
of Israel, but in Russian there is a
proverb, which he knows since he speaks Russian very
well, to the effect that you can’t change the words
of a song. And it is a sad song: Israel has committed
aggression against the Arab countries and now claims
that important
parts of the territory of the Arab
countries should be left in its hands.

refused to deliver aircraft to Israel? No, it has only
postponed such deliveries for tactical reasons and is
waiting a little while; it has suspended deliveries, not
refused them. The fifty Phantoms and the large number
of military helicopters officially promised to Israel by
the United States and the further twenty-five Phantoms
and 100 Skyhawks which have been promised have
not yet been delivered; their delivery has been delayed.
115. This is dii-ect assistance to an aggressor and an
encouragement to further military adventures, one of
which we are currently considering in the Security
Council. According to the generalIy recognized rules
of international
law, this constitutes complicity
in
aggression. Both the Charter of the United Nations
and international
law forbid the giving of assistance
to an aggressor. Israel, as we know, is over-supplied
with arms. The Israeli generals have repeatedly stated
that they have so many arms that if, for example, during
any given year Israel did not receive a single bullet
from abroad, it would still have enough arms to wage
war against all the Arab countries. That is the situation
in which poor Israel finds itself, poor Israel about which
United States propaganda makes so much noise here,
saying that the balance of miIitary forces between the
Arab side and Israel has been upset. The latest statement of the Israeli generals refutes this myth created
by United States propaganda. Israel is over-supplied
with arms.
116. What is the position of the Soviet Union in the
matter of assistance to the victim of aggression? Yes,
the Soviet Union is supplying arms and assistance in
the form of military advisers. Recently, at a Press Conference in Moscow reported byPravda on 5 May 1970,
the head of the Soviet Union, Aleksei Nikolaevich
Kosygin, replying to a question on this point put by
Mr. R. Bernheim, a correspondent of the Swiss newspaper Neue Ziiricher Zeitung , stated:

I I 1. I do not think that such an experienced and
learned historian as Mr. Yost, as Mr. Tomeh described
him today, could be so naive as to admit the possibility
of agreement being reached between the parties to the
conflict regarding such “alterations”.
I do not believe
that those whom Mr. Yost represents here are so naive.
Accordingly, what conclusion can be drawn? It is not
nGivet& It is a completely intentional aspiration and
desire, covert but quite obvious, to help Israel to
achieve the aims of its seizures of territory. It is contrary both to the Charter of the United Nations and
to resolution 242 (1967) and to the main principle contained in that resolutionl for which all the members
of the Security Council, Including the four permanent
members
of the Security Council-the
United
Kingdom,
the United States, France and the Soviet
Union-voted,
namely, the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of foreign territory by force.
112. What reaction has there been to the position
of the United States? Not a single genuine advocate
of peace in the Middle East can agree with that position.
This is the crux of the matter, this is the difficulty
facing the United Nations and the Security Council.

“We have an agreement with the Government of
the United Arab Republic that our military advisers
should be with the troops of the United Arab Republic. The proper functions of our military advisers
are agreed with the Government of the United Arab
Republic. This is being done in order to repel Israeli
aggression, which is enjoying wide support from the
United States. The United States is in fact supplying
Israel with the necessary arms and is protecting and
supporting its aggression against the United Arab
Republic.”

113. In his statement, Mr. Yost touched on the question of arms deliveries from the USSR to the Arab
countries, in particular to the United Arab Republic,
and on the question of the assistance given to those
countries by the Soviet Union in the form of military
advisers. He tried to suggest that the United States
was in favour of refusing such deliveries and that the
Soviet Union was against refusing them. But how is
the United
States refusing to assist Israel, the
aggressor? In the first place, it recently offered Israel
a $100 million
loan. This econbmic and financial
assistance to Israel is now more necessary than arms
for it is quite natural that if a country has been in
a state of war for almost three years its financial and
economic situation is strained to the limit. What is
such a gift to Israel from the United States if not
assistance? This is real assistance to an aggressor.

-17. Those are the facts, that is the reality, Our
assistance-1 might say, incidentally, that I have said
this to Mr. Yost on several occasions but he stubbornly
reverts to this question; I have obviously not convinced
him, so I should like to try to convince him in a wider
forum and perhaps this rnitcht succeed-&r
assistance
is assistance to the victim of aggression and this is
the fundamental difference between our assistance and
yours. You are assisting the aggressor while we are
assisting the victim of aggression. Under international
law and the Charter of the United Nations it is permissible for assitance to be given to a victim of aggression.
This is just and is permitted by all the rules of international law.

114, Has the United States really refused to deliver
arms to Israel? No. Deliveries are continuing under
earlier contracts and agreements and an abundant flow
of arms is going to Israel. Has the United States really
13

designed to assist the aggressor and encourage him
to undertake further military adventures. This is what
is wrong with such a policy, with such a position and
with such an approach.

118. In one of my statements here, I recalled that
the United States had helped the victims of aggression
during the Second World War; it gave broad assistance
to the United Kingdom and also helped the Soviet
Union, although less broadly-I
do not at present have
the exact data as to whether it helped General de Gaulle
and the French who were fighting to liberate their
homeland-but
it did indeed help the Soviet Union
and the United Kingdom. This noble assistance to the
victims of aggression was in accordance with all the
rules of international law. As far as I know, the United
States did not assist Hitler by supplying arms; perhaps
some United States monopolies secretly supplied the
Hitlerites with arms too, but that is another matter.
Officially, the United States assisted the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union as the victims of aggression,
but did not assist Hitler as the aggressor.

:

122. The PRESIDENT
(interpretcrtionjkmz
French):
I now call on the representative of Israel to exercise
his right of reply.
123. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): We have just heard
another Soviet apology for the USSR’s policy of incessant support for Arab aggression, for the continuation
of Arab terror warfare against Israel and for the Arab
repudiation of the cease-fire. We have not heard, however, from the Soviet representative a single word
about the Soviet Union’s willingness to mend its ways,
the Soviet Union’s readiness to see the Arab States
agree to negotiate peace with Israel, as all States do
when they have to terminate war between themselves.
As Iong as the Soviet Union pursues its present policy
of encouragement of Arab belligerency and increased
direct military involvement in the Middle East conflict,
no phraseology can conceal the nefarious and dangerous
character of the Soviet attitude and of Soviet
actions in the region.

119. Now the position of the United States has
changed completely. It is rendering assistance to the
aggressor and is attempting to prevent assistance being
given to thevictims of aggression. This is unacceptable.
Such a demand is aimed at disarming the victim of
aggression and leaving the Arabs without arms in the
face of the military superiority of Israel which is oversupplied with arms and which is continuing to receive
assistance in the form of arms from the United States.
Such an approach, such a policy is aimed at preserving
the military superiority of the aggressor and disarming
and weakening the victim of aggression. This is
absolutely unacceptable.

:

124. The representative of Lebanon, in presenting
statistical information to the Council regarding the
results of the Israeli defensive action, added little to
the information submitted by me at a previous meeting.
However, he omitted two cardinal facts. The few
casualties which he defined as “peaceful civilians”
were in fact members of the terror organizations which,
unlike the great majority of their comrades, did not
lay down their arms in response to Israeli loudspeaker
appeals. The structures demolished were structures
used by the irregular forces. Nevertheless, what he
has omitted to say the terror organizations themselves
have confirmed. Press communiques issued yesterday
by at least three of them-El
Fatah, the Syriancontrolled El Saiqa and the Peoples Democratic Front
-state unequivocally that the Israeli operation was
directed against them, that they were the forces which
engaged the Israeli army in battle, that they suffered
the casualties and that they would rebuild the structures
used by them and demolished by the Israeli forces,
In fact-and this deserves to be placed on record-the
murderers of Israeli women and children, glorified in
the Arab world as heroes for being able to sneak up
at night and open fire on sleeping villagers, showed
their true mettle by immediate surrender or escape.

120. What conclusion can be drawn from all this?
Mr. Yost, I appeal to you: persuade your Government
to put an end to its military assistance to the aggressor;
secondly, persuade your Government that in the consultations between the four Powers in the next few
days agreement should be reached regarding joint formulas to the effect that all Israeli troops should be
withdrawn immediately
and unconditionally
from all
the occupied Arab territories and should return behind
the line of 5 June 1967. If we reach agreement on this
fundamental question, this main and crucial question,
I am almost certain that we shall easily reach agreement
on all outstanding questions: on the question of peace,
on the question of free navigation, on the question
of the United Nations presence in the explosive areas
of the Middle East and on the question of military
observers, in short, on all questions relating to a settlement in the Middle East which would form a kind of
“package deal”. I think this would present no difficulty.

125. For the Council’s information, sixteen camps
and bases of the terror organizations, as well as their
headquarters and depots in six different villages, were
captured and dismantled in the operation. In the village
of Kfar Haman two members of the irregular forces
were caught and admitted that they had taken part
in the firing of Katyusha rockets in the town of KirYat
Shemone which killed several Israeli civilians. A third
terrorist captured in the same village revealed that he
and his’ comrades had installed nine launchers of
Katyusha 122-millimetre rockets and aimed them at
Kiryat Shemone. These were immediately located and
destroyed by the Israel forces.

121. If we reach agreement on a peaceful political
settlement in the Middle East, then we could begin
talks about arms deliveries, then we would be ready
to hold talks with you and with other members of the
Security Council-with
the United Kingdom,
with
France and with others--on the question of arms, particularly since this would coincide with the general
policy line of the Government of the Soviet Union
regarding general and complete disarmament.
Then
there would be a proper atmosphere for talks. The
talks now concern the cessation of arms deliveries and
assistance to the victim of aggression-that
is a policy
14

126. It seems that everyone everywhere knows what
has been going on in the Fatah land established by
the irregular forces in south-east Lebanon and what
happened on 12 May. For some reason the representative of Lebanon refuses to take cognizance of reports
on this in the international information media. He could
find exactly the same information in the Lebanese Press
and radio and in the statements of Lebanese leaders.
Indeed, it is interesting that while the representative
of Lebanon attempts to misrepresent and exaggerate
the events of 12 May, his powerful Minister of the
Interior, Mr. Jumblat, came out with a declaration the
day before yesterday advising that the scope and nature
of the Israeli action should not be exaggerated.

forces returned the fire in the direction of those positions. I should like to express regret that as a result
of this additional attack from Lebanese territory,
Lebanese citizens have suffered loss of life. It indicates
once again the grave dangers involved when peaceful
civilian Lebanese villages are allowed to become bases
of aggression, aggression which is carried out in violation of the cease-fire against a neighbouring State.
133. The PRESIDENT
(intel’pl”etntiorzfr’or?z
I call on the representative of Lebanon.

134. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon) (ilzterpretrrtion
ji-om
French): The families of the victims will not be consoled by the shedding of crocodile tears.

127. The most cogent retort to the Lebanese representative’s arguments at the Council table is to be
found, however, in the words of the leader of the
Naitonal bloc in the Lebanese parliament, a former
Minister and Presidential candidate, Mr. Raymond
Edde, who on 13 August 1969 stated:

135, The PRESIDENT
(interpr.etntiolzfr’om
French):
In my capacity as the representative of FRANCE, and
to reply to an incidental question that was asked by
Ambassador Malik, I should like to say that as far
as United States assistance to the French Resistance
during the Second World War is concerned, France
will never forget the part that the United States played
in the liberation of our country.

“One cannot anticipate promising results from
complaints to the United Nations. As long as the
Lebanese Government approves Fedayeen activity
from Lebanese territory, it must also agree to
ultimate mihtary action on the part of Israel resulting
from such activity.”
12X. The PRESIDENT
(inte~pretntion~om
I call on the representative of Lebanon.

136. Nor shall we forget the immense sacrifices made
by the people and the army of the Soviet Union in
the struggle against Hitlerite aggression. We also recall
that at a tragic moment in the history of the world
Britain stood alone in bearing the burden of the fighting.

Frenck):

137. It is precisely that solidarity-and
perhaps in
this year of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations it may be a good time to remember it-that
allowed the achievement of the victory of freedom and
peace, and we hope that that solidarity will be found
again today in order to establish a peaceful settlement.

129. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon) (int~rprctcrtior? from
Fre&):
I shall not reply now to the statement made
by the representative of Israel. I have already placed
some information before the Council on the damage
suffered in the regions occupied by the aggressive
Israeli troops,

138. The representative of Morocco has asked to be
allowed to address the Council, and as President, I
invite him to take a place at the Council table for that
purpose.

130, I have just received further information on the
incident that took place this morning. A Lebanese military spokesman stated that Israeli forces shelled the
villages of Hula and Blida in the district of Marjayoun.
It lasted for half-an-hour, from 5.00 to 5.30 local time.
In Hula three civilians and one little girl were killed.
One man was injured and a number of houses were
damaged. In Blida a number of houses were damaged
considerably and this increases the list of murderous
Israeli acts and adds to the number of victims among
the Lebanese population.
13 1. The PRESIDENT
(intr~pretcrtiorz,Ponz
I call on the representative of Israel.

French):

139.

Mr, BENHIMA
(Morocco) (intopr.etcrtionfr.orn
This morning there were statements made
which have an important bearing on the debate of the
Security Council. When you have decided on the date
of the next meeting of the Council, Mr. President, I
intend to come and ask to be allowed to speak on
them. However, I have asked for the floor to make
a brief statement now, for it appeared to me that the
statement made by the representative of France called
for an immediate comment.
Freach):

Fred):

132. Mr, TEKOAH
(Israel): I should simply like to
express regret and concern that the representative of
Lebanon is not following the course of our debate this
morning. As a matter of fact, earlier today I informed
the Security Council of the developments in the course
of the night and early this morning, when several
attacks from Lebanese territory against Israeli villages
along the frontier occurred. I indicated that Katyusha
rockets were fired from positions in the Hula and Blida
village areas in Lebanese territory against two Israeli
villages causing extensive damage and that Israeli

140. To hear someone who himself participated in
the resistance in his own country pay, on behalf of
his Government and the French people-which
added
to the pages of its history that of four years of resistance, four of the most glorious years of modern
times-a
tribute to the resistance, on the one hand,
and, on the other, express gratitude to those countries
that assisted it is, I think, the best reply to the Israeli
representative’s
disdainful reference to “heroes who
sneak in during the night to kill sleeping people”.
15

141. It seemed to me that that point could not be
overlooked,
I am happy that the representative of
France paid tribute to all resistance movements and
thanked all those who assisted them, for, in this debate
in the Council, where Lebanon has been attacked
because it assisted the resistance movement, it belies
the accusations made by Israel and is also a reply to
those around this table who feel that they should
espouse the point of view of Israel regarding resistance
and the Government and people of Lebanon that assist
it.
142. The PRESIDENT
(interpr-etutiolafiom
I call on the representative of Israel.

148. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated,from
Russian):
Mr. President, I am
not seeking to be the last. I should merely like to
express my gratitude to you for the reminder in your
brilliant statement on those four difficult years of the
Second World War when. the countries of the antiHitlerite coalition, on the basis of the principle of
struggling against aggression, carried on a noble fight
and not only saved mankind from the terrible threat
of fascist enslavement with which Hitler menaced the
whole world, but also brought about the creation of
the United Nations itself, of which we have the honour
to be Members and whose twenty-fifth anniversary we
shall celebrate this year. It is true that the situation
which is developing in the world in connexion with
acts of aggression in two regions is extremely unfavourable for celebrating an anniversary.

Frerzcl?):

143. Mr. TEKOAH
(Israel): I am certain that all of
us present at this table remember the grim years of
the Second World War and the nature of resistance.
I have no hesitation at all in saying that the resistance
fighters, the freedom fighters, who fought against nazi
occupation and oppression did not kill women and children in their sleep as Arab terrorists are doing today.

149. Now, we, the people of the Soviet Union, the
Soviet State, also appeal to all peace-loving States to
unite on the basis of the principle of struggling against
aggression and to promote peace throughout the world
and friendship among all peoples.

144. I should not like to speak, however, on behalf
of the resistance associations. They have had their
say already, and they have rejected categorically and
with contempt the attempts of Arab propaganda to
compare, to associate, Arab terrorism directed against
Israeli civilians with the glorious resistance against nazi
oppression.

150. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
I call on the representative of Israel.

French):

151. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have no claims, as the
representative of Syria apparently has, to being a historian, but neither do I lay any claims to the right
to distort history.

145. Mr. TOMEH
(Syria): The memories of all of
us are quite .fresh about the nazi crimes committed
by Israel only very recently, when its air force deliberately and knowingly bombarded schools in the vicinity
of Cairo, in the United Arab Republic, where thirty
children were killed, and before that when eighty workers going to their factories in the morning were also
killed. Speaking about terrorists, I would remind the
representative of Israel of a great body of literature
on organized terror. The Israeli-Zionist
terror in the
thirties and forties, the Palmach, the Irgun Zwey
Lyumi, the Haganah, the Stern gang, those who killed
Lord Moyne at Cairo-those
are the real terrorists,
and there is a great amount of literature about them.
I advise him to read in Hebrew the story of Palmach
in two volumes. I advise him to read the book of his
cabinet minister, Menachim Begin, The Revolt. I advise
him to read The Lady was a Killer and Women of
Violence, All that took place in the thirties and the
forties-the
massacre of Arab civilians, women and
children.

1.52. As the representative of Syria referred to the
origins of the Israel defence movement in Palestine
under British mandatory administration in the thirties,
I would simply try to recall to his memory that that
movement was organized in response to Arab terrorism
that began to take the toll of lives of innocent civilians
as far back as the twenties. The originator of that terrorism was a gentleman called Haj Amin el-Husseini. Haj
Amin el-Husseini found the right place to. spend the
war years. When all peace-loving and freedom-loving
peoples were resisting Nazi capture and oppression,
he spent his war years in Berlin as an adviser to Hitler,
as an adviser in the genocide of the Jews of Europe.
Today, Haj Amin el-Husseini, who succeeded after
the end of the war in escaping from the allies, who
declared him an international war criminal, is in the
Arab States inspiring the movement of Arab terrorism,
continuing in the spirit of the Hitlerite persecution and
genocide of Jews.

146. As I look at it, I do not want to dignify a criminal
by a reply, but simply to set the record straight for
the Security Council because I consider it beneath my
dignity to reply to the representative of Israel.

153. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): I referred to the few books
written
by Israeli-Zionist
terrorists,
including
Menachem Begin, This is what is to be found on page
3 of his book The Revolt:2

147. The PRESIDENT
(irztelp~etatio/z.fi’om French):
I shall call upon those who have asked to speak. I
should, however, like to point out-and
I think that
in the interest of the Council I should do so-that it
is not necessariIy those who speak last who have the
last word.

“While we were engaged in educating the youth
and organizing
their
repatriation
to Eretz
Israel-without
British permits-there
arose in Eretz
Israel, as a herald of Jewish national re-birth, the
p New York, Henry Schuman, 1961.

16

first beginning of Hebrew power: the Irgun Zvei
Leumi* . . .
Then he goes on to say that the Irgtin Zvei Leumi
was formed in 1920, even before the Mandate was given
to Britain over Palestine.

sinations, the following will be found in the records
of the Security Council as having been said by no le.ss
a man than Dr. Ralph Bunche, who is present at this
conference table now. This is what he said:
“These assassinations constitute a critical challenge from an unbridled band of Jewish terrorists
to the very effort of United Nations to achieve, by
means of mediation, a peaceful adjustment of the
dispute in Palestine. In a broader sense, they give
evidence not only of contempt for the actions of
the Security Council, but also of a cynical disregard
for the United Nations as a whole. It is clearly
imperative that urgent measures be taken to ensure
that the aims of the United Nations in Palestine
should not be frustrated by criminal bands or by
any individuals or groups who might hope to profit
from acts of such bands.“”

154. Sepher Ha-Palmach , in Hebrew, which is about
the Haganah, acknowledges that the Haganah was

formed in 1913, before the Balfour Declaration.
155. Then there is the real character of the JewishIsraeli-Zionists-and
the three words should go
together, because “Jewish” should not be identified
with “Zionists”
or with “Israeli”
completely. After’
the assassination of the messenger of pehce, Count
Folke Bernadotte, for which assassination the Security
Council condemned Israel on 18 September 1948
[wsolution
57 (1948)], the Council then voted another
resolution on 19 October 1948 requesting Israel to give
a ‘report about the assassination of Count Folke Bernadotte [resolution
59 (1948)]. T ask the Council
whether that report has been given. Those who assassinated Count Folke Bernadotte became members of
the Israeli Knesset. However, concerning these assas* “The
zation-was
ofvladimir

156. Regrettably, there are individuals and groups
that have benefited and that are benefiting from those
acts of terrorism, including Mr. Tekoah at {his conference table.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

Irgun
Zvei Leumi-National
Military
Organicalled into existence (April, 1937), by the teachings
Jabotinsky . .I’

for

17

3 Ojj‘kinlRecords
of the Security Council,
October
1948, document S/1018.

Third Ycnr, Supplement

HOW

TO OBTAlN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

moy be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales S&on,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
Now York

UNIES

Ler pubticotionr
das Nations
Unior
rant
en vente
dans
les libroiries
et ICI ogencer
d&posit&es
du monde entier.
Informez-vous
aupr&
de votre libroirie
ou adrcsrez-vous
6:
Nations
Unies, Section
der veotes, New York ou Genivs.
KAK

IlOJlY’iMTb

MIAAHMR

OPTAHHIAQiM

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLlCAClONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicodoner
de 10s Nocioner
Unidos
est6n
en todor
pa&s
del mundo.
Consulte
a LV llbrero
Ventas,
Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations.
_

New

York

price:

SlJ.5.

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAL(Hti

UNIDAS

en venta en librerias
y caror dirtribuidoror
o dirfjase
OI Naciones
Unidor,
Secci6n

I.00 (or equivulent

in other

currencies)

de

820hS-June

1973--?aojo
