V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

( b) Examination of current economic developments, particularly those having an adverse effect on
the developing countries, and consideration of appropriate action including corrective measures;
( c) Evaluation of the world trade and economic
situation and consideration of issues, policies and appropriate measures to facilitate structural changes in
the international economy, taking into account the
interrelationship of problems in the areas of trade,
development, money and finance with a view to attaining the establishment of a new international economic order and bearing in mind the further evolution
that may be needed in the rnles and principles governing international economic relations and the necessary contribution of the Conference to an international
development strategy for the third United Nations
development decade;

4. Urges all Member States to take the necessary
steps with a view to ensuring satisfactory results from
the fifth session of the Conference through adequate
preparations at the regional and interregional levels
and through the full utilization of the permanent machinery of the Conference for the purpose of facilitating negotiations on the agenda items of the fifth session;
5. Further urges all Member States to work towards agreement on action-oriented and other decisions
at the fifth session of the Conference that would contribute effectively to the establishment of the new
international economic order.

90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

33/155.

Effects of the world inflationary phenomenon on the development process

Recalling its resolution 32/175 of 19 December
1977, in which the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development was
requested to establish a governmental group of highlevel experts to study the world inflationary phenomenon and to transmit that study together with the comments of the Trade and Development Board to the
General Assembly, in order to enable it to decide on
measures to be taken, including the possibility of
convening a world conference on inflation,
1. Takes note of the report of the Group of HighLevel Governmental Experts on the Effects of the
World Inflationary Phenomenon on the Development
Process established by the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, 144 as well as of the comments of the Trade and Development Board at its
eighteenth session; 14 :;
2. Takes note, in particular, of the general conclusions arrived at by the Group of Experts on the
analysis of the effects of the world inflationary phenomenon on the developing countries;
3. Requests the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, at its fifth session, to recommend international policy measures to combat the
world inflationary phenomenon, as apparent in the
decline of some of the major currencies, and to eliminate the economic and social effects of internationally
transmitted inflation on developing countries, taking
into account the conclusions and recommendations
contained in the report of the Group of Experts;
4. Requests further the international community
to pay special attention to the international inflation
problem during the negotiations for the establishment
of the new international economic order and during
the elaboration of the new international development
strategy.
§0th plenary meeting
20 December 1978

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade, 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974
containing the Declaration and the Programme of
Action on the Establishment of a New International
Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974
containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties
of States and 3362 (S-VI) of 16 September 1975 on
development and international economic co-operation,
Bearing in mind that the effects of the inflationary
phenomenon have spread universally, and deeply concerned about the high rates of world inflation which
affect negatively the economies of all countries, especially those of the developing countries,
Recognizing, in particular, that the world inflationary
phenomenon distorts international trade and the international monetary system,
Recognizing further that no country or group of
countries alone can solve the problems caused by
world inflation and that isolated measures that have
been adopted so far are not in themselves sufficient
to combat this world-wide phenomenon,
Bearing in mind that the measures within the scope
of the developing countries cannot in themselves control internationally transmitted inflation,

117

33/156.

United Nations Conference to Negotiate
an International Arrangement to Replace the International Wheat Agreement of 1971, as Extended

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order and 3362
(S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and
international economic co-operation,
Taking note of the report of the World Food Council on the work of its fourth session, held at Mexico
City from 12 to 15 June 1978,146
Ta king note of the resolution adopted on 24 November 1978 by the United Nations Conference to
Negotiate an International Arrangement to Replace
the International Wheat Agreement of 1971, as Extended,147
144 TD/B/704.

145 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/33/15), vol. II, paras. 392-404.
6
14 Jbid., Supplement No. 19 (A/33/19 and Corr.1).
147 TD/WHEAT.6/9.
