UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1995/38
4 August 1995
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3561st meeting of the Security Council, held on 4 August 1995, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council is deeply concerned at the resumption of
hostilities in and around the Republic of Croatia. The Council recalls the
statement of its President of 3 August 1995. It strongly deplores the
decision by the Croatian Government to launch a broad military offensive,
thereby unacceptably escalating the conflict, with the risk of further
consequent attacks by whatever party, and demands that all military action
cease immediately and that there be full compliance with all Council
resolutions including resolution 994 (1995).
"The Security Council condemns any shelling of civilian targets. It
demands that no military action be taken against civilians and that their
human rights be fully respected. It reminds the parties of their
responsibilities under international humanitarian law and reiterates that
those who commit violations of international humanitarian law will be held
individually responsible in respect of such acts. The Council calls on the
parties to cooperate fully with UNCRO, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Committee of the Red Cross in ensuring
access and protection to the local civilian population as appropriate.
"The Security Council strongly condemns attacks by Croatian Government
forces on personnel of the United Nations peace-keeping forces which have
resulted in casualties, including the death of one member of the peacekeeping forces. It demands that such attacks cease immediately and that
all detained personnel be released. It also reminds the parties, and in
particular the Croatian Government, that they have an obligation to respect
United Nations personnel, to ensure their safety and freedom of movement at
all times and to enable UNCRO to fulfil its mandate in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Council expresses condolences
to the Government of Denmark and to the family of the member of the United
Nations peace-keeping forces who lost his life.

95-23277 (E)

040895

/...

S/PRST/1995/38
English
Page 2

"The Security Council deeply regrets the breakdown of the talks which
began in Geneva on 3 August 1995. It calls upon the Croatian Government to
return to the talks. It reiterates that there can be no military solution
to the conflict in Croatia. It reaffirms its call for an unreserved
commitment to the search for a negotiated settlement and to resumption of
talks on the basis of the Draft Agreement drawn up by the Co-Chairman of
the Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter, and will
consider any further measures that may be necessary."

-----
