22

General Assembly-Thirty-seventh Session

8. Endorses the proposal that a meeting be held between
representatives of organizations of the United Nations sys­
tem and representatives of the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States and its specialized organizations;
9. Welcomes the invitation by the League of Arab States
that the Meeting be held at the present headquarters of the
League at Tunis and requests the Secretary-General to pro­
vide whatever assistance will be necessary to ensure the
successful organization of the Meeting;
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the League of Arab States, to ensure that the Meeting
referred to in paragraph 9 above is held not later than
30 June 1983;
11. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thiriy-eignth session on the state
of co-operation between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled "Co-operation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States''.
70th plenary meeting
16 November 1982

37/18. Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nu­
clear installations and its grave consequences for
the established international system concerning
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non­
proliferation of nuclear weapons and interna­
tional peace and security

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled ' 'Armed Israeli

aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave
consequences for the established international system con­
cerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non­
proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security",
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 28
Taking note also of the relevant resolution of the Inter­
national Atomic Energy Agency and the Commission on
Human Rights,
Viewing with deep concern Israel's refusal to comply with
those resolutions, particularly Security Council resolution
487 (1981) of 19 June 1981,
Gravely alarmed by the dangerous escalation of Israel's
acts of aggression in the region,
Gravely concerned that Israel continues to maintain its
threats to repeat such attacks against nuclear installations,
Reiterating its alarm over the information and evidence
regarding the acquisition and development of nuclear weap­
ons by Israel,
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic Or­
der,29 the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States30
and the Declaration on the Use of Scientific and Techno­
logical Progress in the Interests of Peace and for the Benefit
of Mankind, 3 t
28

A/37/365 and Add.l-S/15320 and Add.l. For the printed text, see

Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-seventh Year, Supplement
for July, August and September 1982, documents S/15320 and Add. I.
29 Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vn.
30 Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
31 Resolution 3384 (XXX).

Affirming the need to ensure against the repetition of such
an attack on nuclear facilities by Israel or any other State,
1. Condemns Israel's refusal to implement resolution
487 (1981), unanimously adopted by the Security Council;
2. Strongly condemns Israel for the escalation of its acts
of aggression in the region;
3. Condemns Israel's threats to repeat such attacks, which
would gravely endanger international peace and security;
4. Demands that Israel withdraw forthwith its officially
declared threat to repeat its armed attack against nuclear
facilities;
5. Considers the Israeli act of aggression to be a vio­
lation and a denial of the inalienable sovereign right of States
to scientific and technological progress for achieving social
and economic development and raising the standards of
peoples and the dignity of the human person, as well as a
violation and a denial of inalienable human rights and the
sovereign right of States to scientific and technological
development;
6. Requests the Security Council to consider the nec­
essary measures to deter Israel from repeating such an attack
on nuclear facilities;
7. Calls for the continuation of the consideration, at the
international level, of legal measures to prohibit armed
attacks against nuclear facilities, and threats thereof as a
contribution to promoting and ensuring the safe develop­
ment of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, with the
assistance of a group of experts, 32 a comprehensive study
on the consequences of the Israeli armed attack against the
Iraqi nuclear installations devoted to peaceful purposes, and
to submit that study to the General Assembly at its thirty­
eighth session;
9. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
10. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session the item entitled ''Armed Israeli
aggression against the Iraqi nuclear installations and its grave
consequences for the established international system con­
cerning the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non­
proliferation of nuclear weapons and international peace
and security" .
70th plenary meeting
16 November 1982

37/19. Report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency
The General Assembly.
Having received the report of the International Atomic

Energy Agency to the General Assembly for the year 1981, 33
Taking note of the statement by the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency of 18 November
1982,34 which provides additional information on devel­
opments in the Agency's activities during 1982,
Recognizing the importance of the work of and the rel­
evance for the International Atomic Energy Agency to pro­
mote further the application of nuclear energy for peaceful
32 Subsequently named Group of Experts on the Consequences of the
Israeli Armed Attack against the Iraqi Nuclear Installations.
33 International Atomic Energy Agency, The Annual Report for 1981
(Austria, July 1982); transmitted to the members of the General Assembly
by a note of the Secretary-General (A/37/382 and Corr. I).
34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh Session,
Plenary Meetings. 71st meeting, paras. 2-44.
