S

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.

GENERAL
S/19466
29 January 1YtJtl
ORIGINAL:

ENGL I Sti

Algeria, Argentina, Nepal, Senegal, Yugoslavia
and Zambia:
draft
resolution_
The Security Council,
Having considered the Secretary-General’s report of 21 January 19M8

(S/lY443)

p u r s u a n t t o r e s o l u t i o n 605 (lY87),

Expressing its grave concern over the increasing suf ferinqs of the Palest inian
people in the occupied Palestinian territories,
Bearing In mind the Inalienable rights of all people recognized by the Charter
of the United Nations and proclaimed by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Reaffirminq that the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, is applicable to the Palestinian and
other Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, including Jerusalem,
the

Comendinq the International Committee of the Red Cross for its activities ln
occupied territories,

Commending also the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East for its invaluable work,
COnsCiOUs of the urgent need to resolve the underlying problem through a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement, including a solution to the Palestinian
problem in all its aspects,
1.

Expresses its deep appreciation to the Secretary-Ceneral for his reporti

2.
Calls upon Israel, as the occupying Power and as a High Contracti ng Party
to the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
war, of 12 August lY49, to accept the de jure applicability of the Conventi on to
the Palestinian and other Arab territories occupied since lY67, including
Jerusalem, and fl-llly to comply with its obligations under that Convention;

88-U216Y

3634H

(E)

/. . .

S/lu466
Engl lsh
Page 2
Recalls the obligation of all the High Contracting Parties, under
artrcle 1 of the Conventlon, to ensure rccpect for the Convention in all
circumstances;
3.

4.
Calls again upon Israel to desist forthwith from its policies and
practices which violate the human rights of the I’dlestrnlan people;
5.
Requests Israel to facilitate the task of the International Commlttee
the Hed Cross and of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestlne

of

Refugees in the Near East and requests all Members to give them their full support;
Reyuests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor the situation in
b.
the occupied territories by all means available to him and to ma!te regular and
timely r e p o r t s t o t h e Council;

7.
Affirms the urgent need to achieve, under the auspices of the United
Nations, a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Arab/Israeli conflict,
an lntwral part of which is the Palestinian proble?, and expresses its
determination to work towards that end;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue his endeavours to prornote such
a settlement and to keep the Council regularly Informed;
9.

territories

Decides to keep the situation in the Palestinian and other Arab
occupied by Israel since 19t17, Including Jerusalem, under review.
