V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
-

9. Invites the Secretary-General and the heads of
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system to adopt, in the meantime, all possible measures
to improve management procedures, to reduce administrative and other support costs, and to enhance over-all
efficiency in the execution of programmes and projects
in the field of operational activities for development with
a view to increasing the proportion of resources
available to meet the assistance requirements of developing countries;
10. Reaffirms thac, as set forth in the annex to its
resolution 3405 (XXX), Governments and institutions
of recipient countries should be increasingly entrusted
with the responsibilities for executing projects and, to
this end, that the operational activities of the United
Nations system should, inter a/ia, effectively contribute
to the training of the personnel of recipient countries;
11. Urges Governments and the organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system to accelerate their efforts for the effective implementation of
section V of the annex to General Assembly resolution
32/ 197 and, in this context, requests the heads of the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system to continue to take all necessary
measures to improve coherence of action and effective
integration at the country level, in accordance with the
objectives and priorities of the Governments concerned, of the various sectoral inputs from the United
Nations system;
12. Welcomes the progress being made in the implementation of paragraph 34 of the annex to General
Assembly resolution 32/ 197 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to complete as expeditiously as possible the
process of designation of resident co-ordinators, taking
fully into account the provisions of Assembly resolution 34/213;
13. Decides to undertake a comprehensive policy
review of operational activities in 1983, and thereafter
every three years, on the basis of a coherent, integrated
and systematic approach;
14. Further decides to consider, at its next comprehensive policy review on operational activities for development, the question of the establishment of a single
governing body for United Nations operational activities for development, in accordance with paragraph 35
of the annex to General Assembly resolution 32/ 197;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, for the purpose of
the next policy review, to entrust the Director-General
for Development and International Economic Cooperation with the preparation of a report on policy
issues pertaining to operational activities for development undertaken by the United Nations system, based
on the methodology utilized in his report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fifth session, 100 and the provisions of the present resolution, as well as the views and
comments of delegations on the issue of operational activities for development at the second regular session of
1980 of the Economic and Social Council and at the
thirty-.fifth session of the Assembly, for submission to
the Assembly through the Council;
16. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation also to include in his report:
(a) Recommendations arising from paragraph 7
above, together with his own recommendations;
(b) An elaboration of the suggestion that gaps exist
in the operational activities of the United Nations
system, especially in relation to the restructuring of in-

141

- --

ternational economic relations. and suggestions as to
ways and means of filling such gaps, thereby strengtht:ning the United Nations system and making it more
responsive to the needs of the developing countries;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust to the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation the submission to the General
Assembly of an annual report on operational activities
for development, which should also be made available
to the United Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities, containing comprehensive statistical
information concerning all operational activities for development of the United Nations system, including the
information requested by the Assembly in paragraph 31
of the annex to resolution 32/ I 97 and contained in
appendices II and III to the report of the DirectorGeneral. with a further elaboration thereof in the light of
commitments underta-ken;
18. Further requests the Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation
to include in his annual report to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session information on progress made concerning the invitations set forth in
paragraph 9 above and to include in his annual report to
the Assembly at its thirty-seventh session the recommendations requested in paragraph 8 above. together
with his own.

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980
35/82.

United Nations Special Fund for Land-locked
Developing Countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31 / 177 of 21 December 1976,
by which it approved the statute of the United Nations
Special Fund for Land-locked Developing Countries,
Recalling also its resolutions 32/ 113 of 15 December
1977, 33/85 of 15 December 1978 and 34/209 of 19 December 1979,
Recalling further resolution 123 (V) of 3 June 1979 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development101 and taking note of decision 80/21 of 26 June
1980 of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme, 1" 2
Convinced that access to the world market at the least
possible cost is an integral part of meaningful economic
development of land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind that the majority of countries
classified as least developed are land-locked developing
countries,
Expressing deep concern at the very low level of contributions for 1980 announced at the 1979 United
Nations Pledging Conference for Development Activities,'"'
Noting that, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral prepared in response to General Assembly resolution 34 /207 of 19 December 1979, contributions to
the Fund must increase significantly if it is to be effective in meeting the large requirements for reducing
'"' See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
\lations publication, Sales No. E.79.ILD.14), part one, sect A.
'" See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, /980,
"iupplement No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev.1), chap, XL
'" See A/CONF.98/SR I and 2.

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

142

the real costs of transit for land-locked developing countries, 104
Noting further that the demands for assistance from
the Fund are related to activities additional to, and
generally different from, the types of activities financed
from other sources of the United Nations system,
I. Urges all Member States to give due consideration to the special constraints affecting the economic
and social development of land-locked developing countries;
2. Appeals to all countries to review their position
with respect to the United Nations Special Fund for
Land-locked Developing Countries and to give serious
consideration to having representatives of land-locked
developing countries as members of the Board of Governors of the Fund;
3. Further appeals to all Member States, in particular developed countries, to international organizations and to multilateral financial institutions to contribute generously to the Fund in the context of the 1980
United Nations Pledging Conference for Development
Activities;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme, in consultation with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development and the executive heads of
other related institutions, to pursue action in favour of
land-locked developing countries within the framework
of the interim arrangements, taking into account that
each country concerned should receive appropriate technical and financial assistance.

84th plenary meeting
5 December I 980

35/83.

United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 32/ 114 of 15 December
1977, in which it, inter alia, urged all States to take
measures to provide the United Nations Development
Programme with the necessary resources to fulfil the
aims, objectives and programmes established in· the
second programming cycle, 1977-1981, and especially to
achieve and even exceed the over-all annual growth rate
of 14 per cent for voluntary contributions, on which the
indicative planning figures for the cycle were based,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council
resolution 2024 (LXI) of 4 August 1976 on operational
activities for development,
Reaffirming the validity of the consensus of 1970 as
set forth in the annex to General Assembly resolution
2688 (XXV) of 11 December 1970,
Considering that the United Nations Development
Programme is making an important contribution to the
accelerated development of developing countries,
'" A/S-11/5 and Corr.I, annex, para. 308.

Noting with appreciation the continuing increase in
programme delivery and the measures taken by the
Governing Council and the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to improve the
quality and efficiency of programme operations and to
enhance proper harmonization and complementarity in
the technical co-operation activities of the organizations of the United Nations system,
Deeply concerned that the rate of increase in the
resources for 1980 of the United Nations Development
Programme fell far short of the target,
Having considered the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on
its twenty-seventh session,'"'
I. Takes note of the report of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on
its twenty-seventh session:
2. Notes, in particular, decisions 80/6 of 20 February, 80/7 of 13 June and 80/9 of 17 June 1980, "'"
taken by the Governing Council of the United Nations
Development Programme on the preparation for the
third programming cycle, 1982-1986, on the strengthening of the country programming process through continuous programming and on the arrangements for enhancing the involvement of the developing countries in
the planning of the regional programmes;
3. Notes with approval Governing Council decision
80/44 of 27 June 1980 1"" concerning the reimbursement
by the United Nations Development Programme of
agency support costs and the recommendation that the
executing agencies of the Programme should review
their operational support systems, working methods, arrangements and staffing with a view to bringing about
significant reductions in over-all support costs:
4. Urges all Governments to renew their efforts to
pi:ovide the United Nations Development Programme
with the resources necessary for the implementation of
activities for the second programming cycle, 1977-1981,
which are based on an over-all annual growth rate of resources of 14 per cent, thereby providing the sound
financial basis needed to implement the Programme's
planned activities during the third programming cycle,
1982-1986, which for the purpose of forward planning
also assumes an over-all average annual growth of
resources of at least 14 per cent;
5. Stresses that the realization of the goals and objectives of the International Development Strategy for
the Third United Nations Development Decade 1" 7 will
require a renewed emphasis on technical co-operation
and a significant increase in the resources provided for
this purpose.

84th plenary meeting
5 December I 980

35/84.

Assistance to Nicaragua

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34 /8 of 25 October 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to Nicaragua, 1ex
'" Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. /9/W, Supplement No. 12 (E/1980/42/Rev.l).
''" Ibid., chap. XI.
'" See resolution .15/56 above, annex, sect. 11.
"" A/35/507.
