S/PV.9309

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9309th meeting

Tuesday, 25 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lavrov/Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Vershinin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Al Marar
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-11633 (E)
*2311633*

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Chile, Cuba,
Egypt, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran,
Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia,
Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
Türkiye, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet
Nam to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Observer State
of Palestine to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Riad Al-Malki.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Hameed Ajibaiye Opeloyeru, Permanent Observer
at the Observer Mission of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations; His Excellency
Mr. Cheikh Niang, Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People; and His Excellency Mr. Maged Abdelfattah
Abdelaziz, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.
2/31

begin

25/04/2023

its

Mr. Wennesland: Days ago, Muslims around
the world celebrated Eid Al-Fitr, bringing to a close
the holy month of Ramadan, which overlapped with
Christian Easter and Jewish Passover. That holy period,
while mostly calm, regrettably also witnessed shocking
incidents of violence at holy sites and tensions across the
occupied Palestinian territory and in Israel, with a brief
escalation spilling over into the region. While a widerscale escalation was averted, with each de-escalation the
stakes get higher and the tools at our disposal become
fewer. The current trajectory is neither sustainable nor
inevitable. The parties, the region and the international
community need to address the underlying political,
security, economic and institutional challenges driving
the conflict. There must be an end to the unilateral
measures, provocations and incitement that enable
violence and prevent progress towards resolving the
conflict and ending the occupation.
Overall in the occupied West Bank, 17 Palestinians,
including two children, were killed and 200 Palestinians,
including four women and 38 children, were injured by
Israeli security forces during demonstrations, clashes,
search-and-arrest operations, attacks and alleged
attacks against Israelis and other incidents. Another 39
Palestinians, including three women and four children,
were injured by Israeli settlers or other civilians in
shooting attacks, stone-throwing and other incidents.
Four Israeli civilians, including two women and one
child, were killed and 31 injured, including two women,
one child, and 12 Israeli security forces personnel, by
Palestinians in shooting and ramming attacks, clashes,
the throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails, and other
incidents. In addition, a foreign national was killed and
seven foreigners were injured.
The holiday period was largely observed peacefully,
with millions of Muslim visitors to the Al-Aqsa
compound during Ramadan, the highest numbers in
many years. However, on 4 and 5 April, confrontations
erupted at the holy sites in Jerusalem when Israeli
security forces entered the Al-Qibli prayer hall at the
Al-Aqsa Mosque and forcibly removed Palestinians
who were barricaded inside. Israeli security forces
deployed stun grenades, beat Palestinians with batons
and rifles and fired rubber-coated metal bullets, while
some Palestinians inside the mosque lit and threw
fireworks and stones at Israeli security forces.
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Those developments came in the wake of
provocative calls and incitement from several parties.
Israeli extremists called for Jews to conduct ritual
animal sacrifices at the holy sites. Hamas and other
armed Palestinian factions called for Palestinians to
go to the Al-Aqsa Mosque to resist such acts. As in
previous years, Israeli police blocked attempts to carry
out the animal sacrifices in the compound, arresting at
least two Israelis.
Following those events at the holy sites, on 4 and
5 April militants in Gaza and Lebanon fired dozens of
rockets towards Israel. While some were intercepted
by Israel’s aerial defence system, 46 landed in Israel,
causing one injury and damage to property. The barrage
from Lebanon was the most intensive since 2006. The
Israel Defense Forces carried out airstrikes in Gaza and
southern Lebanon on 7 April, aimed at what were said
to be Hamas targets. A children’s hospital and a health
clinic in Gaza were damaged; however, no injuries
were reported. Lebanon’s Prime Minister condemned
the launching of rockets towards Israel. United Nations
de-escalation efforts, as well as coordination and
liaison by the parties with the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, helped restore calm.
From 12 April, Israeli authorities prohibited
non-Muslim visits to the site for the last days of
Ramadan, in line with usual practice. On 15 April,
confrontations erupted between Israeli police and
Orthodox Christian worshippers attempting to enter the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem’s Old City
for the Holy Fire ceremony, exceeding an attendance
limit enforced by Israeli authorities, citing safety
concerns. The Greek Patriarchate and other church
leaders criticized the limits on visitors, suggesting it
was unjustifiably low and violated the status quo.
Other violence in the occupied West Bank and in
Israel continued during the reporting period.
Many Palestinian casualties were incurred in
Israeli military operations in Area A of the occupied
West Bank and subsequent clashes, some of them
armed. On 16 March, undercover Israeli forces entered
Jenin, resulting in clashes. Israeli forces shot and killed
four Palestinians, including a 14-year-old bystander.
Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed two of
the individuals killed as members of their armed wings.
In Jerusalem’s Old City, on 1 April an Arab-Israeli
man was shot dead by Israeli security forces near an
entrance to the holy sites in disputed circumstances.

S/PV.9309

On 7 April, two British-Israeli sisters, the youngest a
15-year-old girl, were killed in a shooting attack in the
West Bank by perpetrators in a car with Palestinian
plates. Their mother was critically injured in the attack
and died three days later. No arrests have been made.
On the same day, an Italian national was killed in
Tel Aviv, and seven other Italian and British nationals
were wounded, in what the Israeli police said was a
ramming attack carried out by an Arab-Israeli man,
who was shot dead at the scene by police. The alleged
perpetrator’s family disputed the ramming allegation.
On 10 April, a 15-year-old Palestinian boy was shot
and killed by Israeli security forces during an arrest
operation and ensuing clashes in Aqbat Jabr refugee
camp, near Jericho. Eyewitnesses said that the boy was
a bystander, while the Israeli army said that soldiers
returned fire after being shot at.
Levels of settler-related violence also remained
high. Huwwara remained a flashpoint. On 25 March,
Palestinians carried out a shooting attack in the
town, injuring two Israeli soldiers. Israeli settlers
entered the town the same day and again on 27 March,
throwing stones that injured two Palestinians and
damaged property.
On 6 April, an Israeli settler shot and injured a
Palestinian boy in Jerusalem’s Old City. On 18 April,
two Israelis were shot and wounded while in their
vehicle in the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh
Jarrah. On the following day, Israeli security forces
said they had arrested a 15-year-old Palestinian boy in
Nablus who had confessed to carrying out the attack.
I am deeply concerned by the violence and
inflammatory actions over the past weeks, particularly
the violent confrontations inside the Al-Aqsa Mosque. I
again urge respect for the status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem, in line with the special role of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
I condemn the indiscriminate launching of rockets
towards Israeli population centres. I reiterate that acts of
terror and targeting of civilians are abhorrent and must
be condemned and rejected by all. All perpetrators of
violence must be held accountable and swiftly brought
to justice.
Security forces must exercise maximum restraint
and use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable to
protect life.

23-116333/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I am appalled that children continue to be the
victims of violence. Children must never be the targets
of violence, used or put in harm’s way.
On 19 March, senior Egyptian, Jordanian, Israeli,
Palestinian and United States officials met in Sharm
El-Sheikh, Egypt, to further discuss understandings
reached in Aqaba, Jordan on 23 February. In the spirit
of the agreements reached in Aqaba and Sharm ElSheikh, I urge all parties to exercise the utmost restraint
and refrain from any steps that could exacerbate the
situation, and to take concrete steps to implement the
joint communiqués. I remain closely engaged with
all relevant parties to de-escalate tensions and chart a
political way forward.
Turning to settlement-related developments, on
22 March Israeli authorities announced tenders for 940
housing units in settlements in Area C and 89 units
in East Jerusalem. On 10 April, Israeli Government
ministers and members of the Knesset joined over
15,000 settlers and other Israeli civilians in a heavily
secured march to the illegal outpost of Evyatar, in
the northern West Bank, calling on the Government
to legalize it under Israeli law. I reiterate that all
settlements are illegal under international law and that
they are a substantial obstacle to peace. I call on all
parties to avoid unilateral measures and provocations,
such as this march, that can further inflame tensions.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
property remain a serious concern. During the reporting
period, Israeli authorities demolished, seized or forced
owners to demolish 11 Palestinian-owned structures
in Area C and eight in East Jerusalem, displacing 14
Palestinians, including seven children — a relative
decline reflecting a reduction during Ramadan, as
in prior years. The demolitions were carried out due
to a lack of Israeli-issued building permits, which
are nearly impossible for Palestinians to obtain. On
3 April, Israel’s Supreme Court ruled against the
eviction of a Palestinian family from their home in
the East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan, ending a
30-year legal battle. I call on Israeli authorities to end
the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and to
approve additional plans that would enable Palestinians
to build legally and address their development needs.
Turning to the region, on the Golan, Israel Defense
Forces reported, from 8 to 9 April, six rockets launched
from Syria towards Israel and their retaliation with
artillery fire and airstrikes, targeting locations in
4/31

25/04/2023

Syria, including Syrian army positions. The United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force was in contact
with the Israel Defense Forces and Syrian authorities
to de-escalate the situation, urging them to exercise
maximum restraint and to respect the ceasefire, in
accordance with the 1974 Disengagement of Forces
Agreement. No casualties were reported.
Amid the deteriorating situation on the ground,
the Palestinian Authority (PA) continues to face
significant fiscal and institutional challenges. At
the same time, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes that provide support to the Palestinian
people, in coordination and complementarity with the
PA, are facing significant funding shortfalls, notably
the World Food Programme and United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA), impacting basic service delivery. I
am particularly concerned by the prolonged closure of
schools and UNRWA health clinics in the West Bank,
where PA and UNRWA teachers, as well as UNRWA
health staff, have been on strike for weeks, impacting
children across the occupied Palestinian territory.
Efforts are needed by the parties and the
international community to strengthen Palestinian
institutions, improve governance and shore up the fiscal
health of the Palestinian Authority. These steps must
be part of a broader political effort that addresses the
underlying drivers of the conflict, provides the space
and access needed for the Palestinian economy to grow
and encourages the parties to update their economic
and administrative relations. The forthcoming Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in Brussels in early
May provides an opportunity for a strategic shift in
this direction. Addressing these immediate challenges
can also provide much-needed momentum towards
re-establishing a political horizon that favours the twoState solution.
I urge Israelis, Palestinians, States of the region and
the broader international community to show leadership,
re-engage and work collectively in the pursuit of peace
with the aim of ending the occupation and resolving
the conflict in line with international law, relevant
United Nations resolutions and previous agreements,
in pursuit of the vision of two States — Israel and
an independent, democratic, contiguous, viable and
sovereign Palestine — living side by side in peace
and security within secure and recognized borders on
the basis of the pre-1967 lines, with Jerusalem as the
capital of both States.
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine): Allow me at the outset,
Mr. President, to congratulate the Russian Federation
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council and
to express our appreciation for your decision to convene
today’s open debate. Allow me also to acknowledge and
thank all the countries that will speak today in defence
of the United Nations Charter, international law and
the rights of the Palestinian people. I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Mahmoud Darwish, our national and universal
poet, said:
“I know that you the masters of words have no need
for rhetoric before the eloquence of blood. Therefore
our words will be as simple as our rights.”
I therefore come to this Chamber with clear messages.
Seventy-five years ago, our people endured
the Nakba. Nakba is a five-letter word that means
catastrophe and encompasses the dispossession and
displacement of an entire nation. Almost overnight,
two thirds of our people became refugees. Seventyfive years later, the Nakba continues. The denial of
our rights and the displacement and replacement of our
people is still under way with one objective pursued
in broad daylight: annexation. It is time to bring the
Nakba to an end.
This is the most protracted refugee crisis in the
world. It is the most protracted denial of national,
collective and individual rights in the world. It is the
most protracted protection crisis in the world. It is the
longest occupation of an entire territory in modern
history. The question therefore begs to be asked: why
is it still ongoing?
Is it because there is a lack of rules or a lack of
resolve? The rules are clear. The entire international lawbased order is premised on two fundamental principles
from which no derogation is tolerated: the right of
peoples to self-determination and the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of land by force. There are no greater
breaches of these rules than aggression and annexation.
Not only does the international community have
the possibility to ensure international law is respected,
but it also has the responsibility to do so, regardless

S/PV.9309

of the identity of the perpetrators and regardless of the
identity of the victims. Had the United Nations Charter
been upheld and the Security Council’s resolutions
been implemented, peace would have prevailed in
Palestine a long time ago, rather than occupation and
apartheid. That is all we ask for: that the United Nations
Charter be upheld and that United Nations resolutions
be implemented.
We must express gratitude for the clear and
unequivocal stance of the international community
condemning violations of international law and
supporting just and lasting peace in accordance with
the internationally recognized terms of reference.
This might be the most established, solid, consistent
international consensus on any conflict in the world.
What, then, explains that this consensus has not
changed the reality on the ground?
The reality on the ground is the result of failure not
fate. While the international community has adopted
clear positions, it has not backed them with decisive
action. Why is it that, when it comes to Israel, the
international community can take a stance but cannot
act upon it?
The rules are clear; now we need the resolve to
enforce them. Yesterday many delegations in this
Chamber spoke of this self-evident truth: international
law must be upheld (see S/PV.9308 and S/PV.9308
(resumption)). They spoke of obligations, accountability
and collective responsibility.
There is nothing that undermines the authority
and credibility of international law more than double
standards, selectivity and schizophrenia. How is
Israel being held accountable for breaching the law,
the Charter, countless United Nations resolutions over
decades and decades? How many Israeli officials have
been held accountable in any form or shape for pursuing
colonial settlements on our land, for forcibly displacing
our people, for the targeting and indiscriminate attacks
against our civilians, and for demolishing the homes
and structures many of Council members have funded?
What consequences have they faced?
Do members want to know why the Security
Council’s condemnations and calls are not heeded?
They are not heeded for one simple reason: impunity.
Do members want to know how the supremacists came
to power on a supremacist and colonial platform that
is now official Government policy? Once again, the
answer is impunity. Is there anywhere else in the world

23-116335/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

where Council members would condemn all the illegal
actions of an occupying Power and then tell the people
under its occupation that their existence and their
rights are eventually entirely subject to the goodwill of
their oppressors?
We do not take for granted the support provided
to our people by the international community over the
years, including Palestine refugees through United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We do not take for granted
the support provided to our national institutions. We
do not take for granted the support provided to peace
efforts when they were under way. We do not take for
granted the daily efforts to reign in Israel’s colonial
appetite. This investment for the freedom of one people
and peace for all peoples deserves protection.
There are two threats looming. The first threat
is for the international community to be demobilized
until such time as the parties are ready to make peace;
for this, there is not much we can do. The second threat
is for the international community to be demoralized;
for this, there is no way to mount enough pressure on
Israel to change course. We are convinced there is no
alternative to the two-State solution, and we remain
committed to it, but unfortunately the circumstances
are such that we can no longer salvage it.
Such self-fulfilling prophecies would ensure that
the reality on the ground will continue to be shaped
by the will of the colonial settlers, rather than the will
of the peacemakers. We said a while ago that settlers
will not only take over Palestinian land, but they will
also take over Israeli politics. They will turn a solvable
political conflict into perpetual religious conflict. And
here we are. Regardless of how difficult it seems today
for anyone to step in and take bold action, trust us when
we say that the price of inaction is infinitely higher for
the Palestinian people, but not only for them.
We have decided not to spare any effort for
peace. We welcome any initiatives with international
legitimacy and are always ready and willing to meet
and explore any avenue to put an end to illegal unilateral
measures and to restore a political horizon in line with
the internationally recognized terms of reference. We
remain committed to upholding our own obligations
and to pursuing a peaceful path forward.
We do so because we know the alternative. We
appreciate all efforts to save and improve Palestinian
lives, but they are no substitute for a political solution.
6/31

25/04/2023

We cannot coexist under occupation. There cannot
be an international law-based order for the rest of the
world and a negotiations-based order or an occupyingPower-imposed order for Palestine. Negotiations should
seek agreement on how to uphold the law, not how to
ensure its permanent breach.
Israel is outraged that it could be held to the same
standards as all of us. It will say without blinking that its
settlers have the right to live in the occupied Palestinian
territory, that it has every intention to make permanent
its annexation of Jerusalem and that the Jordan valley
and most of the West Bank will suffer the same fate. It
will say that it will keep 2 million Palestinians under
blockade in the Gaza Strip for decades. It will say that
it is not in favour of the two-State solution, that it is
entitled to kill Palestinians, that nobody gets to tell
it what to do and that it gets to tell everybody what
they should do. Israel will scold the Council and every
United Nations member for stating the law. If that is
how it deals with the Council, then imagine how it deals
with the people under its occupation.
Israel will explain to us that the problem is not
them violating international law and the fundamental
rights of our people, but us raising this matter in
international forums. They will tell us that the obstacle
to peace is not the crimes committed against our people
but our attempts to ensure that those responsible are
held accountable. They can be partners for peace while
denying our existence, denying our rights, annexing
our land, killing our people and rejecting the two-State
solution, but how can we be genuine peace partners if
we protest those actions?
Palestinians are not killed by the hundreds and
thousands every year by mistake. The disregard for
Palestinian life, the will to subjugate and dominate them
and the feelings of entitlement are such that Israel has
put in place a shoot-to-kill policy that indiscriminately
affects our children, youth and elderly anywhere and
everywhere in Palestine.
Soldiers and settlers wreak havoc in our streets and
in our lives. No one is safe anywhere or at any time — not
in our land, not in our streets, not in our mosques,
not in our churches, not in our schools and not in our
homes. There is no feeling of shame in proclaiming that
one group, the one illegally present in our land, must
benefit from all the privileges, while the other group,
the lawful inhabitants of the land, should continue to be
deprived of their most fundamental rights.
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

There is a simple principle that underlies all
international law and international justice: deterrence is
the only way to prevent recurrence. The only discussion
worth having is how to mount a collective response that
would deter anyone from breaching international law
and ensure that everyone commits to peace, in words
and in deeds.
As long as Israel reaps the benefits of its occupation
while we pay the price, annexation and apartheid are the
only reality we are left with. If we make the occupation
costly and I can assure the Council that it will come to
an end. The Israeli people themselves will make sure
that it comes to an end. But let me be more specific so
that no one can say that it cannot be done. Where can
we start?
First, I urge one and all to recognize the State of
Palestine if they have not done so yet. How can any
country that supports the two-State solution and peace
justify not yet recognizing the State of Palestine,
without which there is no two-State solution? Did they
wait for Israel to recognize the Palestinian Liberation
Organization (PLO) before they recognized it or did
their recognition of the PLO lead Israel to eventually
follow suit? Why did they not wait for our approval
to recognize Israel, and need Israeli permission
to recognize the State of Palestine? If they do not
recognize the State of Palestine now, when it is under
vital threat, when will they do it, when the two-State
solution is definitely dead and buried?
Why would the Council, which has been calling for
a two-State solution for decades, not recommend the
membership of the State of Palestine to the General
Assembly? I have no doubt that the General Assembly
will agree once that recommendation is made here, in the
Council. Is there a better way to embody international
support for the two-State solution than to have the State
that has been unjustly deprived of membership since
1948 finally become a United Nations member? Why
would Israel, which violated the very conditions of its
membership, namely General Assembly resolutions 181
(II) and 194 (III), and continues violating the Charter,
be entitled to membership and we, who honour the
United Nations Charter, be deprived of it?
The Council has affirmed repeatedly the
need for the protection of all civilians. While we
adhere to that principle, it is our people who needs
international protection. If anyone has a right to

S/PV.9309

security in the occupied Palestinian territory, it is the
Palestinian people.
Everyone is opposed to settlements. Settlements
deprive us of our land and resources and annihilate any
chance for peace. We must ban settlement products,
ban trade with settlements, sanction those who collect
funds for settlements and those who advocate for them
and those who advance them. We must list as terrorist
organizations the groups of settlers that are killing,
maiming and setting property ablaze in front of the
whole world because they are certain they will not be
held accountable? We must condition — in deeds, not
words — relations with Israel on Israel’s commitment
to international law and peace. We must take measures
to roll back annexation and to end occupation.
We must mount a collective front to push for peace,
to take initiatives and to hold the parties accountable if
they do not implement the international will embodied
in the United Nations Charter and in the United Nations
resolutions. We must support every effort to uphold
international law rather than obstruct it, starting with
the International Court of Justice.
In short, we must incentivize freedom, justice
and peace and disincentivize oppression, perpetual
occupation and annexation. Peace, which has eluded us
for so long, will then finally be within our grasp.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Each time I set foot in this
Chamber for these open debates, I mentally prepare
myself for the bias and the falsehoods and the singling
out of Israel — the only liberal democracy in the
region. Yet today’s debate has crossed all the lines.
Not only am I both appalled and outraged to the very
depths of my soul, but I am very sad. Today is one of
the most sacred days of the year for the State of Israel.
Today is Yom Hazikaron — the memorial day for our
fallen troops and victims of terror, and the day during
which every Israeli remembers those who paid the
ultimate price while defending the Jewish homeland. In
Israel, it is a day of unmatched national mourning. Two
sirens, one in the evening and one in the morning, ring
across the country, bringing all activity, even traffic,
to a grinding halt so that every Israeli can observe two
minutes of solemn silence. All restaurants, cafes and
shops shut down, while military cemeteries are filled
with hundreds of thousands of visitors paying their
respects. Television programming is dedicated solely

23-116337/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to films and reels mourning those who fell, while an
entire channel runs the names of every single fallen
hero. This day holds more sanctity for Israelis than
almost any other day of the year.
We made numerous requests to reschedule today’s
open debate, describing the deep importance of the day.
Yet tragically, the Security Council refused to budge.
The decision to nonetheless hold this debate on today of
all days only further proves what Israelis already know
and feel about this biased Organization. What would
you do, Mr. President, if the Council were convened
to single out and condemn the Russian Federation and
your soldiers on 9 May, on Victory Day over the Nazis?
Today, on this hallowed day, every Israeli remembers
those courageous sons and daughters, brothers and
sisters, mothers and fathers and dear friends who
lost their lives defending Israel. Yet while Israelis
mourn, the Council will as usual hear more blatant lies
condemning the State of Israel and falsely painting it as
the root of all the region’s problems.
That could not be further from the truth. The only
reason this conflict has not yet been resolved is because
the Palestinians refuse to accept the very existence of
Israel — the Jewish State. They have proven that by
rejecting every peace initiative and by brainwashing
their children and inciting them to terrorism and to hate
and murder Jews — shame, shame, shame. Meanwhile,
the true threat to the region and the world — the
Ayatollah regime in Iran — will as usual not even be
a footnote in today’s discussion. Iran, the numberone State sponsor of terror, has never been closer to
becoming a nuclear Power. But in the Council, Iran’s
destructive and dangerous advancements will likely not
even be mentioned, let alone condemned.
Therefore today, on this sacred and solemn day
during which we Israelis bow our heads to the 28,468
fallen soldiers and victims of terror, I refuse to take part
in this absurd farce. Instead, I will take this opportunity
to commemorate the past year’s victims of Palestinian
terror and those who fell in the line of duty: Yonatan
Havakuk, Boaz Gol, Oren Ben Yiftah, Noam Raz, Bar
Falah, Noa Lazar, Ido Baruch, Ronen Hanania, Shalom
Sofer, Motti Ashkenazi, Tamir Avichai, Michael
Ladygin, Aryeh Schupak, Eli Mizrahi, Natalie Mizrahi,
Raphael Ben Eliyahu, Asher Nathan, Shaul Hai, Ilya
Sosanski, Irina Korolova, Shimon Maatuf, Alter
Shlomo Laderman, Yaakov Peleg, Asher Peleg, Asil
Sawaed, Yagel Yaniv, Hillel Yaniv, Elan Ganeles, Oris
Car, Alessandro Parini, Maia Dee, Rina Dee and Lucy
8/31

25/04/2023

Dee. If the Council refuses to respect their memory,
I will dedicate this speech to it. I light this candle to
honour them, and may their memory be blessed. I am
sorry, but I refuse to spend this sacred day listening to
lies and condemnation. This open debate disgraces the
fallen, and Israel will not take part in it.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
The Middle East is undergoing a profound
transformation that is unfolding in a highly
contradictory way. What is needed more than ever is to
improve the relations between the States of the region,
stabilize the conflict zones and step up efforts to
resolve them politically and diplomatically on the basis
of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Our position in that regard is outlined in Russia’s new
foreign policy concept, which was recently adopted
by President Putin. We give priority to establishing
a stable and comprehensive architecture of stability
and cooperation in the Middle East and promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue. We intend to
develop active cooperation with all the countries of the
region, both bilaterally and through the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
Gulf Cooperation Council.
We can see a growing interest in the Russian
initiative to ensure collective security, with the
participation of all coastal countries, both Arab States
and Iran, including with the involvement of the outer
circle of influential States. We welcome the positive
changes that until recently seemed difficult to achieve.
I refer primarily to the restoration of relations between
Saudi Arabia and Iran, through the mediation of
China, as well as the plans to return Syria to the Arab
family — something we have worked towards for a
long time — and the normalization between Damascus
and Ankara, which began with Russia’s assistance,
using the advantages of the Astana format. In addition,
largely thanks to the initiatives outlined by Riyadh, we
have seen proactive actions steps taken to accelerate
the settlement of the bloody conflict in Yemen.
At the same time, we note with deep regret and
concern that the Palestinian problem remains on the
sidelines of those positive developments. Our intention
in convening today’s open debate was to draw attention
to the unprecedented rise in tensions and violence in
the Arab-Israeli conflict zone. We believe that it is
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

more necessary than ever to reaffirm the common
denominators of the Middle East settlement, as set out
in the decisions of the Security Council and General
Assembly, as well as to stop the threat of yet another
armed confrontation and provide a political horizon for
resuming the peace process.
Developments in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip,
East Jerusalem and the disengagement line between
Israel, Lebanon and Syria have raised tensions to an
extremely dangerous level. Since the beginning of the
year, military raids in Jenin, Jericho, Nablus, Huwwara
and clashes over the violation of the status of the
holy sites have killed more than 100 Palestinians and
injured thousands. The number of Israeli casualties
is also growing, as the representative of that country
just mentioned. The situation is aggravated by the
Israeli attacks on Syria — of which there have already
been at least 10 this year — including the shelling of
Aleppo International Airport, which is the airport
used to deliver humanitarian aid to the victims of the
devastating earthquake that struck on 6 February. The
number of incidents on the Blue Line with Lebanon
has increased, including the largest exchange of rocket
strikes since 2006.
The main reason for the regular outbreaks of violence
between the Palestinians and Israel continues to be the
unilateral measures aimed at creating irreversible facts
on the ground and the use of force to protect those facts.
We cannot be silent in the face of the record speed with
which Israel is building settlements, together with its
retroactive legalization of outposts, expropriation of
land, demolition of houses and arbitrary arrests. Nor
can we turn a blind eye to the growing radicalization
on Palestinian streets and the deepening rifts between
the major Palestinian parties, with the potential to lead
to violent confrontations.
In the circumstances, while it is of course important
to treat and prevent the symptoms of a deteriorating
situation, it is absolutely imperative that all the major
stakeholders reaffirm that there can be no alternative
to a two-State solution if Palestinians are to realize
their right to their own independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, and Israelis their right to
coexist peacefully and safely with their neighbours and
within the region as a whole. Only a return to direct
negotiations on all the final-status issues can break the
vicious cycle and restore mutual trust.

S/PV.9309

However, instead of helping to restore the political
horizon, the United States and the European Union
continue their destructive attempts to substitute some
sort of economic half-measures for genuine peace
and promote Arab-Israeli normalization by bypassing
a just resolution of the Palestinian problem and the
Arab Peace Initiative. The Middle East Quartet of
international mediators has been a victim of their
efforts. Now Washington claims to be the sole sponsor
of the Middle East peace process, unembarrassed by the
fact that it long ago lost the neutrality and impartiality
required of an honest broker, especially after the wellknown decisions by the Trump Administration that are
in direct contradiction to the relevant Security Council
resolutions and that the Biden Administration has
not rescinded.
There is a reason why that non-fulfilment of the
resolutions of the Security Council resolutions — and not
just those related to issues in the Middle East — deserves
special mention. Not long ago, the United States and
its allies went to great lengths to ensure that, every
time a veto was cast in the Security Council, the issue
would be brought up for debate in the Assembly. We
did not object to that, although the whole notion clearly
targeted Russia. However, we have nothing to hide.
When we exercise the right of the veto, we clearly
explain the reasons and have no problem with repeating
our arguments in the General Assembly. But here is the
thing. The use of the veto is an inalienable right — a
full-fledged part of the mechanisms enshrined in the
Charter — and the use of the veto does not violate it in
any way.
On the other hand, non-compliance with Security
Council resolutions is a violation, I believe, of
Article 25 of the Charter, which requires everyone
to abide by the decisions of the Security Council. Is
it perhaps time that those who have blatantly buried
previous resolutions explained themselves to the
General Assembly? The resolutions that the West has
sabotaged include decisions on Palestine, the Golan
Heights, Western Sahara, the Kosovo settlement,
the Iranian nuclear programme and, of course, the
Minsk agreements on Ukraine, which we discussed in
detail yesterday (see S/PV.9308). The Americans and
Europeans are crudely exploiting the Ukrainian issue,
using blackmail and threats in their attempts to get
developing countries on their side and thereby divert
their attention from the problems in the Middle East
and other regions of the global South. Look, they say,

23-116339/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we will beat Russia and everything will work out on its
own. And because of that, the crises that developing
countries have long wanted to see resolved fall victim
to the double standards and colonial instincts of the
West, driven by its own selfish interests to dictate its
demands to the whole world, ignoring the culture and
traditions of other peoples and making a mockery of
international law.
With the Council’s permission, I would like to
cite a small part of an interview which United States
Secretary of State Antony Blinken gave Wolf Blitzer of
CNN on 8 February 2021.
(spoke in English)
Answering a question on the Golan Heights, Secretary
of State Antony Blinken said,
“Look, leaving aside the legalities of that question,
as a practical matter, the Golan is very important
to Israel’s security. As long as Assad is in power
in Syria, as long as Iran is present in Syria, militia
groups backed by Iran, the Assad regime itself — all
of these pose a significant security threat to Israel,
and, as a practical matter, the control of the
Golan in that situation, I think, remains of real
importance to Israel’s security. Legal questions are
something else.”
(spoke in Russian)
I am not making any value judgments here. I simply
cited a statement by Antony Blinken, who mentioned
both “leaving aside legalities” and that “legal questions
are something else.” There we have an idea of how
resolutions are being implemented and how people are
positioning themselves within our Organization.
In the circumstances, I believe the role of the
United Nations as a facilitator of multilateral diplomacy
is especially important. We urge the leadership of the
Secretariat and the Secretary-General himself to pay
close attention to ensuring compliance with Security
Council resolutions, and, of course, especially those
relevant to the Middle Eastern settlement. We would
also like to see the Secretary-General fulfil his duties
more actively as moderator of the Quartet without
waiting for permission. The Secretary-General recently
took the initiative to convene a meeting in early May
on Afghanistan. We support that, but why should he not
take a similar initiative and convene a meeting of the
Quartet? That is his prerogative.
10/31

25/04/2023

Needless to say, at the same time we call on the
Israelis and Palestinians to cease all unilateral actions
that jeopardize the possibility of implementing a twoState solution, including terrorist and other armed
attacks, incitement to aggression, the disproportionate
use of force by any party, all unlawful measures related
to the issue of settlements and attempts to change
the status quo in Jerusalem. We would like to see
the Palestinian movements rise above their partisan
ambitions and unite on the political platform of the
Palestine Liberation Organization. That will improve
the socioeconomic situation, strengthen administrative
institutions and enable them to prepare for a dialogue
with Israel, this time on behalf of the entire Palestinian
people. We know that our friends from Egypt, Jordan,
Algeria and other colleagues are working towards the
restoration of Palestinian unity. We also are making
efforts to that end and intend to continue to do so.
I would like to stress the roles played by Saudi
Arabia as the penholder of the Arab Peace Initiative,
Jordan, as the custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem, the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation. We certainly attach special importance to
the need to do everything possible to ensure that the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East continues its effective
work. For its part, Russia will continue to do its best
to contribute to the stabilization of the Middle East
and North Africa and promote the Middle East peace
process, together with all the countries of the region
and in coordination with other good-faith mediators. As
always, we stand ready to discuss relevant initiatives
as part of our collective work in the forum of the
United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Al Marar (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over
this high-level debate. I also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his briefing and his continued efforts to
de-escalate tensions.
At the beginning of my statement, I would like to
congratulate the Muslim nation on the happy occasion
of Eid Al-Fitr. We are relieved that thousands of
worshippers were able to say their Eid Al-Fitr prayers
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at the Al-Aqsa Mosque in peace and calm, in contrast
to the painful incidents that we witnessed during the
month of Ramadan when Israeli police forces attacked
worshippers in violation of the sanctity of places of
worship and of the freedom to practice one’s religion.
As we have reiterated on many occasions, we
underscore today that the special status of the city of
Jerusalem must not be compromised. The historical
and legal status quo of Jerusalem and the Hashemite
custodianship of its holy sites must be respected, both
in word and in practice. We believe that Israel’s decision
to prevent settlers from storming the Al-Aqsa Mosque
during the last 10 days of Ramadan prevented further
confrontation. However, we regret the resurgence of
unrest in the city of Jerusalem following yesterday’s
attacks, which reflects the continued deterioration of
the situation since the beginning of this year.
We are deeply concerned about the continued
violence and the increase in raids, demolitions and
displacements of Palestinians, which have further
exacerbated the situation. The number of Palestinians
killed in the first three months of this year alone
accounts for approximately half of the total number of
those killed in the previous year — the deadliest death
toll in nearly two decades. The heinous attack on the
Palestinian village of Huwwara also raised alarm about
the trajectory of upcoming events, in particular if Israel
continues to embolden settlers, provide them with legal
immunity and exploit them as a tool to help confiscate
more occupied Palestinian land, while continuing its
settlement activities.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to the
fact that, according to the United Nations, there are
almost 700,000 settlers in 279 illegally built settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory, 147 of which are
outposts. Those numbers represent alarming facts on
the ground and serve to highlight the urgent need to
protect the two-State solution, which represents the
vision agreed upon by the international community and
the Council to end the conflict. That is also the only
solution that will ensure that the two States of Palestine
and Israel live side by side in peace, security and
mutual recognition. Therefore, we reiterate our call on
Israel to immediately cease all its settlement activities,
reverse the negative trends on the ground and uphold its
responsibilities in accordance with international law,
including international humanitarian law.

S/PV.9309

It is clear that the current phase of the conflict is
very delicate and dangerous, in particular as we witness
the continued violations of the fragile truce on the Gaza
Strip, as well as the recent increase in violence through
the exchange of missiles between southern Lebanon
and Israel. Those clashes and increased tensions reflect
the regional dimensions of the conflict and the fragility
of the security and stability of the situation. Therefore,
it is no longer possible for the international community
to address the conflict with the complacency that we
witnessed in previous years. The current situation
requires maintaining the pressure to reduce escalation
on all fronts, continuing the calls for exercising
maximum restraint and avoiding the adoption of
unilateral measures. We must not waste the current
opportunity to build on the momentum generated by
the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings, at which the
two parties were able to reach a mutual understanding,
following the lapse of serious talks since 2014. As
such, we must ensure that the parties are committed to
and implement that understanding and intensify their
efforts to restore confidence, which will pave the way
to resuming direct negotiations on final-status issues.
The main responsibility for ending violence lies
with the parties that instigated it in the first place. As
members of the international community and of the
organ responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we also have the responsibility to
reject any violations of international law and Security
Council resolutions. As confirmed in the Council’s
recent presidential statement (S/PRST/2023/1), that
includes all acts of violence directed against civilians.
We look forward to the international community
continuing to express its categorical rejection of any
rhetoric that incites escalation. The current tensions
cannot withstand any further incitement of violence
and hatred. What is at stake is not only the fate of the
two peoples, who deserve to live in peace and security,
but also the fate of the security and stability of the
entire region. For its part, the United Arab Emirates
will continue to support all regional and international
efforts aimed at achieving those goals. We will
continue our unwavering solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people and their legitimate right to establish
an independent Palestinian State, based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Finally, the ongoing challenges and crises in our
region, including the most recent developments in
the Sudan, make it imperative to focus on the voices

23-1163311/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that call for dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
conflicts. We must employ all available diplomatic
means and open communication channels to avoid
tensions and foster stability across the region. We hope
that multilateral action will prove its ability to avoid the
deadly conflicts looming on the horizon.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.
France is concerned about the current cycle of
violence in the occupied Palestinian territories and
in Israel. We condemn all violence against civilians,
whether it involves attacks by Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians or terrorist attacks against Israeli
civilians. We call on Israel to protect Palestinian
civilians, in line with its international obligations.
The cycle of violence, fuelled by despair on each side,
can end only when Israeli settlement comes to an end.
France will never recognize the illegal annexation of
territories or the legalization of “wildcat” settlements.
On the ground, we note that annexation is accelerating
despite the commitments made by the Israeli authorities
at Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh in recent weeks. The
Knesset’s partial repeal of the 2005 disengagement law
could pave the way for the building of settlements in the
northern West Bank and for outposts to be legalized.
We have called on the Israeli authorities to reverse
that decision.
Against that backdrop, inaction is untenable and
can lead only to a regionalization of the conflict, as
we have seen with the indiscriminate firing of rockets
towards Israel from the Gaza Strip, southern Lebanon
and Syria. France has strongly condemned those
attacks and reiterates its unwavering commitment to
the security of Israel. I note that today is Remembrance
Day in Israel.
France is also committed to the stability and
sovereignty of Lebanon. The Council has the
responsibility to defend the two-State solution and
ensure compliance with the resolutions it has adopted.
France reiterates its commitment to the treaties
concluded by Israel with its neighbours, as well as to
respect for the historical status quo of the holy sites of
Jerusalem and the specific role of Jordan in that regard.
The violence that occurred at the beginning of the
month at the Esplanade of the Mosques is worrisome,
as is the growing pressure on Christian communities
in Jerusalem.
12/31

25/04/2023

We cannot continue to look the other way and
hope that the situation will not deteriorate further.
France welcomes the efforts of the United States, Egypt
and Jordan. The parties have made commitments,
in particular with regard to halting settlements,
demolitions and evictions, but also in the area of
security, and those commitments must be followed up
with action. France calls for the restoration of a political
horizon, which is the only way to recreate trust between
the parties and allow for the implementation of the
two-State solution. France stands ready to contribute
to those efforts alongside its partners, particularly
with Germany, Egypt and Jordan in the context of the
Amman group. The United Nations, in particular the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
has an important role to play in supporting those efforts.
Israelis and Palestinians alike deserve to live in peace
and security.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for
his briefing today, and we reiterate our support for his
work, which is so valuable and necessary at this time.
I also welcome the presence of the Palestinian and
Israeli delegations.
This is the eighth time this year that the Security
Council has met to discuss the Palestinian question,
which is indicative of a situation of growing tension
and violence, and the briefing we have just heard
confirms that. Ecuador is deeply concerned about the
regrettable events at the holy sites in Jerusalem at the
beginning of this month and the resulting violence.
We share the feelings of dismay and distress that the
Special Coordinator expressed at the time about the
acts of violence inside a place of worship. Attacking
and beating pilgrims is unacceptable behaviour.
We also share his rejection of the storage and use of
fireworks in the same place of worship. Sacred places
must be respected by all as spaces for reflection and
peace, but we have once again witnessed the grave
consequences of a failure to do so. We must therefore
reiterate the calls for special sensitivity and caution, in
addition to respect for the status quo of the holy sites
in Jerusalem and for the role of the Kingdom of Jordan
as their custodian. On the other hand, we deplore the
indiscriminate firing of rockets into Israeli territory, as
well as all acts of violence, terror or provocation. We
call on the parties to respect international law, human
rights law and international humanitarian law, including
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the principles of distinction and proportionality, while
reminding them of their obligation to protect civilians.
The cycle of violence must be broken immediately.
The regrettable events of the past must be investigated
and those responsible brought to justice, but they cannot
be a pretext for further violence. Revenge is not justice
and does not lead to peace. The first step in breaking
the cycle of violence is refraining from all words and
deeds of incitement and provocation. Leaders are the
first who should demonstrate responsibility and selfrestraint in that regard to avoid aggravating tensions. It
is very difficult to make progress towards a definitive
solution if leaders, through their words and actions,
promote a short-term vision and seek only popularity,
even at the cost of pushing peace further away. We
therefore consider the high-level meetings that took
place in February in Aqaba, Jordan, and in March in
Sharm El-Sheikh, Egypt, with the participation of
Israel, the Palestinian Authority, Jordan, Egypt and the
United States, to be a positive development. We hope
that the meetings between the parties will continue
and that the agreements reached will be implemented.
Sincere dialogue is the only pathway to détente.
Finally, Ecuador reaffirms its solidarity with the
Palestinian people and reiterates its commitment to
remedying their plight, as well as to the right of the
Israeli people to live in peace. That will be achieved
only with a political, definitive and just solution
for the parties, and with the establishment of two
States — Palestine and Israel — on the basis of the
recognized 1967 borders and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing to
the Council.
As it is for many others, the unresolved aspiration
of the Palestinian people for a safe and secure homeland
remains a source of anguish for us. The manifestation
of the dispute in its security implications, humanitarian
consequences and human rights issues is also of deep
concern. Ghana therefore hopes that this meeting will
help to drive our collective ambition for urgent and
pragmatic steps that can reassert a political horizon for
a two-State solution and the stability of the Middle East
region. We have three main points to make.
First, we are concerned about the policies and
actions of the Israeli Government that risk complicating
the efforts to use dialogue to seek the realization of

S/PV.9309

a two-State solution, which, regrettably, appears to
be receding with each passing day as a result of the
facts on the ground. We believe that the intentions
to annex territory in the West Bank, legalize illegal
settler outposts and expand settler activities, along
with demolitions of Palestinian-owned properties,
forced transfers and evictions, as well as the increased
risk of settler harassment, detract from the efforts to
reach a political solution, as they undermine the trust
that is required for a genuine engagement between the
two sides.
Secondly, while we welcome the recent efforts
made in the region by the Governments of China, Egypt,
Jordan, the United Arab Emirates and the United States
to help to reduce the violence, encourage dialogue, and
defuse tensions between the Palestinians and Israelis, we
remain concerned about the continuing confrontations.
Ghana encourages a strong commitment on the part
of senior officials of Israel and Palestine to working
together to avoid violence and de-escalate tensions
on the ground, in line with the outcomes of the Aqaba
and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings. We also encourage the
parties to remain committed to a cessation of hostilities
and to take further steps to prioritize the prevention
of violence and the pursuit of confidence-building
measures in order to restore mutual trust and create a
political horizon enabling the outstanding issues to be
addressed through direct dialogue.
Thirdly, we unequivocally condemn the attempts by
extremists on both sides to carry out acts of provocation,
which have recently resulted in confrontations. We are
concerned about the interminable cycle of violence in
the region, which negatively affects the economies,
health, and sociopolitical lives of millions of people in
the Middle East. We also condemn the spate of terrorist
attacks against Israel.
Lastly, we are concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people. We
are dismayed by the high levels of deprivation in Gaza
and the occupied West Bank as a result of the imposed
siege, as well as the use of excessive force by Israeli
security forces, with documented incidents of neardaily raids, arbitrary arrests, mostly of Palestinian
youths, and violations of their basic human rights, as
well as violations of international law and international
humanitarian law.
In responding to the dire humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, particularly in

23-1163313/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Gaza, we call for continued support to ensure the easing
of humanitarian access and free movement to and
from Gaza. We thank the donors that have contributed
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and encourage
further financial and relevant support for the Agency.
We urge action to resolve the deepening economic and
fiscal crisis faced by the Palestinian Authority, which
is also at the root of the threat of unrest in the occupied
Palestinian territories, especially in Area C of the West
Bank and in East Jerusalem. We urge both Israel and
Palestine to jointly establish a mechanism that will help
to improve the Palestinian people’s economic conditions
and significantly enhance the financial and fiscal
situation of the Palestinian Authority in accordance
with previous engagements and in line with the outcome
of the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings.
The unending suffering of the Palestinian people,
as well as Israel’s continuing security concerns, must
compel us to be steadfast in the pursuit of our decadeslong goal of resolving the Palestinian question. Ghana
believes firmly that advancing the peace process
will require all regional and international actors
to reinvigorate the tools of diplomacy, including
international mechanisms and processes, in order to
shepherd a comprehensive settlement of the situation in
the Middle East.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
his informative briefing.
As we heard earlier, today Israel marks the sombre
holiday of Yom HaZikaron. We join our Israeli friends
in commemorating the loss of those killed in past wars
and terrorist attacks, and we unequivocally condemn
terrorist attacks and all violence against civilians.
This has already been a painful year for both
Israelis and Palestinians, and we must all do everything
in our power to reverse those worrisome trends. Just
this month, an already tense situation nearly boiled
over into a broader regional conflict. Thankfully, we
were able to avoid that, but those stakes underscore
the imperative for all the parties to exercise restraint
in action and rhetoric in order to prevent a further
escalation of violence.
We condemn this month’s rocket attacks by
Palestinian militants from Gaza and Lebanon, as well
as the attacks launched from Syria, which endangered
civilians. Using Lebanon as a launching pad for rocket
14/31

25/04/2023

attacks against Israel only puts the Lebanese people
at risk and increases the potential for further conflict,
while the barrage of missiles launched from Lebanon
also endangered personnel from the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, who sought cover and
protection from potential harm.
The United States recognizes Israel’s ability — like
any other country — to exercise its inherent right of selfdefence. We are also deeply upset by the incidents in the
Al-Aqsa Mosque during the convergence of Ramadan
and Passover. All sides must respect and maintain the
historic status quo at Jerusalem’s holy sites, in both
word and practice. We were pleased that the final week
of Ramadan passed relatively peacefully, and I hope
that all those celebrating had a joyous Eid with their
families and loved ones, just as I hope those celebrating
Passover and Easter were able to enjoy the holidays.
Good-faith dialogue remains, without a doubt, the
best path to stability. It remains essential. The United
States applauds the efforts taken by the parties, along
with the United States, Egypt and Jordan, to de-escalate
tensions and build further trust through direct talks in
Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh. Those meetings and the
commitments the parties made were important first
steps. Now we call on the parties to fully implement
those commitments and look for opportunities for
further confidence-building measures.
The United States also remains concerned about the
financial constraints that the Palestinian people face,
and we urge our partners to take further actions to meet
the needs on the ground. We welcome the inauguration
of expanded operating hours at the Allenby Bridge
border crossing, which will allow for easier travel by
Palestinians and facilitate the transportation of goods.
However, as many of us here know, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNWRA) — a programme that provides
education, health care and relief and social services
to the Palestinian refugees — will likely run out of
funding this summer.
Over the past two years, the United States has
helped improve the lives of millions of Palestinians
by providing hundreds of millions of dollars in
contributions to UNRWA, but we are also concerned
about UNRWA’s potential financial shortfall. If
the international community does not step up, the
consequences for regional stability will be grave and
people will lose access to basic needs — and we cannot
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

allow that to happen. All those who can give must give.
Now is the time to make meaningful contributions to
UNRWA and pursue further efforts toward the longterm stabilization of its finances.
The United States believes that Israel and
Palestinians deserve equal measures of security,
prosperity and freedom, and we will continue to work
towards those goals in tangible ways. We will continue
to support a two-State solution and promote dialogue
between Israelis and Palestinians, and we will continue
to support all efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just
and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
Let us do everything possible to ensure that the days,
months and years ahead are brighter, more hopeful and
more peaceful for all.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his briefing.
Since the beginning of this year, numerous
incidents have occurred that have exacerbated tensions
between Israel and Palestine. The Security Council
has met urgently many times, including the most
recent consultations held in response to the beatings
and mass arrests of Palestinian worshippers by Israeli
security forces at the Al-Aqsa Mosque — which we
condemned — but the situation remains volatile.
Japan attaches great importance to preserving the
historic status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem.
In that regard, Prime Minister Kishida stressed the
importance of Jordan’s special role of custodianship
at the summit meeting he held this month with King
Abdullah II of Jordan. Our Prime Minister also had a
telephone call with President of the State of Israel, in
which he expressed his concern about the unilateral
measures taken by both sides. Any unilateral actions or
provocations that aggravate an already tense situation
are unacceptable.
At the same time, Japan strongly condemns
the rocket attacks by Palestinian militants. We also
condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
including the terrorist attack in Tel Aviv on 7 April.
The settlement activities of Israel in the West Bank
continue to be a cause for grave concern. It is imperative
for the Government of Israel to cease its settlement
activities, demolitions and evictions. The settlement
activities, as well as the expansion of settlements,
constitute a violation of international law and go against
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

S/PV.9309

Japan once again urges all the parties to exercise
maximum restraint and refrain from taking actions that
would escalate tensions and undermine efforts towards
peace. In that context, we welcome the serious efforts
made through the five-party talks held in Aqaba and
Sharm El-Sheikh to manage the situation on the ground
through engagement with the parties and advocacy for
the resumption of direct negotiations. The international
community should play an active role in supporting the
parties to achieve a peaceful solution. In that vein, Japan
hosted the Group of Seven Foreign Ministers’ meeting
last week, at which the Group called on the Israelis and
the Palestinians to take steps to build trust towards the
realization of a two-State solution. It also expressed
its readiness to continue assisting the Palestinians to
enhance their economic self-reliance.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
reiterate Japan’s enduring commitment to supporting
Palestinians in need, including through the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, to which Japan is one of the
largest donors.
In conclusion, peace and stability in the region
cannot be achieved without a political resolution to the
conflict. It is vital to end the cycle of violence on the
ground and promote confidence-building measures in
order to maintain the prospects for a two-State solution.
Japan stands ready to contribute to those efforts, and
we urge all the parties to engage constructively towards
reaching a two-State solution.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I too would like to thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and his
Office’s constant efforts to maintain calm, particularly
during this past month.
Regrettably, several escalations in recent weeks
against the backdrop of religious festivities have again
brought us too close to the brink of an uncontrollable
and explosive scenario, threatening to trigger wider
confrontations. Those events should serve as a wake-up
call. Malta remains extremely concerned about the
unprecedented levels of violence, the provocations and
the unilateral actions, which jeopardize any attempts
to constructively remedy the situation and continue
to directly impact the lives and security of thousands
of people. The protection of civilians demands our
undivided attention and focus. Malta unreservedly
condemns all acts of terrorism and incitements to
terrorism, which continue to threaten civilians and result

23-1163315/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in further tragic loss of life. Acts of terrorism can never
be justified. We equally condemn the indiscriminate
rocket fire from Gaza, and more recently from southern
Lebanon. In that respect, Malta reiterates that Israel has
a legitimate right to self-defence.
Nonetheless, we condemn Israel’s excessive
use of force, and stress the importance of respecting
the principles of necessity and proportionality
and especially the responsibility to protect women
and children. We call on all the parties to respect
international law, including international humanitarian
law. We also echo presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1,
of 20 February, which opposes the taking of unilateral
measures, including Israel’s expansion of settlements,
legalization of settlement outposts and demolition of
Palestinian homes. We are deeply concerned about
various worrisome legal amendments and policies
regarding settlements, which continue to contribute
to the fracturing of the occupied Palestinian territory,
particularly in the West Bank. The recent repeal
of the 2005 disengagement law and the transfer of
the governance of Palestinian territory to a civilian
administration are issues of deep concern, exacerbating
conflict and obstructing peace.
At the same time, we underscore the importance
of ensuring that the Palestinian Authority holds
democratic elections. We remain encouraged by the
signing in October 2022 of the Algiers Declaration
and continue to urge the Palestinian factions to engage
in good faith in the reconciliation process as a vital
step towards a renewed Palestinian Government that
is representative of the Palestinian people. Along the
same lines, Malta expresses concern about the political
and fiscal situation of the Palestinian Authority, which
is having a negative impact on the livelihoods of
Palestinians. The disturbing events that we witnessed
in recent weeks at the holy sites and the cyclical
violence that ensued should serve as an additional
warning for actors to de-escalate and promote calm
and constructive dialogue. They came uncomfortably
close to triggering a conflict with tragic ramifications.
It is imperative that the international community focus
on encouraging a return to a political horizon. Malta
welcomes the continued attempts to re-establish crucial
dialogue, including the meetings held in Aqaba and
Sharm El-Sheikh, while hoping that such efforts lead to
meaningful de-escalation.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to a
just and comprehensive resolution of this conflict in the
16/31

25/04/2023

Middle East based on a two-State solution, within the
pre-1967 borders, addressing the legitimate aspirations
of both sides, with Jerusalem as the future capital of
two States living side by side in peace and security,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and internationally agreed parameters. We continue to
believe firmly that this remains the only viable path
to peace.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
At the outset, I want to recognize that today is
Memorial Day in Israel and express the hope that this
conflict, which has cost so many lives on all sides,
may be brought to a just and peaceful end. I thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and
acknowledge the presence here earlier today of Foreign
Minister Al-Malki.
Sadly, as we have heard, in recent weeks we have
witnessed violence that is unacceptable. We call on
all the parties to desist from unilateral measures that
undermine peace, stability and the possibility of a twoState solution.
First, de-escalation remains imperative. We
condemn indiscriminate rocket fire into Israel from
terror factions in Gaza, Syria and Lebanon. Nineteen
Israelis have been killed this year in acts of terrorism,
and 90 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli
security forces. Among those, three British-Israeli
nationals, members of the same family, were victims
of a terror attack in the West Bank on 7 April. We
urge the Palestinian Authority to condemn incitements
to violence. There is never any justification for such
acts. Among Palestinian fatalities, a 15-year-old boy
was killed near Jericho on 10 April. While Israel has a
legitimate right to self-defence, its security forces must
exercise restraint in the use of force and investigate
all fatalities.
Secondly, we urge all the parties to cease unilateral
actions that diminish prospects for peace. We condemn
the raids made by Israeli security forces on the Al-Aqsa
Mosque during Ramadan, injuring many worshippers,
and we call on all parties to respect the historic status
quo and the Hashemite custodianship.
Thirdly, we urgently need to redouble efforts
towards achieving long-term peace. We applaud the
recent efforts to lay a foundation for dialogue, and
notably the initiatives by Jordan, Egypt and the United
States. It remains critical to ensure that both Israel and
the Palestinians respect the commitments they have
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

made, including Israel’s commitment to suspending
the advancement of settlements. Settlements are illegal
under international law and threaten the viability of
a two-State solution. Our position is reflected in our
enduring support for resolution 2334 (2016).
The United Kingdom remains committed to working
with Israel, the Palestinian Authority and international
partners to end the terrorism that Israel faces and the
destructive cycle of violence that continues. Peace will
be sustainable only if both Israelis and Palestinians
recommit to a negotiated settlement leading to a secure
Israel alongside a viable Palestinian State.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for
his briefing at this high-level debate.
Switzerland is following the situation in the Middle
East with full attention. The period around the major
religious holidays was marked by acts of violence in
the heart of the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount
in Jerusalem, followed by the launching of rockets
into Israel from Gaza, southern Lebanon and Syria.
Switzerland firmly condemns those acts of violence.
The risk of escalation is real. It will be vital to
de-escalate tensions in and around the holy sites in
Jerusalem. We call once again for respect for the status
quo at the Al-Haram Al-Sharif/Temple Mount and for
Jordan’s role as custodian. Concrete steps must also
be taken to promote the peaceful coexistence of all
communities in Jerusalem.
With regard to the Gaza Strip, despite the positive
development in the number of exit permits issued
by Israel last year, especially for day labourers, the
humanitarian situation remains worrisome, with
60 per cent of Gazans dependent on humanitarian
aid. Considering that most types of medical care are
unavailable in Gaza, we condemn the fact that more
than 200 patients did not receive exit permits in
February. Switzerland would like to point out that as
the occupying Power, Israel is obliged to ensure that
the basic needs of the population of Gaza are met.
While it is Israel’s right to impose restrictions on the
entry of certain goods, the consequences of that for the
population must be proportionate to the legitimate goal
of ensuring its security. Switzerland calls for lifting the
blockade, which has now lasted almost 16 years. We
also remain concerned about the high level of violence
in both the occupied Palestinian territory and Israel, and

S/PV.9309

we urge the parties to protect the civilian population by
meeting their respective obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law. In that regard,
Switzerland notes that a total of 21 children have died
in violent circumstances to date in 2023. We therefore
call on all parties to continue the dialogue initiated in
December with the Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict and to take measures to prevent
and end grave violations against children.
In the current situation, which remains highly
volatile, Switzerland calls on the leaders of all parties
to make every effort to reduce tensions and refrain
from any unilateral measure, act of provocation or
inflammatory language that could fuel the conflict.
We call on the parties to implement the commitments
made in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh in the wake of
presidential statement S/PRST/2023/1, of 20 February.
Switzerland is concerned about the continued
planning of settlements in recent weeks, despite those
commitments. We recall that settlements are illegal
under international humanitarian law and represent
an obstacle to peace. There is an urgent need for the
parties to address the root causes of the conflict.
The recent commitments made should serve as
a concrete basis for confidence-building towards a
negotiated two-State solution in accordance with
international law and internationally agreed parameters,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Switzerland stands ready to facilitate the resumption of
a credible dialogue towards such a solution, including
through its good offices.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): Exactly
one year ago, the Security Council met in this very
Chamber to hold an open debate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question (see
S/PV.9021). The distressing fact is that the scene is
much the same: the same cycle of violence, the same
rhetoric and the same deadlock.
I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for his
enlightening briefing and his tireless efforts in the
search for peace between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority. I also welcome the presence of the Foreign
Minister of the Observer State of Palestine and the
representative of Israel.
The Special Coordinator’s briefing on this day of
remembrance for Israel augurs more concern than hope.
The violence witnessed over the past few weeks has

23-1163317/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

taken place in a particularly volatile context. Tensions
reached new heights on 4 April, when Israeli forces
raided the Al-Aqsa Mosque. That grave incident joins
the various other violations of the historical status quo
of the holy sites that have occurred since the beginning
of this year. Those violations continue to undermine
the coexistence of all communities, particularly
during such a sensitive period of celebration for
the three monotheistic religions of Islam, Judaism
and Christianity.
The status quo of the holy sites must be respected
and preserved. To that end, we recognize the crucial
role of the Kingdom of Jordan as the official custodian
of the Muslim holy sites in Jerusalem. We also reiterate
our support for the efforts of the King of Morocco, as
Chair of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s
Al-Quds Committee, to preserve the special status of
the holy city as a symbol of the common heritage of
humankind and of the three monotheistic religions,
as well as a place of dialogue and mutual respect. We
echo the Pope’s call during the celebration of Easter
for a resumption of dialogue, in a climate of trust and
mutual respect between Israelis and Palestinians, so
that peace may reign in the holy city and throughout
the entire region.
The recent flare-up on the ground — with rocket
fire from Gaza, southern Lebanon and Syria towards
Israel and bombings by Israeli forces against southern
Lebanon, the Gaza Strip and Syria — has served as a
reminder of the regional significance of the conflict.
The upsurge in hostilities in recent weeks, manifested
in brutality and the disproportionate use of force
against civilians, has led to an increasing number of
victims. The year 2023 is set to equal the disastrous
and dramatic record of 2022 in terms of the number of
civilian casualties, including women and children. In
that connection, the impact of the conflict on children is
terrifying. They are being killed or seriously injured, if
not recruited or used. That is unacceptable. We urge both
Israeli forces and Palestinian armed groups to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
including the principles of distinction, proportionality
and precaution.
My country reiterates its call on the political
leaders of both sides to refrain from, prevent, combat
and punish the hate speech and intolerant rhetoric that
fuel belligerence and undermine peace efforts.
18/31

25/04/2023

On the sensitive issue of the return of human
remains to Palestinian and Israeli families, we call on
the parties to seek a solution that will generate a climate
of confidence for a lasting peace. The issue is all the
more sensitive as it concerns respect for funeral rites,
which are an integral part of the culture and identity of
both parties.
The security situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory remains precarious and volatile, due in part
to the ongoing policy of illegal settlement expansion
and the demolition of Palestinian homes and other
evictions affecting many Palestinian families. Such
acts contribute to the destabilization of the occupied
Palestinian territory, exacerbating tensions in the West
Bank and fuelling the victims’ anger and desire for
revenge. It is therefore essential to implement resolution
2334 (2016), which calls for an immediate and complete
cessation of all settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.
In the same vein, the particularly worrisome
economic situation of the Palestinian Authority, which
has been aggravated by the freezing of tax funds
collected by Israel from Palestinian Authority workers
on the Authority’s behalf, requires urgent measures
aimed at achieving an economic recovery. Free access
to the Israeli labour market for Palestinian workers
in Gaza and the West Bank, as well as the lifting of
all restrictions on access to materials in Gaza, are
initiatives to be encouraged.
Israel and the Palestinian Authority must centre
their actions in a dynamic of appeasement. It is obvious
that a complex situation with inextricable stakes cannot
be resolved by the protagonists’ unilateral initiatives,
but can be resolved only by constructive dialogue in
good faith between the parties. Now more than ever, it
is time to activate the channels of diplomacy in order
to ensure that restraint, reason and respect for the right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination and
of Israel to security prevail in order to relaunch the
peace process.
We welcome the meeting held in Sharm El-Sheikh
on 19 March, under the auspices of the Arab Republic
of Egypt, among Jordanian, Israeli, Palestinian and
American political and security officials, in the
framework of the agreement reached in Aqaba, Jordan
in February. Gabon reiterates its commitment to a twoState solution, which cannot be achieved without the
resolute political commitment of all the parties, the
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

mobilization of regional players and the firm will of the
international community to work harder than ever to
restore peace between Israelis and Palestinians. That is
the only way to give a greater chance to the two-State
solution for which we all yearn.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): We commend the
Russian Federation’s decision to convene today’s
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestine question, which we
consider to be a high priority on the Council’s agenda.
We want to express our deep appreciation to Mr. Tor
Wennesland, the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for the insightful information
he shared at today’s meeting. And we welcome the
presence in the Chamber of His Excellency Mr. Riad
Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates
of the State of Palestine.
As time goes by, the simmering conflict between
Israel and Palestine seems to be boiling over,
descending into a dangerous and permanent state
of confrontation. We are deeply concerned about the
increased tensions between Israel and Palestine, which
leave very few prospects for lasting peace and goodneighbourliness between the two peoples. The high
costs of the conflict have had dire consequences, with
the most worrisome factors being the high number of
casualties who are dead, injured or imprisoned and the
high incidence of land occupation, both unfolding on
a daily basis. We deeply deplore the situation, which
should be addressed as a matter of urgency by the
Council and the international community at large. The
illegal occupation and aggression are unacceptable and
must cease. The Council has a primary responsibility to
protect the most vulnerable people from this protracted
conflict. In that regard, we deem it important to ensure
that the Council’s resolutions on the matter are fully
implemented, in the interests of peace and stability in
the Middle East.
We believe in and defend the long-standing concept
of a two-State solution. In that connection, we attach
great importance to a resumption of negotiations
and a revitalization of the peace process between the
parties. Political will and a strong sense of commitment
from both parties are the most crucial elements. The
Palestinian people have been rightly clamouring for full
recognition and implementation of their right to selfdetermination. We consider that demand fair, just and
legitimate under international law and the principles of
the United Nations, particularly at a time when already

S/PV.9309

serious grievances have been amplified in the wake of
the illegal colonial project that is dispossessing and
displacing the Palestinian people from their lands. Its
acts constitute a gross violation of international law and
of the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions and decisions.
Mozambique is deeply concerned about the
prevailing situation of violence at the holy sites of
Jerusalem, particularly the invasion and desacralization
of the holy sites. We call on Israel, the occupying
Power, to refrain from such acts. More importantly,
we need to bring Israel and Palestine back to the
negotiating table as soon as possible. We must support
them in recommitting their political will to finding
lasting peace and a long-term solution. In that regard,
we encourage all initiatives, regional or international,
aimed at reaching a negotiated settlement to the conflict.
We strongly appeal to the international community
for increased, predictable and sustainable support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the World Food
Programme. Mozambique reiterates its commitment to
supporting dialogue and constructive initiatives for
lasting peace and security in Israel and Palestine.
We are aware that no two conflicts can be equated
with each other. But the experience of the protracted
and challenging problems we faced in the past in
Southern Africa shows that the right side of history will
always prevail. It should serve as a token of inspiration
for finding a solution to the difficult and daunting
problems in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Brazil thanks
the Russian presidency for organizing today’s open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We are grateful to Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing and welcome
the participation of Mr. Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of Palestine, in today’s meeting.
The Council has met several times since the
beginning of the year to address the situation in Israel
and Palestine, as a series of crises have unfolded in
an increasingly complex and volatile environment.
Last month, ahead of Ramadan, Passover and Easter,
we appealed for calm and maximum restraint (see
S/PV.9290), while anticipating the possibility of a
repetition of the scenes of violence seen during the
religious holidays of previous years. Regrettably,

23-1163319/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

appalling incidents, such as raids inside the Al-Aqsa
Mosque at Al-Haram Al-Sharif, deeply disturbed the
period of religious celebrations, injured worshippers and
damaged buildings. Once again, heightened tensions
raised the possibility of an escalation of violence with
the potential to result in direct confrontation. The
stability of the entire region was put at risk. Brazil
is also extremely concerned about the launching of
rockets against Israeli civilians from the Gaza Strip and
Lebanese territory.
Access to religious sites is an essential component
of freedom of religion and belief. Respecting the
historical status quo of Jerusalem’s holy sites is
critical, as well as maintaining the custodianship of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. Brazil condemns the
actions undertaken in violation of the historical status
quo of the holy sites and regrets that many worshippers
were ultimately prevented from celebrating in peace
and security. The fact that religious holidays of such
significance to Muslims, Jews and Christians alike
have become a period of permanent tension should not
be normalized. Nor should we normalize the current
overall situation characterized by ongoing violence
and grave violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. As the Special
Coordinator often reiterates, and we agree, managing
this conflict in perpetuity is not a viable option. On
the contrary, it moves us further away from the goal
of lasting peace. If the core issues driving the conflict
are not addressed, this intensified cycle of violence
will continue.
Some elements are crucial here. First, Israel
must immediately cease all settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem. As one of the main obstacles to peace,
the continued expansion of settlements is in flagrant
violation of international law, including resolution
2334 (2016), and it threatens the viability of a future
Palestinian State and, therefore, the prospects for a
two-State solution. Israel must also put an end to the
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian structures, as
well as to the displacement of Palestinian families.
Secondly, all acts of violence against civilians must
cease. Brazil condemns the settler-related violence, the
disproportionate use of force by security forces, as well
as the acts of terror, which are never justifiable. The
Israeli authorities must provide adequate protection
to the Palestinian civilian population, as required by
international law, as well as investigate and bring to
20/31

25/04/2023

justice perpetrators of violence. Leaders on all sides
must promote calm, avoid spreading inflammatory
rhetoric and speak out against actions aimed at
inciting violence.
Thirdly, and as important to peace as the
aforementioned measures, is improving the living
conditions of the Palestinian people, restoring their
hope for a better future. Economic growth may also
contribute to intra-Palestinian reconciliation, which
is also a crucial step towards stabilization and the
resumption of a genuine dialogue.
Palestinian refugees should also not be forgotten.
We acknowledge the importance of increased,
predictable and sustainable support for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). For as long as
it has existed, UNRWA has played a crucial role in
providing relief and assistance to millions of people.
The work of the Agency is key to the maintenance of
stability in the region.
In conclusion, Brazil reaffirms its long-standing
commitment to a two-State solution, with Palestine
and Israel fully viable and living together in peace and
security within mutually agreed and internationally
recognized borders. We therefore encourage all parties
to work in good faith and with renewed political will to
leave this vicious cycle of violence behind. They should
pursue the path of dialogue, working together in a
constructive manner towards lasting sustainable peace.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank the Special
Coordinator for his briefing.
We are deeply troubled by the fact that, as we
gather here every month, we note over and over again
that the situation in the Middle East remains marred
by pervasive endless violence with the unfortunate
consequences that we have witnessed so many times.
It is dangerous, it is unsustainable, and it leads to a
dead end.
As Israelis gather to commemorate Memorial Day,
we reiterate our strong and unreserved condemnation
of terrorist attacks in Israel. Nineteen people have
lost their lives this year in such attacks, including
four children and European nationals. The deliberate
targeting of innocent civilians with indiscriminate
rocket attacks from Gaza, Lebanon and Syria, or other
acts such as the one that was perpetrated yesterday in
Jerusalem when a vehicle hit pedestrians near a busy
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

market, are unacceptable, unjustifiable and should be
condemned by everyone. There can be no justification
ever for terror acts, and we support Israel’s right to selfdefence through proportionate response.
A continued tense situation on the ground has,
unfortunately, resulted in a troublingly high number of
Palestinian civilians — 90 since the beginning of this
year — who have lost their lives, including innocent
women and children. We deplore the indiscriminate
violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinian civilians,
including the destruction of homes and properties.
Unlawful action should be investigated, and perpetrators
brought to account. We call for full implementation of
international humanitarian law and for the protection of
civilians and their properties in all circumstances.
We reiterate our position that unilateral actions drive
the parties further apart and undermine trust between
them, already in very short supply. In that respect,
we recall our principled position that settlements are
illegal under international law. They should stop, as
they constitute an obstacle to peace and hamper the
prospect for a two-State solution. We call on both sides
to exercise maximum restraint and spare no efforts in
finding ways to ease the situation, bearing in mind that
the proliferation of violence will do no good to anyone.
Inflammatory rhetoric, incitement to violence and hate
speech are unacceptable as they only breed violence,
which will only continue to harm civilians.
Those worrisome developments reinforce the call
for both parties, the Israelis and the Palestinians, to abide
by and implement in good faith the commitments made
in Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh. Every step towards
confidence-building measures is an opportunity for
them to open up the perspective of the currently blurred
political horizon.
The heightened tensions and violence in and
around the holy sites are a cause for concern, which
reveal and underscore the complexities of the situation.
The places of worship should be for safe, peaceful
and dignified religious rituals. Political and religious
community leaders on all sides must reject incitement
and provocations. We are, nonetheless, pleased to note
that a record number of 1.5 million Muslim worshippers
visited the Al-Aqsa Mosque throughout the holy month
of Ramadan to exercise their rights.
Peaceful coexistence among Muslims, Jews and
Christians and respect for religious diversity and
tolerance towards different faiths and beliefs are

S/PV.9309

fundamental values to be dearly preserved. They are at
the heart of efforts to promote understanding and social
cohesion and the best antidote against violence and
conflict anywhere, even more so in the Middle East. This
confirms the crucial importance of the preservation of
the historic status quo of the holy places, and we praise
the special role of the custodianship of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan.
Let me express once more Albania’s full support
for the need, the urgent need, to restore a political
horizon for a just and negotiated two-State solution
within the 1967 borders, unless otherwise agreed by
the parties. We see no alternative to comprehensive
peace between Israelis and Palestinians. It means
a safe and secure Israel and a viable, independent
and democratic Palestine. There has never been, and
we do not believe there will ever be, an alternative
to reconciliation through constructive dialogue and
mutual understanding. A solution with two States for
two peoples, with mutual recognition and Jerusalem as
shared capital, will ensure that both sides, the Israelis
and the Palestinians, live as neighbours in safety and
security and enjoy freedom, dignity and justice.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
am honoured to participate in this meeting as the
representative of Mr. Qin Gang, State Councilor and
Foreign Minister of China.
I would like to begin by thanking Foreign Minister
Lavrov for presiding over this meeting. I also thank
Special Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Palestine, in today’s
meeting. The series of questions he raised in his speech
revealed the essence of the elusive settlement of the
long-standing Palestinian issue. The international
community should attach great importance to it and
seriously reflect on it.
Muslims all over the world have just celebrated Eid
Al-Fitr. I would like to take this opportunity to extend my
warm greetings to our many Muslim friends, brothers
and sisters who celebrate this holiday. Regrettably,
the situation in the occupied Palestinian territory has
become tense for the whole world during Ramadan
over the past few years. Violence in the West Bank has
intensified, with frequent tensions in East Jerusalem
and Gaza. The international community cannot become
accustomed to this or let it continue unchecked. Instead,
we must invest further in promoting a comprehensive,

23-1163321/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

just and lasting settlement to the Palestinian issue with
the greatest sense of urgency.
First, we must oppose violence and incitement and
seek common security. Over the past month, Israeli
forces and police have repeatedly stormed the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, beating and removing Muslims, thus shattering
the peace and tranquillity of Ramadan and triggering
new tensions. China condemns all acts of violence
against civilians and calls on all parties to exercise
calm and restraint and to put an end to all extremist
and provocative statements and actions. Palestine and
Israel are neighbours that cannot be moved away from
one another. The security of one party cannot be based
on the insecurity of the other. In order to fundamentally
break the cycle of violence and establish lasting
peace, we must give equal attention to the legitimate
security concerns of both sides and encourage both
sides to achieve common security through dialogue
and negotiation.
Secondly, we must stop unilateral actions to change
the status quo and earnestly uphold the international
rule of law. Settlement activity in the occupied territory
is illegal. Since the beginning of this year, Israel has
continued to pursue unilateral actions on approving
returns, legalizing settlements and building new
settlements, thus encroaching on Palestinian land and
resources, squeezing the living space of the Palestinian
people and building a territorially contiguous,
independent and sovereign Palestinian State even more
elusive. We urge Israel to comply with the requirements
of resolution 2334 (2016) and effectively stop all
settlement activities. We also note that unilateral
measures to change the status quo of Jerusalem are null
and void. China calls for earnest respect for the historic
status quo of Jerusalem’s holy sites and Jordan’s
custodianship over them.
Thirdly, we must protect peoples’ livelihoods
and promote economic development in Palestine.
The prolonged occupation and frequent turmoil have
severely restricted the viability of the Palestinian
economy, leading to the continuous deterioration of the
situation of the Palestinian people. Israel should cease
and lift unreasonable restrictions on the movement
of people and goods, as well as on land use in the
occupied territories, create conditions conducive to
the development of Palestinian communities in the
West Bank and lift the blockade of the Gaza Strip
as soon as possible. The international community
should also provide assistance to Palestine through
22/31

25/04/2023

multiple channels in order to help Palestine alleviate
its financial crisis and ensure the provision of public
services. China will continue to do what it can in order
to provide humanitarian and development assistance to
Palestine and increase its support for the work of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Fourthly, we must adhere to the two-State solution
and promote the resumption of peace talks. Facts have
repeatedly shown that piecemeal crisis management is
difficult to sustain, nor can it replace a comprehensive
and fair solution. Not long ago, Saudi Arabia and Iran
resumed diplomatic relations through dialogue, setting
an example of resolving differences through dialogue.
On other issues in the Middle East, a positive step
towards dialogue and reconciliation are also in the
making. It is never too late to do the right thing. State
Councilor and Foreign Minister Qin Gang recently held
separate phone calls with the Palestinian and Israeli
Foreign Ministers. He conveyed that China encourages
Israel and Palestine to show political courage and
take steps to resume peace talks on the basis of the
two-State solution. China is willing to facilitate such
endeavours. We expect the international community
to step up coordination, take substantive steps and
make unremitting efforts to promote the resumption
of Palestinian-Israeli talks and implement the twoState solution.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We are glad to be
back here in the Chamber. We commend the Russian
presidency for hosting this debate on the Middle East.
We also recognize today the important contribution
of the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, Mr. Wennesland, and thank him for his
tireless efforts.
We echo the warnings of the international
community that the current cycle of conflict in the
Middle East region, especially the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, is cause for serious concern. The conflict
has the potential for further escalation, which could
lead to the destabilization of the entire region and
beyond. It requires our urgent and immediate attention.
Kazakhstan echoes the common concern about the
continued expansion of settlements across the occupied
Palestinian territory.
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Kazakhstan calls on interested parties to refrain
from any action that could undermine the advancement
of the two-State solution. We appeal to all political,
community and religious leaders to spare no effort to
end the intensifying hostilities.
In the light of the above, Kazakhstan suggests the
return to dialogue between all parties to the conflict,
accompanied by new measures for building trust and
improving the humanitarian situation in Gaza. That
is essential because Gaza remains an integral part of
the two-State solution, in keeping with relevant United
Nations resolutions.
Given that both Israel and Palestine are members of
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building
Measures in Asia, we call on them to use the multilateral
cooperation mechanisms of that organization to bring
closer their countries’ positions.
Kazakhstan reiterates the urgent need to support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in its critical role
of mitigating the deteriorating situation in Gaza and
promoting the long-term development of the area.
The current situation that we are witnessing today is
one of deepening poverty, unemployment and chronic
economic regression, which will fuel further conflict.
The deterioration of the security and socioeconomic
situation across the occupied Palestinian territory must
be reversed.
Kazakhstan’s long-standing policy is the creation of
an independent State of Palestine coexisting peacefully
with Israel within the 1967 borders. We join others in
reinforcing the two-State solution as the only viable
option for durable peace.
Kazakhstan stands ready to join every mediation
effort, with a view to ensuring that both Israel and
Palestine can live in peace, security, progress and
prosperity — the long-cherished goals of both nations.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Cuba.
Mr. Peñalver Portal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We align ourselves with the statements made by
the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, and of Senegal,
in its capacity as Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

S/PV.9309

We welcome the Joint Trilateral Agreement reached
by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran and the People’s Republic of China, whereby
Saudi Arabia and Iran re-established diplomatic
relations and reopened embassies. We hope that this
step will contribute to regional stability and security.
Looking at the situation in the Middle East over
the past quarter, that positive development contrasts
with deplorable developments. During the month of
Ramadan, the climate of violence was exacerbated
by the Israeli incursion into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and
attacks on worshippers, which are flagrant violations of
international norms and shock the religious sentiment
of Palestinians. This took place in a context where
violence, arrest, detention, imprisonment, human
rights violations and killings of Palestinian civilians
are daily occurrences in the occupied territories. The
Palestinian people continue to suffer from Israeli
apartheid practices in their own territory.
We reject the Israeli military aggression and
occupation of the Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, along with Israel’s annexation policy
and its illegal colonization practices, including the
continued destruction of homes and other properties,
the forced displacement of Palestinian families and the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements.
We condemn the continuing blockade of the
Gaza Strip and the latent plans for annexation of the
Palestinian territories of the Jordan Valley and other
parts of the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
Contrary to the notion that is attempted to be
imposed as part of efforts to rewrite history, the
United States is responsible for repeatedly obstructing
Security Council action to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and has, in turn, ensured Israel’s impunity,
the continuation of its policy of aggression and its
unwillingness to reach a peace agreement that would
allow the creation of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and which would also
guarantee the right of return of the refugees. As long
as this situation persists, we will continue to reiterate
our condemnation of the unilateral decisions of the
United States Government to recognize Jerusalem
as the capital of Israel and establish its diplomatic
representation in that city, disrespecting its historical
status, as well as to recognize Israel’s sovereignty over

23-1163323/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Syrian Golan, which constitute grave violations of
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Double standards, selectivity, inconsistency and
political manipulation, which undermine the cause of
international peace and security to the detriment of
the mandate of the Security Council, must cease. We
reiterate our demand for Israel’s full and unconditional
withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and all occupied
Arab territories. We demand the cessation of external
interference in Syria and call for full respect for its
sovereignty and territorial integrity, while supporting
the search for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the
situation imposed on that sister Arab nation.
We ratify our support for the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran and our support
for the inalienable right of States to the peaceful use
of nuclear energy. We reiterate our rejection of the
unilateral withdrawal of the United States from the
JCPOA. We demand an immediate and unconditional
end to the arbitrary and illegal unilateral coercive
measures imposed by the United States against nations
in the Middle East.
We will continue to strongly support the accession
of the State of Palestine to the United Nations as a
full Member. We support its President’s call for an
international peace conference.
It is urgent to heed the historic demands of the
United Nations, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and other international actors
in favour of the just cause of the Palestinian people. We
expect this Security Council to fulfil its mandate.

25/04/2023

Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor
Wennesland, for his briefing.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan stresses
the importance of making concerted regional and
international efforts to stop the deterioration we
are seeing in the occupied Palestinian territories
and to ensure de-escalation by putting an end to all
measures that stand in the way. That would pave the
way to relaunching serious and effective negotiations
to achieve a just and lasting peace based on the twoState solution. Achieving that peace in accordance with
Security Council resolutions to establish an independent
sovereign Palestinian State within the borders of
4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side in peace and security with Israel, is the
basis for establishing peace and security in the region.
Protecting the right of all peoples of the region to
peace, security and stability requires putting an end
to all unilateral measures by Israel that undermine the
two-State solution, most notably settlement activities,
confiscations of land and evictions of Palestinians from
their homes.
It is also important to respect the legal and historic
status quo of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in
Jerusalem. All practices that undermine the status quo
must stop. As the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is
historically the custodian of the Muslim and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem, it will continue to play its full
role in protecting those sites and preserve their Arab
Muslim and Christian identity. We will continue to
keep the legal and historic status of those holy sites.

I now give the floor to the representative of Jordan.

In that context, we stress once again that the
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, with its area of
144,000 square metres, is a place of worship exclusively
for Muslims. The Jerusalem Waqf and Al-Aqsa Mosque
Affairs Administration, which is affiliated with the
Jordanian Awkaf Ministry, is the sole authority with
the prerogative of managing the affairs of Al- Haram
Al-Sharif and regulating entry into that holy site.

Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the assumption
of the Russian Federation of the presidency of the
Security Council. I wish you and your delegation every
success in leading the Council’s deliberations this
month. I also welcome Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, and
Mr. Riad Al-Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
state of Palestine, to the Council. I thank the Special

Jordan will also continue to cooperate with all
brothers and partners to stop the deterioration of the
situation, end violence and its causes and find political
horizon for the achievement of a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace based on a two-State solution.
That peace is a strategic Jordanian, Palestinian and
Arab choice. It is a necessity at both the regional and
international levels. Working towards establishing such
peace is a joint responsibility.

The President (spoke in Russian): I would like
to remind all speakers to limit their statements to no
more than four minutes in order to enable the Council
to carry out its work expeditiously.

24/31

23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jordan stresses the importance of implementing all
outcomes of the Aqaba and Sharm El-Sheikh meetings,
which led to a number of commitments, most notably
upholding the signed agreements and stopping all
unilateral measures, ceasing violence and respecting
the legal and historic status of the city of Jerusalem.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council this month. Egypt highly values
the holding of today’s meeting at the ministerial
level, which is consistent with Russia’s long-standing
position of support for Palestinian legitimate rights. I
would also like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Khalifa
Shaheen Al Marar, Minister of State at the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the sisterly United
Arab Emirates, and His Excellency Mr. Riad Al-Malki,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of sisterly Palestine, to
today’s meeting.
I would like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for
his briefing.
Egypt aligns itself with the statements of the Group
of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Tensions have worsened in the Palestinian
occupied territories over the past few weeks as a
result of continued Israeli violations in the West
Bank, including occupied East Jerusalem, through
settlement expansion, confiscation of land, demolition
of Palestinian houses, storming Palestinian cities and
continued killings by occupation forces and settlers
against unarmed civilians, including children. Since
the beginning of the year, the number of Palestinian
martyrs has amounted to 98. The Egyptian Ministry for
Foreign Affairs recently condemned those practices on
several occasions.
As the situation remained tense, Egypt, in
coordination with the United States and the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, convened two meetings in Aqaba
and Sharm El-Sheikh in February and March, with
the participation of both Palestine and Israel, aimed at
containing the situation and working on de-escalation
and self-restraint in order to spare the blood of
innocent people. A number of recommendations were
agreed during those meetings, most notably to put an

S/PV.9309

end to unilateral measures, especially when it comes
to settlements, and to respect the status quo and the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s custodianship over the
holy sites.
However, despite the agreements reached in Aqaba
and Sharm El-Sheikh, calm has not been restored on the
ground, as the agreements have not been implemented.
Over the past few weeks, the holy sites in the occupied
city of Jerusalem have continued to be subjected to
Israeli violations during the celebration of the religious
holidays of the three Abrahamic religions. Under the
protection of the occupation forces, extremist Jewish
groups have continued to storm Al-Haram Al-Sharif,
attacking worshipers and restricting freedom of access
to places of worship, whether for Muslims or Christians,
in flagrant violation of international law, the resolutions
of the United Nations, the status quo at the holy sites and
Jordan’s custodianship over them. The current situation
confirms Egypt’s repeated warnings — namely, that
the continuation of the current violations portends a
vicious circle of violence, for which innocent civilians
will pay the price. In order to bring an end to the current
situation and maintain the prospects for implementing
the two-State solution and achieving peace, Egypt calls
for three steps to be taken.
First, the agreements reached at the Aqaba and
Sharm El-Sheikh meetings must be implemented,
especially with regard to putting an end to all unilateral
measures related to settlement expansion; all acts of
violence against civilians, whether perpetrated by
settlers or Israeli occupation forces; and the confiscation
and demolition of Palestinian homes and facilities,
arrest operations and the storming of Palestinian cities.
Secondly, the existing legal and historical status
quo of the Islamic and Christian holy sites in East
Jerusalem and their Jordanian custodianship must
be respected.
Thirdly, the necessary international protection
must be provided to the brotherly Palestinian people,
and there must be accountability for the violations
committed against them.
Implementing the steps I just mentioned will
undoubtedly contribute to de-escalating the situation
in the short-term and stopping the current cycle of
violence, especially if it is coupled with the lifting of the
blockade on the Gaza Strip and providing support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. In the medium term, there

23-1163325/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

is an urgent need to address the root causes of the
conflict, because managing the conflict alone is not
enough. We must work to revive the peace negotiations
between the two sides by reactivating the role of the
Middle East Quartet and resuming its meetings as soon
as possible, in accordance with the agreed international
terms of reference.
In conclusion, Egypt affirms its unwavering
support for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people, above all their right to self-determination
and the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State along the 4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the resolutions of
international legitimacy, international law and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon): Before I deliver this
statement on behalf of the Group of Arab States, I
would like to ask your indulgence, Mr. President, as I
may exceed the three-minute time limit given that this
is a group statement.
(spoke in Arabic)
I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I also appreciate the
briefing delivered by the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process.
I deliver this statement on behalf of the member
States of the Group of Arab States.
Over the past month, the members of the Security
Council have repeatedly called for de-escalation in
the occupied Palestinian territories in general and in
Jerusalem in particular, at a time when the religious
holidays of the three Abrahamic religions coincide.
Nevertheless, the occupying Power has ignored those
calls and committed the worst forms of violence against
Palestinians, Muslims and Christians, in addition to
limiting their ability to exercise their religious rights
on the occasion of Easter and Ramadan, especially
in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. The Arab Group condemns in the strongest
terms the violence committed by the Israeli occupation
forces against worshipers this month, which is a
continuation of the cycle of bloody violence that has
been systematically practiced against the Palestinians,
especially since the beginning of this year and during
26/31

25/04/2023

last year. The Group also condemns the storming of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the assaults, detentions and
arrests of hundreds of worshipers. Those irresponsible
acts perpetrated at holy sites provoke millions of
Muslims around the world, especially during the holy
month of Ramadan.
In that regard, the Arab Group also stress the
need for Israel, the occupying Power, to respect the
existing legal and historical status quo of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including by respecting
its status — with its area of 144 dunums — as a place
of worship exclusively for Muslims. It is also important
to respect the role of the Jerusalem Waqf of Jordan’s
Ministry of Awqaf Islamic Affairs and Holy Places,
as it is the only body authorized to manage the affairs
of all Al-Haram Al-Sharif and regulating entry into
it. We also stress the right of the State of Palestine to
exercise its sovereignty over the occupied city of East
Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine and its
holy sites. Israel, the occupying Power, has no rights or
sovereignty over the occupied city of Jerusalem and its
Islamic and Christian holy sites.
The Arab Group values the positions of the countries
that rejected and condemned the provocative and
aggressive storming by Israel of the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
They stress their positions rejecting any altering of the
historic and legal status quo. The Group also reiterates
its support for all efforts and initiatives to protect the
occupied city of Jerusalem, and defends its holy sites
while rejecting and condemning any attempts to alter
its demographic character and its Arab, Islamic and
Christian identity, along with its legal and historic
status. The Group condemns the extremist views of the
new Government of Israel, in flagrant violation of all its
commitments to international law and Security Council
resolutions, which have led to a state of stagnation and
great tension in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Israel is targeting Palestinian civilians, killing
Palestinian children, young people, women and
older persons in their cities, villages and streets, and
storming their homes, schools and workplaces, as
well as deliberately targeting health-care and media
personnel, in addition to the attacks by extremist
settlers, the colonial expansion and the incitement
and racist rhetoric adopted by the Israeli Government,
which ignores all human and legal norms, without
accountability or punishment, in defiance of the
international position with regard to its occupation and
violations in the occupied Palestinian territory.
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Arab Group therefore calls on the Security
Council to assume its responsibilities and ensure the
implementation of its resolutions in order to put an
end to all of Israel’s unilateral, illegal, provocative
and escalatory steps, as well as the violations that it
continues to commit unabated in order to build and
expand its illegal settlements. Israel continues to kill
innocent people, storm Palestinian cities and villages,
confiscate Palestinian land and property, demolish
Palestinian houses and structures and displace the
original inhabitants, including in Jerusalem, while
flagrant violations of the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif are committed by Israel’s
occupying army and radical settlement groups. In the
light of that continued aggression, the Arab Group calls
urgently for the protection of the Palestinian people by
the international community in line with the proposals
made by the Secretary-General, which the General
Assembly welcomed in view of the increase in Israel’s
aggressions against the Palestinian people.
The Arab Group condemns Israel’s policy of
arbitrary detention and denial of medical care for
prisoners. We support the prisoners in their struggle to
achieve their release. We must ensure that the occupying
Power complies with humanitarian international law
and international human rights law. Pressure must be
put on Israel to immediately release all prisoners and
detainees, as well as the bodies of martyrs. Israel must
end its policies on deportation and house arrest, among
other things. We call on the international community
and Council members to condemn all forms of violence
against Palestinian civilians by the occupation forces
and radical settler groups and urge for accountability
for all such practices.
We will not be able to achieve a comprehensive and
just peace in the Middle East, along with security and
stability, until the Palestinian people are granted their
inalienable legitimate rights, including their right to
self-determination, and until we see the end of Israel’s
illegal and colonial occupation and the assurance of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine within the
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We
therefore call on the countries of the world to show their
solidarity with the Palestinian people in their struggle,
to recognize that the Palestinian question is a just one
and acknowledge the State of Palestine and its right to
be a full member of the United Nations.
We welcomed the General Assembly’s adoption
of resolution 77/247, which calls for requesting the

S/PV.9309

International Court of Justice to render an advisory
opinion on Israel’s colonial occupation of the land of
the State of Palestine and its repercussions, given that it
violates international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. We call on all Member States that care for the
values of justice and international law to support the
State of Palestine in its endeavour by providing written
and oral legal submissions to the Court by 25 July. We
call on the International Criminal Court to complete
its investigation and hold to account the perpetrators
of the war crimes and crimes against humanity
being committed by Israel against the defenceless
Palestinian people.
The Arab Group appreciates Jordan’s role in
safeguarding and maintaining Muslim and Christian
holy sites in Jerusalem within the framework of the
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan,
under the leadership of King Abdullah II. We appreciate
the role of the Al-Quds (Jerusalem) Committee and its
affiliated Beit Mal Al-Quds under the chairmanship of
King Mohammed VI of Morocco, as well as the efforts
in support of the Palestinian question by Algeria, under
the leadership of President Abdelmadjid Tebboune,
through Algeria’s historic policies and continued
financial aid to the budget of the State of Palestine. We
express our appreciation to Saudi Arabia, under the
leadership of King Salman Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud, the
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, for its support of
the Islamic holy sites in Jerusalem. We also appreciate
the historic role played by Egypt, under the leadership
of President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, in support of the
Palestinian question. And we want to express our
appreciation for all Arab efforts aimed at preserving the
city of Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Palestine,
along with its Arab, Islamic and Christian identity with
its holy sites and cultural and humanitarian heritage,
supporting its institutions while addressing Israel’s
policies on settlement building and Judaism. We also
thank and appreciate the countries hosting Palestinian
refugees, including Lebanon.
In conclusion, the Arab Group stresses that the
Palestinian question is the central Arab issue. It has been
on the Council’s agenda since 1948, which exemplifies
the injustice that has been inflicted on the Palestinian
people and their need for their own independent State.
On 15 May we will mark the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Nakba, whose repercussions have continued
to affect every succeeding generation, while further
demonstrating the international community’s inability

23-1163327/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

25/04/2023

to implement United Nations resolutions. We are still
far from seeing the hopes based on the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations come true. There
have been many international efforts, peace initiatives
and related United Nations resolutions. However, the
situation on the ground for Palestinians, including
refugees, continues to deteriorate. The unjust realities
of the occupation have not changed. Israel’s hostile
campaigns have continued and its settlements are
expanding, while it continues to completely disregard
international law, international humanitarian law and
the wishes of the international community. In that
context, we must continue to provide political and
financial support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
until a just and permanent solution to the Palestinian
question is achieved in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), on the right of return.

Alma Al-Shaab. The Security Council must condemn
such violations.

We can achieve peace in the Middle East only
through a just and comprehensive solution based
on the decisions of international legitimacy and
the implementation of the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including, most recently, resolution 2334
(2016). Furthermore, we need to implement the Arab
Peace Initiative and ensure the establishment of an
independent Palestinian State within the borders of
4 June 1967 and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

The President (spoke in Russian): Once again,
I wish to recall the appeal by the presidency to all
speakers to limit their statements to no more than four
minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out its
work expeditiously, while we listen respectfully to all
those who wish to contribute to today’s debate.

I would now like to make a brief statement in
my national capacity on behalf of the Government
of Lebanon.
Lebanon condemns the attacks by Israel on Friday,
7 April, which targeted parts of southern Lebanon and
threatened the lives and territories of Lebanese civilians
We believe that act of aggression is a flagrant violation
of the sovereignty of Lebanon, which threatens the
stability that southern Lebanon was enjoying and is
furthermore a clear violation of resolution 1701 (2006)
and a threat to international peace and security. Lebanon
reiterates its rejection of the use of its territories as a
platform for destabilizing the situation and reserves its
legitimate right to self-defence. Lebanon emphasizes
that the lines of communication with the United Nations
and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) represent the best pathway for resolving
problems and preserving calm and stability. Lebanon
once again warns that all the tensions along the Blue
Line are the result of Israel’s continued violation of that
Line. Israel even recently built a T-shaped wall on the
Lebanese occupied territories across from the town of
28/31

On the occasion of the forty-fifth anniversary of the
establishment of UNIFIL, Lebanon highly appreciates
its important role in establishing peace and security in
southern Lebanon. We are also grateful to UNIFIL’s
troop- and police-contributing countries for their
continued commitment to preserve peace. UNIFIL’s
presence and role in maintaining calm and defusing
tensions are necessary to maintain stability and avoid
any miscalculations or escalations along the Blue Line.
It is also essential for UNIFIL to monitor adherence
to resolution 1701 (2006) in that regard. Lebanon
underscores once again the importance of coordinating
between the activities undertaken by UNIFIL and
the Lebanese Government in accordance also with
resolution 1701 (2006).

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Philippines.
Mr. Lagdameo (Philippines): I would like to thank
Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation, for convening today’s Security
Council open debate on the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine. I would like also to thank Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.
We follow with serious concern the recent
developments surrounding Israel and Palestine,
including the growing tensions on the ground. We join
the international community in urging all the parties
concerned to exercise maximum restraint and refrain
from violence and provocative actions in order to avoid
a further escalation of the situation and end the vicious
circle of violence. We support all efforts to prevent all
forms of violence, terrorism and violent extremism.
The Philippines recognizes the resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict as the key to the region’s
peace and stability. The conflict can never be resolved
by violence, but only through meaningful dialogue and
negotiations in accordance with international law. We
continue to support the peaceful implementation of
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

all United Nations initiatives towards the resolution
of the Middle East conflict. We support all efforts to
revive the Middle East peace process articulated in the
Middle East Quartet road map to peace, including the
affirmative steps to be taken immediately to reverse the
negative trends on the ground, which are imperilling
the achievement of a two-State solution in accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016). The Philippines has always
expressed support for the creation of a State of Palestine,
living in peace and security with its neighbours. In that
regard, the Philippines reaffirms its support for a twoState solution.
We commend the efforts of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) to immediately respond, under
extraordinary circumstances, to the humanitarian needs
of the affected populations, including both refugees
and non-refugees, as well as the tens of thousands of
people who have sought safety in Agency schools in
Gaza. Its designated emergency shelters are equipped
to host internally displaced persons during times of
conflict. We should continue to support UNRWA’s
work to protect the delivery of vital services to millions
of Palestine refugees.
The Philippines enjoins the parties to place a
more intense focus on building trust and confidence.
We also ask them to refrain from actions that could
further incite violence. We encourage the parties to
clearly demonstrate their resolve to pursue a just and
lasting peace, from which not only their own peoples
but the entire world would undoubtedly benefit. We
call on all stakeholders, including the Middle East
Quartet, to help negotiate the best possible diplomatic
outcome. As the Secretary-General has emphasized, it
is critical to de-escalate the situation and move towards
re-establishing a political horizon. The statements by
European Member States, the presidential statements
of the Security Council and the joint communiqué
of the Aqaba meeting are welcome calls for calm. If
implemented, the steps outlined at Aqaba could be
an important start to reversing the negative trends on
the ground.
We also welcome the recent establishment of
diplomatic relations between Israel and a number of
Arab countries with a view to enhancing prospects
for reaching a comprehensive settlement in the Middle
East peace process.

S/PV.9309

Finally, the Philippines reiterates the importance
of supporting steps that would expand the space for
meaningful dialogue and negotiations, building trust
and mutual understanding, and cooperation for peace.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Önal (Türkiye): I would first like to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. I thank you for convening this open
debate, and I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland
for his briefing.
As we meet to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, the conflict between Israel and Palestine is going
through one of its most difficult episodes in history.
Violations against the historic status quo of the holy
sites, the desecration of the sanctity of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the repeated brutal storming of the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound have led to a dangerous
escalation of the situation, creating a spiral of violence.
Türkiye denounces in the strongest terms the raiding of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque by Israeli security forces and the
detention of many Palestinian civilians. Those attacks
against worshippers in the Al-Aqsa Mosque during the
holy month of Ramadan are unacceptable. We engaged
in intensive talks before and during the month of
Ramadan, in particular with our Israeli counterparts
at every level. We warned about the dangers of such
an escalation. We would have hoped that our warnings
would have been heeded from the very beginning.
The situation in other parts of the occupied
Palestinian territory is no less alarming. Illegal
settlements, demolitions and evacuations continue
unabated. Settler violence has reached unprecedented
levels. As a result, many Palestinians have been killed
since the beginning of this year. We share the deep
concerns of the international community regarding
that dangerous trend on the ground, which could have
catastrophic consequences if left unchecked.
Turkey has repeatedly underlined the necessity of
addressing the root causes of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and bringing an end to the plight of the
Palestinian people. The reasons that perpetuate the
failure to find a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question run counter to the
founding principles of this Organization. Ending the
occupation is a prerequisite for, and key to, reaching
a lasting and sustainable solution to the conflict. We
cannot achieve a lasting peace in the Middle East

23-1163329/31

S/PV.9309

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

without an independent, sovereign State of Palestine
on the basis of the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. To achieve that goal, there is an urgent
need to return to the political path and accelerate
efforts towards the revitalization of the peace process.
The financial, administrative and security capacity
of the Palestinian State should also be substantially
supported. We cannot expect the overall situation to get
better unless the living and security conditions in the
occupied Palestinian territory are improved.
The powerful earthquakes of 6 February that
struck Türkiye and Syria also affected Lebanon
and had a damaging impact on the already difficult
living conditions of Palestinian refugees in Syria and
Lebanon. The United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East has once again
shown how vital its role is in providing emergency
assistance in times of crisis. Despite financial
constraints, the Agency has quickly mobilized to
meet the humanitarian and early-recovery needs of
Palestinian refugees. We call on all countries to support
its crucial work. The Agency’s long-term financial
stability must be assured so that its life-saving services
for millions of Palestinian refugees can continue.
We remain hopeful that one day Israelis and
Palestinians can live side by side in peace and security.
Türkiye will continue to support all efforts to find
a comprehensive and lasting solution to the Israeli
Palestinian conflict, based on the vision of two equal
and independent States. Türkiye’s unwavering support
to the Palestinian people in achieving their inalienable
rights, including the right to live in their own sovereign
and independent State, will continue.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Algeria.
Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, Mr. President, allow me to warmly congratulate the
delegation of the Russian Federation on its presidency
of the Security Council this month and on its excellent
guidance of our deliberations. I wish you every success
for the rest of the month.
We are meeting in this Chamber just a few days
before the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Nakba — the
original catastrophe for the Palestinian people. They
were expelled and chased from their homeland and
scattered to the four corners of the world. They dream
of returning to build a State that is recognized by all
United Nations resolutions and international forums.
30/31

25/04/2023

That dream is not being realized because of the
obstinacy of the occupying Power and its decades-long
status quo policy. Killings and arrests are part and
parcel of the daily life of Palestinians, who continue to
live under the yoke of an apartheid regime that denies
them the right to freedom and life and undermines
their most basic rights. How can anything change when
the occupying Power continues to deprive Palestinian
Muslims and Christians of their religious rights,
including that of visiting their holy sites, as we saw at
the beginning of the month and during the religious
holidays? And as usual, the occupying authorities are
not held accountable in any way.
I would like to reiterate Algeria’s firm condemnation
of the raids by Israeli occupying forces of the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque and their attacks on worshippers. We
emphasize that those barbaric and criminal practices
are a flagrant violation of the holy sites and a stark
violation of all international laws and norms. That
fact now compels us more than ever to implement the
mechanisms designed to protect Palestinians, such
as resolution 904 (1994), which calls for measures
to be taken to guarantee the safety and protection of
Palestinian civilians throughout the occupied territory,
including by a temporary international or foreign
presence. Furthermore, we reiterate that we must
activate all international and regional multilateral
mechanisms to provide support and protection
for Palestinians. Unfortunately, that support and
protection are dependent on some leaders focused on
narrow interests and political considerations, and the
Palestinians will be the only losers in that situation.
Given its continuing support to the Palestinians and
commitment to their unity in any future negotiations,
based on a clear vision and the internationally recognized
terms of reference, Algeria, under the personal and
direct guidance of President Tebboune, hosted a series
of reconciliation meetings among Palestinian factions
that led to the adoption of the Algiers Declaration.
Algeria supports Palestine’s aspiration to become
a full member of the United Nations, given that the
Palestinian Authority enjoys the functions of a State.
If Palestine joins the United Nations, the principle of
a two-State solution will be seen to be fully endorsed
by the international community. Algeria reiterates its
firm and unconditional support to its brother people of
Palestine in their quest to enjoy their inalienable rights
in full, including the right to self-determination and the
right to create an independent and sovereign State, with
23-11633

25/04/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Jerusalem as its capital, as well as to find a just solution
to the issue of Palestinian refugees. We reiterate that
the Arab Peace Initiative remains essential to a political
settlement of the Palestinian question and is a shared
position that is reiterated in the Algiers Declaration,
which was adopted at the Arab League Summit.
The deafening silence of the international
community in response to the suffering of the Palestinian
people and the crimes perpetrated by the occupation
authorities has enabled those authorities to continue
with their plans to change the situation on the ground.
That undermines the possibility of a political solution
to the Palestinian question in line with international
law. Efforts to resort to the highest forums of that law
have become a crime that is being collectively punished
by the occupying authorities.
We would also like to reiterate that Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and its entire area is a holy site for Muslims,

S/PV.9309

and we underscore the custodianship role played by
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan in managing its
affairs. Any attempt to change the historical and legal
status quo by dividing it physically or temporally is
unacceptable and constitutes a threat to the future of
Palestine and the security and stability of the region.
We must therefore revive the peace process with the
participation of all parties in order to arrive at a lasting
solution to the Palestinian question, one that will enable
the Palestinian people to enjoy all their inalienable
rights, including the right to establish an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are still
a number of speakers on my list for this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, with the agreement of
the members of the Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

23-1163331/31
