S/PV.8348

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8348th meeting

Tuesday, 11 September 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Esono Mbengono
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-28204 (E)
*1828204*

S/PV.8348

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Griffiths is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Amman.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Let me first express my sympathies
to you, Madam President, your Government and your
people on this tragic day that we have all mourned for
so long.
When I called for the intra-Yemeni consultations
in Geneva, I never expected it to be an easy mission.
The parties have not met for more than two years, the
war has been escalating virtually on all fronts, the level
of confidence is at its lowest, I believe, and the human
and humanitarian cost is ever-rising. The parties have
been locked into a cycle of violence. In contrast, the
main victims of this war, the Yemeni people, naturally
enough, have been yearning for a peaceful political
solution that can end their misery, put an end to the war
and deliver a Government that is in a position to address
their basic needs. I have also learned that this is no
longer a race between political and military institutions
and solutions. It is, instead, a race to salvage what is
left of State institutions as quickly as possible. It is
with that sense of urgency that I was encouraged — as
you know, Madam President — to move forward with
the parties so as to inject a prospect of hope into this
conflict and to develop an alternative narrative to the
narrative of war.
Following six or seven months of intensive
discussions with the parties, and based on my strong
conviction, supported by the Security Council, in the
need for a political solution to the conflict, I decided
2/13

11/09/2018

to call for formal consultations that would lead to
a resumption of the political process. Indeed, I had
the honour of being with the Council on 2 August to
announce that call (see S/PV.8323). I am glad to report to
the Council that, despite the absence of one of the sides
to the consultations in Geneva last week, and although
it certainly did not go as planned, we still managed to
relaunch the political process with solid support from
the Yemeni people and the international community.
Of course, I was as disappointed as anyone that
we were unable to bring the delegation from Sana’a to
Geneva. That is not what I had planned for last week,
and I certainly would not want to see that happen again,
and neither would any of us. But I will continue not to
be drawn into going into the details of the many issues
that we had to overcome together, even if we ultimately
failed to bring the delegation to Geneva. I stress that
everybody — in Geneva, in Amman, in the Coalition,
in the Government of Yemen — tried to overcome the
issues that were presented to us, but it simply did not
work out on this occasion. I promise to make absolutely
sure that does not happen again.
The Yemeni political process, like so many others
of its kind, will see ups and downs. The challenges
we faced last week — and I suppose this is my main
messagge — remain temporary hurdles to be overcome.
That is not a sign, in my view, that the political and
military situation, as dire as it is — and perhaps because
it is dire — is not conducive to formal consultations.
We need to stay focused on nurturing the political
process, particularly in these fragile early stages, and
build the needed momentum so that it can deliver
tangible benefits to Yemenis throughout Yemen. Such
a process is not simply about holding and moving from
one big and, indeed, short event to the next. Instead,
it needs political will, determination and commitment
from all the actors, including the members of the
Council, as well as putting the interests of the Yemeni
people above all else. I see my role, therefore, as
working with the parties to understand their concerns,
hopes and expectations, so that I can provide them
with the needed help and support to move the process
forward. My role, therefore, and perhaps somewhat
controversially, is to encourage but not expose them,
and to work with but not undermine them, all the while
reminding them of the need to respect their obligations
and responsibilities towards the Yemeni people and the
international community.
18-28204

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

As the parties resume the formal efforts to make
compromises and build trust, it is important that we do
not allow ourselves to become embroiled once again
in large-scale military confrontations. As I said, the
fighting is escalating on all sides, but we have still not
seen an attack on the city or the port of Al-Hudaydah,
although there are operations on the outskirts of the
city. I hope that will continue to be the case. We are
concerned about the launching of attacks by Ansar
Allah forces towards Saudi Arabia, as the Council has
frequently made mention, and the attacks on the Red
Sea shows the ongoing threat the conflict poses for
regional security.
In addition, the continued decline in the Yemeni
rial and broader economic decay are pushing people
further into vulnerable situations and poverty. The
frustration is rising, and with it is the threat of the
conflict, particularly in the south — during the past
10 days there have been widespread demonstrations
in the southern governorates. The protesters give
voice to their concerns over the economic situation
and basic-service delivery, and they remind us of the
importance of listening to southern voices and ensuring
their meaningful participation in arrangements that
will put an end to the conflict. I have met with several
southern groups in recent months and I will be meeting
with them again. They have been strongly in favour
of resolving their concerns through dialogue and
are keen to participate — I am glad to say — in the
political process.
I will continue my discussions by holding a set of
visits in the coming days, including tomorrow to Muscat
and then to Sana’a, to engage with the political leadership
in those two cities. I have two objectives for the visit.
First, I intend to make tangible progress while building
on discussions in Geneva on key confidence-building
measures, including on an exchange of prisoners and
the opening of Sana’a airport. I am greatly encouraged
by the very positive, open and constructive approach to
the issues that I have encountered by the Government
of Yemen and from the coalition in their support. I am
keen to outline public commitments to progressing on
those issues in the coming days.
My second objective, unsurprisingly, is to secure
a firm commitment from the parties to convening
for continued positive consultations. I hope to meet
with the Government of Yemen in Riyadh and look
forward to seeing President Hadi Mansour. I must say
that I am very grateful to him and his Government

S/PV. 8348

for their support of all the efforts that the United
Nations is making to provide a political solution to
the conflict. I am grateful to him and his Government
as well for their delegation’s presence in Geneva and
for their constructive participation in rather unusual
circumstances there.
I am also planning to consult soon, as I have said,
with a number of southern stakeholders to agree on their
meaningful participation in the process. I would like to
add, not least, that we were able to enjoy the presence
of a group of women from Yemen with strong specific
strengths on various issues. Given that fact that there
was more time available than anticipated, I believe
we will have a very positive trajectory going forward
as to how they will advise me and have a meaningful
input into the process. The inclusivity of the process is
crucial for its success, and while there are two principal
parties, it would behoove me continue to seek broader
consultations with people whom I think can advise me
to better perform my duties.
Finally, the reason that I am so grateful to you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting today,
so soon after Geneva and, indeed, before I am able to
outline a positive path back to peace, I would like to say
this — the road to peace is never straight; it will always
be difficult, particularly at a time when the process is
restarting after two years of enmity, opposition, doubt,
confusion and a lack of confidence. It is not surprising
that there will be those who, in this case, find it difficult
to attend and that there are those who did not find some
element of interest. This is not the last time that we will
have difficulties, but I am sure that it will be the last
time that we have that particular difficulty.
But it does not mean for one minute — and this is
why I am glad to be here — that the process towards
peace is made more difficult. It is made more urgent. I
think we learned some lessons in Geneva and, if I may,
I would like to ask for the Council’s continued support
for the efforts of the international community and my
Office, under the Secretary-General, to move back to
the table with all speed.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his
briefing. The challenge that he has before him is not
lost on us, which is why we continue to appreciate
his service.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

18-282043/13

S/PV.8348

The situation in the Middle East

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this meeting, which
we appreciate very much. It was very good to hear
from the Special Envoy. We appreciate the efforts he
has made. We share his disappointment at the fact that
the talks did not go ahead as planned, but it was good
to hear that the consultations he did manage to hold
yielded some positive outcomes. I think among those
was the inclusivity point that Mr. Griffiths mentioned,
particularly on the presence of women, which I think is
excellent. But I urge all sides, including the Houthis, to
get behind the process that the Special Envoy is leading,
invest in confidence-building measures and engage in
future consultations in good faith. That is bound to
require flexibility from all sides, but we all know, and
we have said many times, that there is no alternative to
a political solution.
We support Mr. Griffiths and we would like to
continue to support him to the hilt. We can offer
Security Council members some press elements, if
that would be welcome, as a way of expressing that the
Council stands behind him at this time as he tries to
bring all the parties back together. I think that what
he said about the economy of Yemen just gives added
urgency to an already desperate situation. I therefore
hope we can all build on that.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths for his realistic
briefing to us today, as well as for his persistence
and resilience.
I will address three issues: first, the political process;
secondly, the effects of the conflict on the civilian
population; and, thirdly, the humanitarian situation.
First, with regard to the political process, we share
Martin’s disappointment that one party did not make
it to the highly anticipated consultations in Geneva
last weekend. However, the beginning of those kinds
of consultations is never easy, especially not following
two years of growing distrust between the parties since
the last negotiations took place, in Kuwait. Confidence
has to be rebuilt one step at a time, and we commend
Martin’s efforts in making that happen.
Confidence-building measures, as proposed and
discussed in Geneva, are focused on the most crucial
of issues that we face in Yemen — the well-being of
ordinary Yemeni citizens and issues such as resuming
medical flights out of Sana’a airport and addressing
Yemen’s failing economy. We strongly support that
4/13

11/09/2018

approach and call on the parties to show good faith at this
critical juncture. They should engage with the Special
Envoy by taking meaningful steps to achieve them.
This weekend’s minor setback can, and must, be
overcome. It should not be used to justify an escalation
on the battlefield. A sustainable, peaceful, political
solution is the only way forward. Unfortunately,
already we have seen an increase in clashes in
Al-Hudaydah, as well as enhanced tensions in Aden.
We call on all sides to demonstrate their commitment
to peace. They should show restraint, de-escalate and
engage without preconditions with the United Nationsfacilitated process.
Let me also take this opportunity to express
particular appreciation for Martin’s efforts in
strengthening female participation in the process, a
point which he just elaborated.
Secondly, with regard to the effects of the conflict
on the civilian population, the last time the Council met
in consultations we discussed the worrying spike in
civilian casualties as hostilities increased. Since then,
we have witnessed more violations of international
humanitarian law. Those violations include an attack
on a World Food Programme food truck, an air strike
in Ad Durayhimi and the injuring of civilians as a
result of a shot-down Houthi missile. We condemn
those practices. As the Council, we must continue to
send a clear signal that all parties must comply with
international humanitarian law and should address its
violations. Accountability must continue to feature
high on our agenda, including to sustain a future
political agreement.
Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
the concerns raised by the Special Envoy about the
devastating humanitarian impact of any further
escalation in Al-Hudaydah and Aden are as prominent
as they have ever been, and the Council has expressed
itself several times in that regard. In line with the
presidential statement of March (S/PRST/2018/5), we
continue to insist on the full and sustained opening
of the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, as well as
the unimpeded distribution of supplies throughout
the country. That includes access for ships carrying
containers and fuel, as facilitated by the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism.
In conclusion, the reinvigoration of the political
process and bringing it to a successful resolution will
likely be a long process. The first steps have now been
18-28204

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

taken. In order to keep the process moving all parties
need to take their responsibility. They need to move
beyond words and show their commitment by taking
concrete steps to restore confidence. We will stay
closely engaged as Mr. Griffiths’ work progresses.
Let me express the hope that the Security Council will
stay united in supporting the Special Envoy in finding
a peaceful, political and sustainable solution in the
interests of the people of Yemen.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his
briefing and tireless efforts to bring together the parties
to engage in discussion. I repeat that Martin has the full
support of France. I would like to convey three brief
messages, before I address some of the points in greater
detail during the consultations that follow.
France regrets that the talks planned in Geneva at
the invitation of the United Nations could not be held.
As Mr. Griffiths eloquently recalled, it is essential to
safeguard the possibility for restarting the dialogue.
Geneva might be a missed opportunity in that regard,
but it is by no means the end of efforts to move the
political process forward.
My third message is that, more than ever, we must
call on the parties to remain engaged with the Special
Envoy in order to resume dialogue as soon as possible
and move forward the political process, which is the
only possible solution to the conflict in Yemen, as we all
know. United Nations mediation is the only path towards
a relaunching discussions with a view to reaching an
agreement on the management of the Al-Hudaydah port,
a resumption of talks, a lasting cessation of hostilities
and the setting of the parameters for a political
solution. The time is ripe for the implementation of the
confidence-building measures identified by the Special
Envoy, with a view to a sustainable, comprehensive and
inclusive political agreement.
My third message is a matter of urgency. The
quest for a political solution is not only essential but
also urgent, while the humanitarian situation, already
disastrous, continues to deteriorate. Only a political
solution will make it possible to put a lasting end to
the suffering of the Yemeni people. Such a solution
will require resolute and unanimous support from the
members of the Security Council for the efforts of
Mr. Griffiths — support that is in place— but it will also
require, in more proactive terms, coherent messages

S/PV. 8348

from us collectively to the parties to the conflict and
regional actors alike.
At the moment, the population of Yemen is surviving
only thanks to the extraordinary efforts undertaken
by the United Nations and humanitarian actors on the
ground, whom I salute. We reiterate in the strongest
terms: it is imperative that international humanitarian
law and human rights law be respected. In that regard,
swift and unimpeded humanitarian access must be
guaranteed to populations in need. Those obligations, it
must be hammered home, are incumbent upon all.
That is the spirit in which France will continue to
strive towards the goals I have just recalled, sparing
no effort as we work with all the relevant actors to
those ends.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I can be quite brief. I will
not repeat our longstanding and well known positions
on the broader humanitarian and political situation.
However, I wanted to take the floor to express our
appreciation to Martin Griffiths for his briefing and,
more important, for the very determined and energetic
efforts he is making in Geneva.
Despite the challenges and temporary setbacks,
I think it is important to echo what he was saying:
things are difficult; it is understandable that there are
challenges after years of conflict and distrust. We are
encouraged by the launch of the consultations and
the steps taken in Geneva. The discussion with the
Government in Yemen on vital confidence-building
measures related to Sana’a airport, medical flights,
the release of prisoners and the economy is one such
promising step. We therefore commend the Government
for its constructive engagement.
We join others in welcoming the active participation
of the technical advisory group of Yemeni women.
It is regrettable that the Houthis did not make it
to Geneva — an opportunity that they should have
seized. Nevertheless, we are happy to note the Special
Envoy’s assessment that there is willingness to take
the political process forward, and we strongly urge the
parties to engage. We support the approach outlined by
Mr. Griffiths today for moving forward by travelling
to Sana’a and the region to continue the political
consultations building on the discussions in Geneva.
However, now more than ever, it is crucial that the
emphasis remain on the political track. With that in
mind, we are concerned about the rocket attacks against

18-282045/13

S/PV.8348

The situation in the Middle East

Saudi Arabia, the latest escalation in Al-Hudaydah,
reports of intensified clashes and air strikes, as well as
of the unrest in the South. Again, all of that results in
unacceptable levels of civilian casualties. We therefore
once again remind the parties that a full-scale escalation
in Al-Hudaydah would aggravate the humanitarian
disaster even further and risk hundreds of thousands of
lives, while clearly undermining the political process.
Yemen’s ports, including those at Al-Hudaydah and
Saleef, must remain open and functioning to allow for
unhindered humanitarian and commercial imports.
Now is the time for the Security Council and
the broader international community to renew our
support for the United Nations Special Envoy and to
call on the parties to de-escalate, respect international
humanitarian law, ensure accountability and engage
in an inclusive United Nations-led political process
without preconditions. If we could express that through
a press statement or something of the like, as suggested
by my British colleague, we would be in favour.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful to you, Madam President, for having
organized this meeting, and to Mr. Griffiths for his
important briefing. We wish to commend and support
the efforts of the Special Envoy in the pursuit of lasting
peace in Yemen. We agree with him that, despite the
difficulties, common ground exists around which
Yemenis could converge towards a peaceful solution.
That is something that we could not say at the beginning
of this year.
We are concerned that it was not possible for the
Geneva consultations to proceed as planned due to
the absence of the Houthi delegation. We view that
as a setback that must be overcome. But under no
circumstances should that setback be interpreted as
justification for an escalation of fighting. We must bear
in mind the responsibility to prevent any exacerbation
of the situation, which already constitutes the worst
humanitarian crisis in the world today. On the contrary,
the complexity of the context and the mistrust and
distance between the parties are such that we should
step up our efforts to get them at last around the
negotiating table without preconditions.
Against that backdrop, we must record our concern
at the upsurge in violence seen in recent days and its
cost in humanitarian terms. It is our responsibility to
protect the civilian population, in accordance with
international humanitarian law. We stress that there can
6/13

11/09/2018

be no recurrence of, or impunity for, atrocities against the
civilian population such as those observed last month,
including the attack that claimed the lives of dozens
of children, as well as terrorism and indiscriminate
attacks against the territory of Saudi Arabia.
I conclude by reaffirming Peru’s commitment
to achieving a lasting peace in Yemen that ends the
humanitarian disaster, fosters regional stability and
ensures accountability for the atrocity crimes that have
been committed.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing provided by the Secretary-General’s Special
Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. We take this
opportunity to convey to him our full support in his
duties and in his tireless efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Yemen.
We took note of the outcome of the consultations
held in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations, despite the fact that all the interested parties
were not present. Nonetheless, we recognize the full
validity and legitimacy of the process of consultations
and dialogue as the only way to advance the political
negotiation process towards a peaceful solution to
the situation in Yemen. In that regard, we call on the
relevant parties and actors to constructively participate
in and contribute to the process of dialogue and avoid
confrontational and violent rhetoric.
As the Special Envoy noted, there is undoubtedly a
real need to work on confidence-building measures to
bring the parties closer together, and dialogue must be
stepped up on key issues, such as the opening of routes
and roads to enhance the deployment of humanitarian
and medical assistance, the permanent reopening of
the Sana’a airport and, above all, the de-escalation of
the conflict zones, which includes stability and full
operations at the port of Al-Hudaydah.
Also, it is important to reiterate to the parties that
any attack or military campaign that targets civilians
or public spaces, housing or medical and educational
health centres, as well as the launching of missiles and
the deployment of antipersonnel mines, is contrary to
international law and international humanitarian law.
We therefore we call on them to observe the fundamental
principles and rules of distinction, proportionality and
precaution in the military campaigns that they carry out,
while avoiding causing unnecessary suffering to the
civilian population, especially to women and children.
18-28204

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

We reiterate again that there is no military or
otherwise confrontational solution to the conflict
in Yemen. For that reason, all the stakeholders and
parties involved should cease violence and commit
themselves to complying with the contents of the
Council’s presidential statements of 15 March 2018
(S/PRST/2018/5) and 15 June 2017 (S/PRST/2017/7)
and fully implement the provisions of resolution
2216 (2015), while abandoning all preconditions for
starting dialogue, stopping hostilities immediately
and committing to establish a process of negotiation
that allows for agreement on a political solution that
satisfies the demands and aspirations of the Yemeni
people against that backdrop of respecting their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
In that regard, we recall the words of the SecretaryGeneral on 13 April here in the Chamber:
“There is only one pathway to ending the Yemeni
conflict and to addressing the humanitarian crisis:
a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue.” (S/PV.8231, p. 2)
Finally, in order to achieve that objective, my
delegation reiterates its utmost support for the mediation
and dialogue efforts that the Special Envoy has initiated
and continues to develop with the parties.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I join others in
expressing appreciation to Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths for his clear and comprehensive update and
efforts to bring about a political and humanitarian
solution in Yemen. My delegation also welcomes the
Permanent Representative of Yemen, His Excellency
Ambassador Ahmad Bin Mubarak, to the Chamber.
Kazakhstan
is
closely
following
recent
developments and would like to make the following two
points today.
First, on the political track, we note the importance
of continuing to strive towards sustainable peace,
conflict prevention and resolution through political
and diplomatic means, including confidence-building
measures, as mentioned today by the Special Envoy
and the Permanent Representative of Sweden, and
which are also very important to us, as the country
that created the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence-building Measures in Asia, an organization
for confidence-building measures in Asia. That would
foster trust by bringing the parties together around the
common goals of peace and development.

S/PV. 8348

We are closely following the recent United Nations
diplomatic efforts in Geneva, Sana’a and Riyadh, and
soon in Muscat, to persuade the warring parties to
return to the difficult but much-needed negotiations.
Undoubtedly, the diplomatic moves led by the
Special Envoy have helped Yemen a great deal, and
Al-Hudaydah in particular. Kazakhstan supports the
efforts of interested countries and parties to reach a
political path through negotiations for a full and fair
settlement, including at the political consultations in
Geneva. Only such an approach could preserve the
sovereignty, independence and unity of Yemen and
realize the interests and aspirations of its people.
Secondly, with regard to the humanitarian
dimension, we voice our support for the United Nations
repeated calls on all parties to safeguard civilian lives,
prevent deaths and injuries, allow the freedom of
movement and protect hospitals, clinics and schools.
That should be in accordance with relevant types of
international law. We therefore note and welcome
the coordinated efforts of the stakeholders — United
Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations
and the Gulf countries — to provide humanitarian
assistance to the people of Al-Hudaydah. Kazakhstan
salutes the selfless work of the humanitarian partners
who have been providing food, water, emergency kits,
cash and health care. To our deep regret, 75 per cent
of the Yemeni population still require protection from
malnutrition, cholera and other diseases, which have
killed or afflicted thousands of civilians, especially after
a very hot summer season. Against that background,
we express hope that critical health infrastructure, and
in particular reproductive health centres, sanitation
facilities and water plants and stations that supply water
to the population, will be thoroughly protected.
Finally, Kazakhstan supports the Special Envoy and
his able team, as well as their untiring efforts to reach
an inclusive political solution, in close cooperation with
the stakeholders concerned.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Griffiths for his comprehensive briefing.
We welcome the process of consultations with
the parties to the conflict launched last week in
Geneva, which we consider to be an important step
towards relaunching a political process in Yemen. We
commend the fact that essential confidence-building
measures — including, among other things the
release of prisoners, the reopening of the Sana’a

18-282047/13

S/PV.8348

The situation in the Middle East

airport and economic issues — were discussed with
the representatives of the Yemeni Government. We
also welcome and are encouraged by the holding of
consultations with a group of Yemeni women, and we
commend the Special Envoy’s efforts to ensure that the
process is inclusive. However, while we regret that the
representatives of Houthis were not present in Geneva,
that should not be perceived as an obstacle for further
advancement of political dialogue.
Reviving the political process, which would lead
to a comprehensive and long-standing solution to the
conflict, is of paramount importance and must be a
priority for all stakeholders. Therefore, we expect the
parties to redouble their efforts to achieve that goal. We
urge them to continue to engage with Mr. Griffiths in
good faith and without preconditions and to show greater
flexibility toward his proposals. We look forward to the
continuation of the consultations in Muscat and Sana’a.
Despite the progress achieved on the political
track, the fighting in Yemen has become even more
intense in the past few weeks. We are alarmed by the
continued reports of attacks resulting in casualties
among civilians. Poland condemns all indiscriminate
attacks against the civilian population, which are in
clear violation of international humanitarian law. We
urge the parties to de-escalate and refrain from taking
actions that would lead to increased violence. We urge
the parties to abide by the principles of international
humanitarian law, including the fundamental principles
of proportionality and distinction in attack, and to
ensure the protection of civilians. We also expect them to
ensure that all Yemen’s ports, including Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Isa, are open and fully operational, and
that access for humanitarian deliveries across the whole
country is guaranteed.
Let me conclude by reiterating that there can only
be a political solution to the conflict in Yemen, and by
once again expressing Poland’s full support for Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths and his efforts to bring about
an inclusive political solution to that crisis.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for
his briefing. We underscore our support and confidence
for his efforts. We also thank all the United Nations
personnel who are working on the ground in Yemen,
and we commend all their work and sacrifices.
8/13

11/09/2018

We listened closely to the briefing by Mr. Griffiths
on the United Nations efforts to hold intra-Yemeni
consultations in Geneva, which regrettably have not
materialized owing to the absence of the Houthis, despite
conducive conditions being established for the holding
of those consultations and all the attempts to overcome
the impediments to their participation. The unrealized
consultations provided an opportunity to distinguish
between the party seeking a political solution, based
on relevant Security Council resolutions, and the
party that does not seek to achieve any progress in the
political process in Yemen and obstructs international
and regional efforts to reach a political solution,
while perpetuating the crisis and exacerbating the
humanitarian suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people,
who seek a peaceful and stable life.
The absence of Houthis in the consultations
demonstrates their indifference to the statements of
the Security Council calling for consultations and
urging all parties to participate constructively therein.
Therefore, the Security Council has to shoulder its
responsibilities and to insist on the full implementation
of its resolutions, leading to security and stability in
Yemen and giving priority to a political solution based
on the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the national dialogue and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
The States of the coalition to support legitimacy
in Yemen have proved once again their open support
for the efforts of the United Nations and the Special
Envoy through their announcements confirming their
support for a political solution and the presence of
their accredited ambassadors to Yemen at the Geneva
consultations in order to participate in the briefings
that were supposed to be given by Mr. Griffiths at
the margin of those consultations. The States of the
coalition also announced that they would grant flight
permission to the aircraft that was supposed to transport
the Houthi delegation to Geneva in order to participate
in the consultations. In addition, they stopped their
military operations in Al-Hudaydah in order to help
the international efforts to promote the peace operation
in Yemen.
In most of its outcomes, the Security Council has
been persistent in asserting that the optimal solution
to any dispute involves addressing its root causes. It is
evident to everybody that the root cause of the conflict
18-28204

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

is the September 2014 coup by the Houthis against
the legitimate Government in Yemen. The Security
Council must therefore work to shoulder the collective
responsibility in fully implementing its resolutions and
translating its words into deeds.
We reaffirm our support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, who has reiterated the
wish of the international community to find a political
solution to the crisis based on the aforementioned three
terms of reference. That would end the humanitarian
suffering of the brotherly Yemeni people and the
threats to international and regional security posed by
the Houthis, who continue to target the territories of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia with ballistic missiles
and to threaten the safety of the international maritime
navigation in Bab Al-Mandab and the Red Sea.
In conclusion, we welcome the United Kingdom’s
intention to address the media.
Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, let me thank the delegation of
the United Kingdom for requesting this meeting and the
delegation of the United States for convening it. We are
also grateful to Mr. Martin Griffiths for his excellent
and enlightening briefing and his tireless work to
achieve peace in Yemen.
In August, the delegation of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea expressed its support for the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen in holding
consultations with the warring parties, on 6 September
in Geneva, in order to initiate confidence-building
measures for the peace process. In that regard, we support
Mr. Griffiths efforts to oversee the consultations and
for all that he has been able to achieve in his meetings
with the Yemeni Government delegation, headed by the
Yemeni Minister for Foreign Affairs. At the same time,
we express our concern about the absence of the Houthi
delegation at that very important meeting. For us, the
Geneva conference represented an opportunity for the
belligerent parties to initiate and support a new process
that would not only help stop hostilities, but also pave
the road towards facilitating negotiations leading to
the parties’ reconciliation and achieving lasting and
sustainable peace in Yemen.
Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about the
vulnerable situation of civilians in the nearly three-year
conflict, with no immediate solution in sight,
which clearly will prolong the suffering of the most
vulnerable — the defenceless civilian population. My

S/PV. 8348

delegation therefore calls on all parties involved in the
conflict — in keeping with the outcome of the meeting
held in Geneva — to understand that a political process
characterized by frank and inclusive dialogue, while
respecting human rights, international humanitarian
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, is the
only way to find a lasting solution to the crisis.
As the facts on the ground have repeatedly
demonstrated, there is no military solution to the
conflict, My delegation categorically condemns any
form of violence that targets civilian populations.
Conversely, we believe that civilians in need must be
provided with access to humanitarian assistance.
In conclusion, we commend and are grateful for
the work of the Security Council, which, despite the
difficulties that it faces, ceaselessly continues to devise
solutions to restore peace and stability in Yemen.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the holding of this Security
Council briefing to update us on the most recent
developments in the Yemeni conflict, in particular the
continued fighting between Government forces and the
Houthi rebels, the political process for exiting the crisis
and the humanitarian situation. My delegation thanks
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen, for his excellent briefing.
Despite the calls of the international community
for an immediate end to hostilities, fighting continues,
in particular in the strategic port city of Al-Hudaydah,
which since 8 September has been the theatre of violent
clashes between pro-Government forces and Houthi
rebels. According to corresponding reports from
medical sources and hospitals, the toll includes 84
killed combatants, of whom 73 were Houthi rebels and
11 were members of pro-Government forces. Overall,
the United Nations estimates that the conflict claimed
6,660 civilian victims from March 2015 to August 2018,
although the levels of violence during the clashes and
the sophisticated nature of the weapons and methods
deployed by the belligerents would lead us to believe
that the number of victims could be higher. With regard
to the atrocities committed throughout Yemen since the
beginning of the conflict in 2014, Côte d’Ivoire calls for
those responsible for those acts to be held accountable
and for all parties to respect international humanitarian
law. My country also urges them to refrain from
hindering the delivery of humanitarian aid in any way,

18-282049/13

S/PV.8348

The situation in the Middle East

which, under international law, can be prosecuted
before the relevant international competent courts.
In addition to the heavy toll caused by the clashes
and their humanitarian consequences, the impasse
of the Geneva talks between Houthis and Yemeni
Government representatives is a source of great
concern to Côte d’Ivoire. Hope for the resumption of
dialogue among the Yemeni enemy brothers quickly
faded owing to the absence of representatives of the
rebel forces at the negotiations held on 6 September
in Geneva. Despite that failure and the widespread
pessimistic about the prospects for a rapid resumption
of negotiations, my delegation believes that the United
Nations must use every means at its disposal within
the framework of preventive diplomacy to bring the
parties to the conflict together to resume talks. To that
end, my delegation encourages the work of Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, and urges him to pursue his mediation and his
good offices in his contact with Houthi and Yemeni
Government representatives. We take this opportunity
to call for a greater role in this effort to be played by
regional actors, in particular regional organizations, in
working harder to advance dialogue aimed at achieving
a solution to the Yemeni crisis.
My country’s faith in dialogue as the peaceful
means of settling conflicts and the most effective tool
of preventive diplomacy leads us to believe with firm
conviction that there will be no lasting peace in Yemen
without an inclusive political process. Côte d’Ivoire
calls once again on the warring parties to lay down their
weapons so as to establish an environment conducive
to resuming talks, which is the only way to exit the
current impasse and turn hopes for lasting peace into
the reality dearly sought by millions of Yemenis.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the United Kingdom for convening
today’s meeting. We also thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, for
his detailed briefing on the work with the parties to the
Yemeni conflict, including within the framework of the
latest consultations in Geneva. Russia supported and
contributed to achieving the initiative of the Special
Envoy and launching the negotiation process. We
believe that this is very much needed and is a unique
opportunity to end the bloody conflict.
We did not expect that it would be easy or perhaps
even possible to move the Yemeni conflict to the
10/13

11/09/2018

political sphere. We believe that the process has been
launched and must now be built upon. We pin our hopes
on Mr. Griffiths convincing the parties that they need
to continue the political process in the framework of
shuttle diplomacy and to make them aware that a military
solution is not viable and has no future. It is important
that he maintain open channels of communication with
all key players.
We consider that the support of his mediation
mission, along with the absence of attacks and missile
launches, will contribute to maintaining a calm situation
around Al-Hudaydah. Everyone must demonstrate
restraint and not try to resolve the situation by force.
Developing confidence-building measures, including
the release of prisoners and detainees is necessary. We
would like to add that it is important to unify the efforts
of all Yemenis in combating terrorism on the Arabian
peninsula, which has taken on a threatening scale.
We believe that the potential for collective
international support for the efforts of the Special
Envoy has not been fully utilized. In our view, what
is needed is an effective, balanced and focused format
of support for the efforts of the United Nations. It is
critical that the format operate on an integrated basis.
We would like to underline that finding solutions to the
Yemeni conflict will be an important contribution to
stability in the entire subregion.
We wish to remind the Council of our proposals
to launch — in the Persian Gulf and, in the long-run,
in the whole Middle East — a process of developing
a package of security- and confidence-building
measures. That kind of architecture, in which all key
countries of the region should participate, including
the Persian Gulf States and Iran, would contribute not
only to strengthening comprehensive and indivisible
security in that part of the world, but also resolving
long-standing and newer crisis situations, including the
Yemeni conflict.
Threats and confrontations should cede place to
dialogue to dialogue and cooperation. Russia will
continue, in consultation with all interested parties,
its efforts aimed at implementing the Russian concept
of security and cooperation in the Persian Gulf. We
believe that it is timely and necessary.
In conclusion, we call on all parties involved in the
Yemeni conflict to actively participate in the mediation
efforts of Mr. Griffiths. There is no military solution
to the Yemeni crisis. For our part, we will continue to
18-28204

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

support the work of the Special Envoy, alongside all of
the parties to the Yemeni confrontation.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, for his briefing and we
commend his tireless efforts to facilitate the relaunching
of the intra-Yemeni dialogue. China regrets that the
parties failed to seize the opportunity represented by
the United Nations-sponsored Geneva consultations in
Yemen, which were not held as planned. The Special
Envoy indicated that he would remain engaged with
various parties in Yemen in order to bring them back to
the track of political dialogue. We commend his efforts.
Soon after taking office, the newly appointed
Chinese Ambassador to Yemen went to Geneva to meet
with the Special Envoy and other stakeholders, thereby
demonstrating China’s willingness to actively advance
the political settlement process. China will continue
to provide its constructive support to the Yemeni
political process.
At present, the protracted conflict and worsening
humanitarian situation profoundly impact regional
peace, stability and security. The Yemeni people and the
international community fully expect that the Yemeni
issue can be restored to the political track. We hope that
parties with influence will continue to push the Yemeni
parties to demonstrate a spirit of reconciliation, narrow
their differences and prevent the escalation of the
conflict so as to achieve peace, security and stability in
Yemen as soon as possible.
A political settlement is the only way to achieve
lasting peace in Yemen. The international community
should continue to support Yemen’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. It
should also support the good offices and efforts of the
United Nations and the Special Envoy, push for the
early resumption of intra-Yemeni dialogue and build
a sustained political process on the basis of relevant
Council resolutions, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its implementation mechanism, and
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference in
Yemen. An inclusive settlement can be reached through
dialogue and reconciliation.
It is important to ensure unhindered humanitarian
access. That is critical. The relevant parties should
come together in order to ensure safe and unimpeded
humanitarian assistance so as to create conditions
conducive to alleviating humanitarian suffering in

S/PV. 8348

Yemen. China stands ready, alongside the international
community, to support the Special Envoy in continuing
his constructive role in moving forward the process to
settle the Yemeni issue.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom for requesting this meeting.
We also thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths for his
briefing. We continue to support his tireless efforts to
facilitate a political solution to the crisis in Yemen and
we commend his diplomatic endeavours to relaunch the
political process after two years.
We know that this will not be an easy task and we
understand the difficulties encountered. Nevertheless,
we agree with the Special Envoy that the Geneva
consultations mark the beginning of the process and we
encourage him to persist in his efforts. We commend
the Yemeni Government for participating in the Geneva
consultations and for engaging constructively with the
Special Envoy on issues related to the peace process,
and particularly on confidence-building measures.
On the other hand, it is regrettable that the Houthis
did not attend the consultations. We understand that the
Special Envoy will be meeting with the representatives
of the Houthis in the coming days, and we hope they
will demonstrate the political commitment necessary
to meaningfully and constructively engage with the
Special Envoy.
At this critical juncture, we believe that the
Council should continue to support the Special Envoy
as he makes every possible effort to fully restart the
political process, which we believe is the only way to
end the suffering of the Yemeni people and to address
the legitimate security concerns of regional actors.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for coming back to
brief us. We obviously share his frustration that the
Houthis did not show up in Geneva. He did everything
he could to get them there. The Houthis should know
that the members of the Security Council are not going
to tolerate attempts to undermine the efforts of the
United Nations. While Geneva did not work as we had
hoped, it is urgent to find a way to bring the parties
to the table. That is why we are here. We want to give
Mr. Griffiths the strongest possible backing so that
he can go back and tell everyone that they have got to
commit to peace in Yemen.

18-2820411/13

S/PV.8348

The situation in the Middle East

The stakes on all sides are so high. It would be a
mistake for the parties to dismiss the idea of peace talks
and resort to military options. The temperature is rising
across the region because of this war. Ballistic missile
attacks into Saudi territory continue. There are threats
to freedom of navigation in the Red Sea. Chaos in
Yemen is spilling across its borders. We are potentially
one missile strike away from a full-blown crisis. There
is an alternative.
As we heard today, there is a remarkable degree of
Security Council unity on Yemen. Everyone around the
table wants to see diplomacy succeed. The parties must
act to help the Yemeni people. They can do things right
now that will actually make the Yemeni people better off
instead of accelerating this humanitarian catastrophe.
They can help the Yemeni people by finding a way to
pay the salaries of teachers and allowing kids to go
back to school, which is a step that any parent in this
Chamber can immediately understand.
They can help by opening up access to medical
flights so that ordinary Yemenis who desperately need
medical treatment abroad for conditions like cancer or
dialysis can get help. They can help by doing everything
they can to avoid targeting civilians and civilian
objects, and by holding accountable those responsible
for civilian casualties. They can help by making sure
that humanitarian aid and life-saving commercial goods
reach Yemenis who need it through all of the country’s
ports, including Al-Hudaydah.
We know that Mr. Griffiths is working on many of
those points, as well as others. We urge the parties to
make rapid progress on getting those things done before
convening for a new round of talks. There should be no
question of the confidence the Security Council has in
Martin Griffiths. We are losing time and patience. All
sides would be wise to work with Martin and reach out
to him immediately.
I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Bin Mubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your country,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to wish the United
States delegation every success. We also thank you for
this opportunity to address the Council.
12/13

11/09/2018

On this sad day for the friendly American people,
we express our condolences to the American people and
Government, as well as to the families of the victims of
11 September 2001 terrorist attack.
We would also like to commend the representative
of the United Kingdom, Ambassador Karen Pierce, for
her wise stewardship of the Council’s work last month.
The delegation of Yemen went to the Geneva
consultations in good faith on the date and place
indicated, bringing with it the pain and hope of the
Yemeni people for concrete progress that would reflect
positively on their lives. At the invitation extended to
us by Mr. Martin Griffiths to attend the consultations,
His Excellency President Hadi Mansour was personally
committed to ensuring that they were successful. He
was in constant coordination with our team and with
the Yemeni people with a view to reviving hopes for
achieving the long-awaited peace.
The Government of Yemen has demonstrated and
will continue to demonstrate its full support for the
Special Envoy. We commend his efforts to ensure the
progress of the peace process and his sincere attempts
to bring together the Government’s delegation with
the party involved in the coup d’état after more than
two years. We will be involved in all efforts aimed at
reviving peace, restoring the State and putting an end
to the coup d’état.
The Security Council has overseen that process with
great care and attention. On the eve of the negotiations,
the Council issued a press statement (SC/13484) in
which it reiterated its call for the full implementation
of its resolutions and statements, including resolution
2216 (2015). The Council also called on the parties to
take advantage of this opportunity to ease tensions and
participate fully, constructively and in good faith to
build confidence and take the first step towards putting
an end to the conflict, which has caused so much
suffering for the Yemeni people.
The Houthis, on their side and with their wellknown irresponsibility, did not attend to the talks. In
fact, with a great deal of arrogance they exploited the
interest and efforts of the international community to
achieve peace in Yemen and avoid a military solution.
That militia has an erroneous interpretation of some
reports issued by certain international organizations.
I recall our letter to the Council dated 24 August,
just a few days before the start of those negotiations,
18-28204

11/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

regarding the meeting of the Head of the coup delegation
with Hassan Nasrallah. We said that this would have
a negative impact on the consultations and would
demonstrate the extent to which the Houthis are linked
to Iran and its proxies in the region. In fact, they are
trying to establish an Iranian model in Yemen, which
the Yemeni people and its leadership will never accept.
Before its delegation went to Geneva, the
Government of my country underscored that it was
necessary to prioritize confidence-building measures
agreed upon during the Biel peace negotiations in 2015.
Emphasis needed to be placed on the humanitarian
aspects, including the release of prisoners and hostages,
and on ensuring access to humanitarian aid without
interference or obstacles. It was necessary to focus
on measures that would strengthen the capacity of the
Yemeni Central Bank in order to ease the suffering
of the people and resume the payment of salaries. In
fact, the Government made efforts and worked with the
Office of the Special Envoy on all those points.
The Houthis have tried to impose preconditions to
their participation at all stages of peace negotiations.
They have tried to undermine the efforts of the
Special Envoy by creating obstacles, in spite of all
the flexibility and logistical support provided by the
Office of the Special Envoy, as well as the coalition
to restore legitimacy in Yemen. The coalition showed
maximum restraint. In spite of that, missiles continue
to be launched against populated Yemeni cities and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
It is regrettable that certain words are used to justify
that kind of behaviour, which represents an evident
challenge to the international community. Failure to
describe what is happening accurately in Yemen will not
help to resolve that crisis. What is happening, in fact,
is not a dispute between parties to a conflict, as some
have described, but a coup against a constitutionally
legitimate Government elected by an overwhelming
majority of Yemenis after a comprehensive political
settlement followed by national dialogue. It is a coup
d’état conducted by an ideological armed group that
has nothing but arrogance and disdain for Yemenis and
believes that it has a God-given right to govern. From
the very first day of the coup d’état, that group has
tried not only to overthrow the Government and even
the whole State, but to undermine the very foundation
of our country and change its national characteristics.

S/PV. 8348

It has been implementing ideology-driven sectarian
programmes to change the common denominator that
unites Yemenis and to destroy their social fabric and
national pillars.
On behalf of my country’s Government and the
suffering mothers, children and the injured, and in the
name of those who have been killed and the prisoners
and detainees, I reiterate my call on the United Nations
and the Security Council to assume direct responsibility
and to implement their resolutions. It is essential to force
that coup group to respect the will of the Yemeni people
and the international community in order to achieve a
lasting peace based on the three terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Initiative and its implementation
mechanism, the outcome of the national dialogue and
the resolutions of the Security Council, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
This month marks the anniversary of the
26 September revolution, which the Yemenis supported
in order to put an end to the sectarianism that dominated
the country during the ruling of former imams. That
rebel group is trying to revive the past, but I can assure
members of the Council that this will never happen
because we believe in the September and October
revolutions and are ready to defend them, along with
their ultimate goals that were written with the blood of
Yemeni people.
Before concluding, I want to show those present
a picture, which I believe to be more eloquent than
a thousand words. The picture is of Abdel-Rahman
Akram Atran, a 10-year old Yemeni child, who died
two days ago after he was shot in the head. While he
was playing, his football touched the leg of a Houthi
leader by mistake. That Houthi leader simply took out
his pistol and shot the child in the head. The incident
happened in the city of Ibb in Yemen. The child is the
son of a professor at Sana’a University. How long will
the suffering continue to be inflicted on the children
and women by the coup group, which defies the whole
world and tries to impose the law of the jungle?
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list. I now invite the members of the Council
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

18-2820413/13
