United Nations

A/RES/64/213

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 56 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 21 December 2009
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/64/423/Add.1)]

64/213. Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed
Countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Brussels Declaration 1 and the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010, 2 adopted at the Third United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
0F

1F

Recalling also the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 3
2F

Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,

4
3F

Recalling its resolution 61/1 of 19 September 2006, entitled “Declaration of
the high-level meeting of the sixty-first session of the General Assembly on the
midterm comprehensive global review of the implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010”,
Recalling also its resolution 63/227 of 19 December 2008, in which it decided
to convene the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries
in 2011 at a high level,
Taking note of the Ministerial Declaration adopted at the Ministerial Meeting
of the Least Developed Countries held in New York on 29 September 2009, 5
4F

Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2009/31 of 31 July 2009 on
the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2001–2010,
Recalling also the Cotonou Strategy for the Further Implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010, 6
as an initiative owned and led by the least developed countries,
5F

_______________
1

A/CONF.191/13, chap. I.
Ibid., chap. II.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
See resolution 60/1.
5
A/C.2/64/3, annex.
6
A/61/117, annex I.
2

09-47461

*0947461*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/213

Recalling further the Outcome of the Conference on the World Financial and
Economic Crisis and Its Impact on Development, 7 where it was recognized that the
economic and social progress achieved by the least developed countries in recent
years is being threatened by the global economic and financial crisis and that, in
order to adequately respond to the crisis, developing countries, especially the least
developed countries, will need a larger share of any additional resources, both shortterm liquidity and long-term development financing,
6F

Reaffirming that the Programme of Action constitutes a fundamental framework
for a strong global partnership, whose goal is to accelerate sustained economic
growth, sustainable development and poverty eradication in the least developed
countries,
Urging the least developed countries to strengthen country ownership in the
implementation of the Programme of Action by, inter alia, translating its goals and
targets into specific measures within their national development frameworks and
poverty eradication strategies, including, where they exist, poverty reduction
strategy papers, promoting broad-based and inclusive dialogue on development with
relevant stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, and enhancing
domestic resource mobilization and aid management,
Urging development partners to fully implement, in a timely manner,
commitments in the Programme of Action, and to exercise individual best efforts to
continue to increase their financial and technical support for its implementation,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
1.
of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade
2001–2010; 8
7F

2.
Also takes note of the progress being made in the preparatory process for
the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries;
3.
Welcomes and accepts with appreciation the offer of the Government of
Turkey to host the Conference;
4.
Decides to convene the Conference in the first half of 2011 for a duration
of five days, from within existing resources, at a venue and time to be determined in
consultation with the host Government;
Also decides that the meeting of the intergovernmental preparatory
5.
committee envisaged in paragraph 5 of resolution 63/227 will be organized in
New York in two parts, from 10 to 14 January 2011 and from 18 to 25 April 2011,
each of five working days;
Requests the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed
6.
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States,
as the focal point for the preparations for the Conference, as requested in resolution
63/227, to ensure effective, efficient and timely preparations for the Conference and
to further mobilize and coordinate the active involvement of the organizations of the
United Nations system;
Requests the organizations of the United Nations system, including the
7.
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Conference on Trade

_______________
7
8

2

Resolution 63/303, annex.
A/64/80-E/2009/79 and Corr.1.

A/RES/64/213

and Development, the regional commissions, the specialized agencies, and funds
and programmes, and invites the Bretton Woods institutions, the World Trade
Organization and other relevant international and regional organizations, within
their respective mandates, to provide necessary support and actively contribute to
the preparatory process and to the Conference itself;
Requests the Secretary-General to ensure, as appropriate, the full involvement
8.
of resident coordinators and country teams in preparations for the Conference, in
particular in country- and regional-level preparations;
Invites Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
9.
major groups and other donors to contribute to the Trust Fund for the participation
of representatives of the least developed countries in both the preparatory process
and the Conference itself;
10. Recognizes the importance of the contributions of all relevant stakeholders,
including parliaments, civil society, non-governmental organizations and the private
sector, to the Conference and its preparatory process, stresses, in this regard, the
need for active participation, including from the least developed countries, and
invites donors to make appropriate contributions for that purpose;
11. Requests the Secretary-General, with the assistance of concerned
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, including the Department of
Public Information of the Secretariat, in collaboration with the Office of the High
Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, to take the necessary measures to
intensify their public information efforts and other appropriate initiatives to enhance
public awareness in favour of the Conference, including by highlighting its
objectives and its significance;
12. Emphasizes the importance of country-level preparations as a critical
input to the preparatory process for the Conference and the implementation of and
follow-up to its outcome, and calls upon the Governments of the least developed
countries to submit their reports in a timely manner;
13. Requests the executive secretaries of the Economic Commission for
Africa and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, in close
coordination and cooperation with the Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, to provide the necessary substantive and organizational
arrangements and to organize the regional-level preparatory review meetings in the
context of the annual sessions of 2010 of their respective commissions, as called for
by the General Assembly in its resolution 63/227;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fifth session a report on the further implementation of the Programme of
Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2001–2010 as well as on
the implementation of the present resolution, including the state of the substantive,
organizational and logistic preparations for the Conference.
66th plenary meeting
21 December 2009

3
