S/PV.7787

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7787th meeting

Monday, 10 October 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng
Mr. Moustafa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Ciss
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2016/824)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-31535 (E)
*1631535*

S/PV.7787

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2016/824)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and Mr. Abderrazzak Laassel, Chair of
the Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission and Deputy Permanent
Representative of Morocco.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/824, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): The Council
has before it the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/824) on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) . I would like to briefly update the Council
on key developments since the issuance of the report.
We are at the end of the rainy season — a traditionally
volatile period — which has been used by armed groups
and other spoilers to advance their interests. Last week,
on 4 October, tensions flared when a member of the
Central African Armed Forces, the former of head of
the personal security team of the interim President
Samba-Panza, was shot and killed in the predominantly
Muslim neighbourhood of PK5 in the third district
of Bangui by a gunman reportedly affiliated with a
self-defence group from PK5. In retaliatory acts of
violence, a total of 12 people were killed and another
2/7

10/10/2016

20 wounded by some by uncontrolled elements of the
Central African Armed Forces, self-defence groups
and unknown perpetrators. Fourteen people are still
missing, but may be hiding.
MINUSCA acted decisively to prevent an outbreak
of intercommunal violence, including by securing the
perimeter of the PK5 neigbourhood. It also engaged with
the Central African Republic authorities at the highest
level to coordinate the response. Representatives of the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
Muslim community called for calm. President Touadéra
ordered an investigation into the killings, including the
reprisal actions. The President also activated — for
the first time — the joint coordination mechanism
between MINUSCA and the national security and
defence forces. Joint patrols were undertaken and
MINUSCA adjusted its protection efforts to better and
more directly respond to the needs of civilians and to
encourage community dialogue. Calm has since largely
returned to Bangui, but the tension remains palpable.
For example, on 7 October the body of a young Muslim
man was dumped by alleged elements of the Central
African Armed Forces in front of one of MINUSCA’s
camp. The Government, MINUSCA and civil society
leaders are making an effort to break the cycle of
violence and put an end to impunity.
In the provinces, in the north-west and in KagaBandoro, recent clashes between anti-Balaka and exSéléka factions and retaliatory attacks against the
civilian population have resulted in significant loss of
human life and forced 3,200 people to flee their homes.
The more than 16 attacks on aid groups in the region
in September alone forced many organizations to
temporarily relocate staff and reduce or suspend their
operations. MINUSCA has enhanced its uniformed
personnel deployments and used its good offices in
these areas to protect civilians and reduce tensions.
Meanwhile, in the north-east of the country,
members of some ex-Séléka factions have continued to
gather in the town of Bria for an assembly, which some
want to use to reunite the ex-Séléka. MINUSCA, in
line with its mandate, maintains a robust posture in the
area. The Mission continues to enforce the weaponsfree zone and to communicate its intent to arrest any
combatant caught in town with a weapon.
In stark contrast with these worrying developments,
the Central African authorities continued to make
progress in implementing President Touadéra’s vision
16-31535

10/10/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

for the country, including by engaging the armed
groups to start a formal dialogue on the launch of the
national programme on disarmament, demobilisation,
reintegration and repatriation. The first meeting of
the consultative monitoring committee is expected to
be convened in Bangui on 12 October by President
Touadera. Representatives of 11 out of the 14 armed
groups are expected to participate. Those refusing to
attend include the ex-Séléka Front patriotique pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique; the Return, Reclamation
and Rehabilitation, or the 3R; and the anti-Balaka
Mokom faction.
In line with its strategic objective, MINUSCA
has supported all the Government’s outreach and
awareness-raising efforts to help lay the groundwork
for the dialogue. Last Wednesday, MINUSCA met with
ex-Séléka representatives in Bria and urged them to join
the first committee meeting. Indeed, many of the leaders
agreed to participate and reiterated their commitment
to forging lasting peace, while nonetheless noting
their concerns over the Government’s commitment
to inclusive solutions. In this regard, the ex-Séléka
assembly in Bria can be seen as an effort to strengthen
the negotiation position of certain armed groups before
the dialogue.
Continued international support for the Central
African people in their endeavours to stabilize the
country is now more critical than ever. The importance
of the donors’ conference, hosted by the European Union
in Brussels on 17 November, cannot be overemphasized.
In previous crises in Central Africa, the international
community often failed to sustain its engagement in
the country over time, which critically undermined
stabilization efforts. While the primary responsibility
for the restoration of peace and stability rests with the
Central Africans, the international community must
also keep its word. I would like to mention that, in a
demonstration of the United Nations commitment to
peace in the country, the Deputy Secretary-General
agreed to lead the Organization’s delegation in Brussels.
Preparations for the Brussels conference
have benefited from a unity of effort between the
international community and the Central African
Government. The country’s needs for the next five
years have been jointly assessed by the Government,
the United Nations, the European Union and the World
Bank. As a political complement to these efforts, I
welcome President Touadéra’s personal commitment to
strengthening cooperation between the Central African

S/PV.7787

Republic and the international community through
the mutual accountability framework, sometimes
called the “compact”, which is in development. At
the ministerial-level meeting held on 23 September
on the margins of the general debate, President
Touadéra announced his intention to finalize this
mutual accountability framework before the Brussels
conference.
It is therefore more critical than ever to maintain
a positive momentum to build peace in the Central
African Republic. Important progress has inarguably
been made so far, but there is a great need for it.
The country’s institutions must be strengthened in
a spirit of inclusiveness to make progress in national
reconciliation. Key reforms must be undertaken in
the security and defence sectors. The promotion and
protection of human rights needs to be strengthened,
and impunity must be brought to an end. Inclusive
economic development must be fostered. State authority
under the rule of law must be extended. Finally, basic
services for all must be improved.
Recent events show that the situation remains
fragile, and spoilers are still active on both sides, I would
say. Central African institutions must do everything
in their power and more to stop attacks against
humanitarian actors and help create the conditions for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons,
an area that has seen very little progress. More than
ever, MINUSCA and the international community
must stand firmly by the side of the Central Africans to
address these challenges.
Everything that can be done, in particular by the
members of the Council, to rally the greatest number
of Member States, including non-traditional donors, to
support the country ahead of the Brussels conference
should be done. With such concerted and persistent
effort, there is a good chance that we can help Central
Africans to lay down the foundations for a lasting peace
in a country that has suffered for too long.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Laassel.
Mr. Laassel: I would like to start by Ambassador
Hilale’s apologies for his absence today. He was in fact
here in the Chamber earlier this morning, but he was
called to speak at the Fourth Committee. I am therefore
making this statement on his behalf.

16-315353/7

S/PV.7787

The situation in the Central African Republic

I would like to start by congratulating the Russian
Federation on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October, and by thanking
you, Mr. President, for your invitation to speak in the
Security Council today. It is always a pleasure and an
honour for Morocco to brief the Council on behalf of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), in its capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration
of the PBC.
I would also like to welcome and support the
comprehensive briefing delivered by the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping, Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, on the situation in the Central African
Republic, and commend him for his tireless efforts
aimed at building peace in that country and for the
cooperation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations with the PBC.
It is my pleasure to brief the members of the Council
on Mr. Hilale’s most recent visit to the Central African
Republic, in particular on his participation at the ninth
meeting of the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic (ICG-CAR). The report of his
mission will be circulated to all members in due course,
following the usual practice.
On the occasion of his second visit to Bangui,
Mr. Hilale was invited to participate at the ninth
meeting of the International Contact Group on the
Central African Republic, co-chaired by the African
Union and the Republic of the Congo. As mentioned
in his report, the meeting was attended by 25 countries
and by representatives of several organizations. Strong
regional mobilization was noted during this meeting
and should be encouraged and welcomed.
The main issues raised during the Bangui meeting
were as follows. The first tier of issues were political
issues; security issues; disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration (DDRR) issues; and
security sector reform (SSR) issues. The second tier
of issues involved justice, reconciliation and the fight
against impunity. The third tier of issues related to
the humanitarian situation, refugees and internally
displaced persons. The fourth tier of issues related
to recovery and peacebuilding. Since each of those
topics are addressed in the report, I will limit myself
to highlighting the main issues discussed during the
Bangui meeting and in Mr. Hilale’s various exchanges
throughout his visit. While other issues such as the
humanitarian or the economic situations will not be
4/7

10/10/2016

addressed in this briefing, they remain of paramount
importance.
The Government expressed its strong commitment to
the success of the DDRR, SSR and national reconciliation
programmes based on the recommendations of the
Bangui Forum. Presidential decrees on the coordination
of these three programmes were promulgated in order
to support the efforts of the Government in this regard
in a coordinated manner. Efforts were also made by
the Government in the implementation of the Special
Criminal Court.
With respect to disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration, interlocutors expressed
the need for strong political and financial support.
The main task of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) will be to support the
Government in implementing a DDRR programme. To
date, the World Bank is the main partner, financing
approximately half of the estimated budget. This is
not the first time that a DDRR programme has been
planned for the Central African Republic. It is therefore
important to benefit from the lessons learned from past
DDRR programmes. DDRR is a vast and complex issue
that will have a crucial impact on the stabilization of
the country.
The main problem remains funding, but other
aspects, such as the identification of beneficiaries
or the inclusiveness of the entire process, are also
important and must be dealt with carefully. For its part,
the Government is encouraged to redouble its efforts
and pursue its dialogue in an inclusive manner with
all armed groups. We welcome the fact that dialogue
with the armed groups is scheduled to restart in the
coming days, as Mr. Ladsous mentioned earlier. We
take this opportunity to commend the commitment of
the Government, MINUSCA and the World Bank in
this regard and call upon all involved stakeholders to
increase their efforts aimed at investing in building the
foundation of a successful DDRR process as early as
possible.
Secondly, with respect to security sector reform
in the Central African Republic, SSR is crucial for the
stabilization of the country, in particular with regard
to the extension of State authority. In accordance with
its mandate, MINUSCA, with the backing of other
partners, has the challenging task of supporting the
Government in this critical endeavour. In this regard,
16-31535

10/10/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

we welcome the involvement of the European Union,
which initiated a military training and advisory
mission with the objective of training two battalions of
the national armed forces with a view to constituting a
republican and professional army under the authority of
the Government.
We also welcome the commitment of the countries
of the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, announced during the ICG-CAR meeting,
to train one battalion per country. The implementation
of this commitment will be an important step towards
the success of the programme, and further bilateral
support is also encouraged given the important needs of
the country. Based on the draft national security policy,
we note that the SSR programme will also need to
include the reinforcement of the police and gendarmerie,
as well as a clarification of their respective mandates,
with the aim of extending the authority of the State to
the entire territory of the country.
Thirdly, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/824) and during the ICG-CAR meeting,
national reconciliation remains a matter of concern,
particularly due to the fact that the national reconciliation
strategy has still not been adopted. However, some local
initiatives are encouraging, especially the activities of
the religious platform, which is still playing a vital role
in that area. The PBC, with its experience in this area,
remains committed to supporting all kinds of initiatives
aimed at addressing communal tensions, and welcomes
the Secretary-General’s commitment to supporting the
Government in this regard.
Last but not least, there is the issue of the rule of law.
As has often been mentioned, national reconciliation,
in particular, but also to a certain extent DDRR and
SSR, cannot be successful without addressing the issue
of impunity. I am pleased to report that some key steps
leading to the establishment of the Special Criminal
Court have been taken, thereby allowing for the launch
of the recruitment process for national and international
magistrates.
The Central African Republic has come a long
way since its last relapse into conflict. Since 2012, the
Council has been following closely the development
of the situation in the country and has witnessed the
positive steps achieved recently following the return
of constitutional order. Yet the path to stability is still
being hampered by many challenges, and a risk into
relapse is, unfortunately, still a plausible scenario.

S/PV.7787

As illustrated by Mr. Ladsous, the security situation
remains volatile. That is probably the main reason that
the support of the international community will be
crucial in the coming months. We are aware that many
situations around the world need the Council’s urgent
attention, but the singularity of the situation in the
Central African Republic, its geographical situation,
the impact of the crisis on the region and the relatively
modest investments needed should make the case of the
Central African Republic a priority for the international
community.
For all those reasons, it is our collective duty to
ensure the success of the important next step, which is
the upcoming Donors Conference to be held in Brussels
on 17 November. The national strategy for recovery
and peace consolidation, as well as the framework
for mutual accountability with the international
community, will need to be shared in advance to ensure
an optimal preparation for the Donors Conference. In
the upcoming weeks, the configuration will organize
an event with the main stakeholders in order to inform
PBC members of the specifics of the Conference and
contribute to making it a success. It is time we translate
our efforts into tangible contributions that can improve
the lives of women and men in the Central African
Republic.
I would like to conclude by thanking the Central
African authorities for their hospitality and their
constant support for the activities of the configuration.
I would also like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga and his team for
their assistance and all of their efforts.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Laassel for the briefing that he made on behalf of
Ambassador Hilale.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Hervé Ladsous, for
his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/824) and an update on the most recent
developments in the Central African Republic. I also
thank Mr. Laassel for his briefing of the report of the
Chair of the Central African Republic configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.

16-315355/7

S/PV.7787

The situation in the Central African Republic

Uruguay acknowledges that the Central African
Republic took a decisive step this year with a
democratically elected President taking up office,
the formation of an inclusive Government and the
setting up of a National Assembly, among other
important milestones. Those achievements must now
be consolidated by addressing the root causes of the
crisis. To that end, we encourage the new President and
his Government to take specific, visible measures to
achieve national reconciliation. In that regard, Uruguay
welcomes the various reforms being implemented by
the current Government, with the support of United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and other international partners. Such reforms are being
implemented in the defence, security and justice sectors,
as well as in the national disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programme. Nonetheless,
in spite of the progress being made, the Central African
Republic continues to face monumental challenges, in
particular with regard to the humanitarian and security
situations.
Uruguay remains concerned about the country’s
fragile humanitarian situation, as more than
2.3 million people — virtually half of the country’s
population — remains dependent upon humanitarian
assistance. It is also estimated that there are more
than 450,000 refugees in neighbouring countries and
approximately 380,000 internally displaced. In that
regard, we trust that national authorities, with the
support of the humanitarian community, MINUSCA and
other international partners, will continue their efforts
to ease the situation and meet the basic humanitarian
needs of the population.
With regard to the security situation, increasing
tensions among communities and clashes among armed
groups are a source of concern. In addition, crime and
serious human rights abuses by armed groups continue
to pose a threat to civilians. In that respect, Uruguay
condemns the incidents sparked by the murder of a
Central African Republic army officer, on Tuesday
4 October, in the capital of Bangui, which have, to date,
led to the death of, at least, 11 civilians. To end the
insecurity and human rights violations, it is critical
to combat impunity. In that regard, it should be noted
that the Government is committed to selecting and
appointing magistrates in order to set up the Special
Criminal Court before the end of the year, which would
help to put an end to impunity.
6/7

10/10/2016

In conclusion, Uruguay highlights the efforts made
by the Government of the Central African Republic,
which, with the support of the United Nations, the World
Bank and the European Union, is making progress on
a national strategy to restore and rebuild peace, whose
outcome document could be used as an instrument
to mobilize resources during the Donors Conference
scheduled to be held in Brussels on 17 November.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Central African Republic.
Ms. Kpongo (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would like in particular to thank Mr. Ladsous
for his presentation of the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2016/824), which was comprehensive and
focused the attention of all of the members of the
Security Council on what remains to be done in the
Central African Republic.
Despite the efforts that have already been made
and those that the Government, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and
the international community continue to make, the
situation in the Central African Republic remains
extremely fragile. That is why it is important to
continue to pay particular attention to the situation. We
are not talking about inter-community actions; these
are really provocations. I would prefer to hear mention
being made of gangs and of people who snub peace in
our country in order to ensure that we do not achieve
the goals we have set.
It is important to ensure that resolution 2301 (2016)
is implemented and, in particular when it comes to
non-State armed groups. It is those armed groups that
continue to sow the seeds of the terror throughout the
country, and even in Bangui. When someone is killed
and it cannot be explained, it elicits a negative reaction
and more people die as a result. It is crucial for the
Security Council to continue to support MINUSCA’s
efforts and to ensure that all material and logistical
resources needed are supplied, as mentioned in the
report. This report should compel us to do more and to
realize that there is still much left to be done. If we do
not pay attention, what is occurring now could continue
and the very implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation
and
reintegration
programme, and even reconciliation, could pose more
problems.
16-31535

10/10/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

We have already engaged in dialogue in the Central
African Republic in the past. We have tried to ensure
that communities work with each other. After the
elections and when the transition ended, the situation
was going well. But regrettably, we acknowledge that
the efforts we had been making to achieve the goals
we set are now being threatened. That is why I will
continue to support the work of MINUSCA, of the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and of all those who participated in the
latest contact group meeting, so that we can work
together to ensure that our country will succeed in
re-establishing peace. When we talk about the Brussels
Conference, what we reap there will fall short. We will
still face the issue of security and that of struggling
to ensure that every Central African can enjoy safety
and go about their business in peace. The President has

S/PV.7787

emphasized that in his statements, even following the
recent unfortunate events. He has underscored that he
is not the President of a particular group, but that he is
the President of all Central Africans. And we as Central
Africans must stress that point ourselves in order that
people understand that the time has come for us to come
together to work as one.
I thank the Security Council for having once
again considered this agenda item and for convening
this meeting on the subject of the Secretary-General’s
report in order to understand that much remains to be
done.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now invite
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

16-315357/7
