UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

,:

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

NEW

16 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2433)

. . . . , , . . , . . , , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . .

1

Adoption of the agenda * , , . . . . . . . . . . * , . . ,.,,,,,..~......,.............

1

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) .I,....

1

UPV.2433

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security CounciI, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2433rd MEETING
Held
President: Mr. UMBA

in New York on Monday,

16 May 1983, at 3.30 p.m.

di LUTETE

SPain and Venezuela in which they ask to be invited to
Participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, 1 propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure,

(Zaire),.

Present: The representatives of the following States;
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional
1. Adoption

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mufijz (Argentina), Mr. Zumbado Jimknez (Costa Rica), Mr. RosajesRjvera (El Salvador), Mr. Vongsajy &o
People’s
Democratic Republic), Mr. Maudave (Mauritius), Mr.
Ozores Typaldos (Panama), Mr. Cassandra (Sao Tome
and Prjncjpe), Mr. de Pini& (Spain) and Mr. Martini
Wianeta (Venezuela) took the places reservedfor them at
the side of the Council chamber,

agenda (S/Agenda/2433)

of the agenda.

2. Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15762, containing the text of a letter dated 13 May
1983 from the representative of Panama addressed to the
Secretary-General,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)

4. The first speaker is the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, on whom I now call.
5. Mr, D’ESCOTO BROCKMANN (Nicaragua) (interpretation from Spanish): A week ago today [2431st meeting] we gave an account of the death and destruction

I. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings
devoted to this item [2431st and 2432ndmeetings1, I invite
the representative of Honduras to take a place at the
Council table. I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Cuba, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guatemala, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali,
Mexico, Seychelles and the Syrian Arab Republic to take
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

caused by the armed invasion of Nicaragua from Honduran territory, which is directed and financed by the
Government of the United States.
6. We explained that the problem was basically with
the United States, which uses Somozisl Guards and Honduras as instruments of its aggressive policy. We pointed
out that the complicity of the Honduran rCgime, which
allows its territory to be used for attacks on Nicaragua
and which increasingly involves its army in the direction
and carrying out of military action against our country,
was making more real the possibility that war-which we
have always wished and continue to wish to avoid-may
inevitably result. This would be the consequence of Honduran complicity with those who attack us.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colitidres
(Honduras) took a place’ at the Council table. Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria), Mr. Roa ~ouri (Cuba), Mr. lbruhim (Ethjopia), Mr, Taylor (Grenada), Mr. Quifiones-AmeigUita
(Guatemala), Mr. Rajaje-Khorassani (Islamic Republic of
Iran), Mr. neikj (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Traod
(Mali), Mr. Ah+ioz Redo (Mexico), Ms. Gonthier (SeYchelles) and Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic) took the
places reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. Since my statement to the Council last Monday there
have been a veries of new acts of aggression against my
country, which I consider important to bring before the
Council.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): 1
should like to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Argentina,
Costa Rica, El Salvador, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Mauritius, Panama, Sao Tome and PrinciPe,

,3 At 11.30 a.m. last Monday, 9 May, in El Siucet 12
kilometres east of Jalapa, and 900 metres from the
1

from the obligation to frame its actions within the rules
and principles that should govern the conduct of all the
Members of the Organization, most particularly those
who are members of the Council.

border, 60 Somozist counter-revolutionaries
crossed the
border from Honduran territory. As a result of this
attack, one comrade in the forces of the frontier guards
was killed and another wounded. Subsequently the
counter-revolutionaries
withdrew to Honduran territory.

14. Our people and our Government feel that they have
a right to a response from the Security Council and that
it should help put an end to the acts of aggression against
our country and prevent war between brother peoples
who desire peace. We do not seek to deny in any way that
several Central American countries, like many other
countries in Latin America and throughout the world,
are experiencing difficulties, and we have not come here,
as I said in my initial statement, to say more than that
our country has been a victim of armed aggression and
invasion. This, despite the fact that Mrs. Kirkpatrick, the
representative of the United States, seeks to deny it, is
something so clear that even children are capable of
understanding it.

9. On Thursday, 12 May, there were six acts of aggression. At 8 a.m. there was artillery fire from Honduran
territory lasting 10 minutes against the El Paraiso observation post, 12 kilometres south-west of San Pedro de
Potrero Grande. At 10.28 a.m. there was similar firing
from Honduran territory against the El Cortizal observation post in the same area. At 10.30 a.m. there was
81 mm mortar fire from Honduras against Las Marias
observation post, 2.5 kilometres south-west of San Pedro
de Potrero Grande. At noon on the same day-12 Mayin Dipilto Viejo, in the department of Nueva Segovia, a
farmer, Felipe Ayestas, was kidnapped by 20 counterrevolutionaries and taken to Honduras. At 4. p.m. and
again at 4.30 that day there was artillery fire for 10 minutes from Honduran territory directed against the La
Ceiba observation post, 5 kilometres west of Somotillo,
in the department of Chinandega, and 200 metres from
the border.

15. A letter from a child of 14 which we received only a
couple of days ago deals with this eloquently. I shouid
like to quote briefly from that letter:
“I have been reading about the situation in Nicaragua and in El Salvador and I am very angry. I am
angry with our country, I am a boy of 14 and I live in
Salt Lake City, Utah, a city in the west of the United
States. . . .

10. On 13 May two Somozist “Task Forces”, made up
of 500 counter-revolutionaries
from Honduras, invaded
our national territory, clashing with troops of the Sandinist People’s Army in a place known as Llano Bawisa in
northern Zelaya, where their advance towards the interior of our territory was checked. Also on 13 May, at
9.00 a.m., 80 counter-revolutionaries
from Honduras
attacked the frontier post of Waspfin, using artillery and
heavy machine-guns, and Nicaraguan citizen HCctor
Rodriguez was killed.

“I have read how our Government is sending Central Intelligence Agency agents and money for weapons to the Government of Honduras. I cannot tell you
how angry I am at all this, as indeed are millions of
other Americans, . . .
“I would like to be able to go to Nicaragua and
fight on your side, but I cannot,, , but let me say this:
although I am only 14 I can tell you that when two or
three or four thousand people suffer hunger there is an
anger more powerful in them than any nuclear
weapon or any speech by Reagan.”

11. On 14 May, at 7.00 a.m., the frontier post of Bilwaskarma was attacked from Honduran territory with mortar and machine-gun fire and Nicaraguan citizen Carlos
Cajina was killed.
12. Obviously, if Nicaragua cannot by its own means
persuade the Government of the sister Republic of Honduras of the importance of open and constructive dialogue in order to put an end to this serious situation; if
Honduras persists in turning a deaf ear to and disregarding the initiatives of Latin American Governments that
have proposed a dialogue -as have also the countries of
the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries; and if the
Security Council itself is unable to exercise its proper
authority by demanding such dialogue, Nicaragua cannot be asked to give up indefinitely its right of selfdefence. We say again, however, that Nicaragua wants
peace, that we abhor war. That is why we have again
come here to give an account of the acts of aggression
against US by the Reagan Administration,
with the complicity of the Government and army of Honduras, to our
colleagues in the Council.

The boy goes on to give his opinion that when soldiers
fight for some Governments, and die, they do it for
money, but when a Sandinist dies, “he does it for love”.
Then he says:
“Love is the most important thing in the universe.
As a boy of 14, I can only say that you will win in the
end. God bless you.”
It is signed Andrew Hunt and he gives his address in Salt
Lake City, Utah.
16. We found out, through the telephone company, the
telephone number in order to see whether there was a
boy of that name there, whether he was 14 and whether
he minded if we quoted his letter in this context. I did this
and he told me he would be most happy to have his letter
quoted here.

13. The Council has an unavoidable duty to shoulder
its responsibility in the light of these facts, regardless of
the will of one of its members which, because it is militarily and economically powerful, regards itself as exempt

17. This is just one of the many letters that we are
constantly receiving from American people. I ventured to
2

quote from it because it seems to me to be particularly
powerful and because I believe that very often adults,
even if we are teachers, can learn from children, if we
have the necessary humility to listen to them when they
try, as did Andrew Hunt, to make their thinking known
and share their concerns.

22. It was therefore important to have talks at the highest level with the Honduran authorities, In the final
months of 1979, throughout 1980 and the early months
of 1981, we made many efforts to bring about a meeting
of the heads of State of Honduras and Nicaragua.
Besides countless telephone calls and diplomatic notes, I
made two trips to Tegucigalpa to visit President Paz
Garcia, solely and exclusively to extend or repeat the
invitation from Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra to
a meeting where bilateral problems would be discussed,
in particular those brought about by the Somozist incursions over the northern frontier.

18. Clearly, it is not only children that are aware of and
condemn the atrocities committed against our people by
the Reagan Administration.
A few days ago, 65 American legislators, in a letter to Representative Edward
Boland, also expressed their condemnation of the Reagan policy against Nicaragua, stating:

23. President Paz Garcia always received us with his
customary warmth. He expressed concern at what was
happening on the border and his readiness to meet Commander Ortega Saavedra. But something prevented him
from accepting our suggestions of a date or making his
own suggestions as to a date. Consequently, he always
delegated to the Minister for Foreign Affairs the responsibility for agreeing on a date-an arrangement that was
possible only for May 1981, the date on which the heads
of State of Honduras and Nicaragua. met in Guasaule,
which is a frontier post in Nicaraguan territory.

“We believe that underwriting a counter-revolution
in Nicaragua will not achieve its objective, because it
does not have the support either of the public in the
United States or in Latin America. . . . We consider
United States involvement in such an enterprise to be
fundamentally immoral.“*
19. Is it possible for the Security Council to refuse to
reflect what is undoubtedly a world-wide demand and
not to carry out its fundamental obligation to order the
cessation of an invasion by a great Power of one of the
smailest and most impoverished countries in the world
and to ensure that other Governments do not allow their
territory to be used for foreign wars and to compromise
their own peace?

24, At that meeting there was agreement on a meeting
in the near future between the leaders of the armies of
Honduras and Nicaragua, the purpose of which would
be to establish a joint patrol plan for the border in order
to root out the Somozist camps in the area t.o stop armed
incursions against Nicaragua carried out from Honduran
territory by the Somozists. Such a patrol would further
help to monitor more effectively any traffic in arms that
might exist in that area. There was left open the possibility that this patrol would be carried out on land, on sea
and in the air if the parties regarded it as necessary. I do
not exaggerate if I tell the Council that at least once a
week I was in touch with the then Foreign Minister of
Honduras, Colonel CBsar Elvir Sierra, stressing the
importance of this meeting of the top military leaders as
agreed on by our heads of State.

20. Almost immediately after the triumph of the Sandinist people’s revolution, Nicaragua began to be the
object of armed harassment by Somozist Guards, who
carried out incursions into our territory from Honduran
territory. It was clear to us that this was something that
was being done unbeknown to the then President of Honduras, Policarpo Paz Garcia. We knew that there were
certain military elements in Honduras that approved of
the incursions and intended, from the end of 1979, not
only that Honduras should co-operate with the Somozists but that they should prepare their own army to
invade Nicaragua before the Sandinist people’s revolution could consolidate its position, International public
opinion was informed of all of this because of the extensive reporting in the international media, where the
aggressive and belligerent attitude of the then leader of
the Honduran Public Security Force, Colonel Gustav0
Alvarez, was clearly established.

25. There were more and more frequent armed incursions from Honduran territory; there was a growing
number of dead; and there was increasing pressure from
the Reagan Administration
on the Honduran army and
this gained even greater momentum with the United
States imposition of Colonel Alvarez as the leader of the
Honduran armed forces, with the rank of general.

21, It was considered, none the less, that this scheme to
involve the Honduran army could not be carried out
because there were mature officials who would not countenance the Alvarez scheme, considering it irresponsible,
adventuristic and highly dangerous for Honduras’s own
interests. It was clear at that time that the main interest
of the Somozists was to cause friction between Honduras
and Nicaragua in the hope that Nicaragua would fall into
the trap of counterattacking and thus provide the United
States with the possibility of condemning Nicaragua as
an aggressor, in order to be able to justify action against
our revolution.
* Quoted

in English

26. When President Roberto Suazo C6rdoba took over
on 27 January 1982, Commander Ortega Saavedra
visited Tegucigalpa and emphasized to the President that
there was a pressing need to have a meeting as soon as
possible between the army leaders of Honduras and Nicaragua in order to agree on the joint patrol and eliminate
the tension produced by Somozist incursions from Honduran territory. The President said that he agreed on the
importance of this and that he would talk to Alvarez,
suggesting to him that this meeting should be held as
soon as possible. The steps taken by Nicaragua to
achieve this are too many to enumerate, Suffice it to say

by the speaker.

3

that this meeting has not happened, because of the Honduran refusal. Finally, we have spent at least three years
and nine months seeking ways and means of removing,
through dialogue and agreement on joint patrolling, the
tensions that are increasingly poisoning our relations
with Honduras and have already caused the deaths of
hundreds of innocent peasants, teachers, technical personnel, doctors, nurses, militiamen, frontier guards and
members of the Sandinist People’s Army.

the countries of the Contadora Group as essential for the
process of detente to begin and for war to be avoided.
Nicaragua further considers that holding this dialogue
would be the main contribution of the Contadora Group
countries to peace in Central America. Nicaragua will continue to co-operate to the fullest with the Contadora
Group in order to bring about these bilateral talks with
Honduras, with the participation of that Group.
34. Hence, we regard as particularly important what
was said by the Foreign Ministers of the Contadora
Group at the conclusion of their second round of consultations. In their bulletin of 21 April [S/15727, annex],
they stated that

27. The Government
of Honduras obviously either
does not want to talk or has lost its freedom and independence to such an extent that it is not in a position to
accept something which the interests of its own people
would dictate.

“agreement in principle was reached concerning the
procedures of consultation and negotiation to be followed in the near future in such a way as to adapt
them to the diverse nature of the subjects, irrespective
of whether the latter are regional or bilateral in
scope.”

28. In view of the impossibility of arriving at a dialogue
between the top military leaders, in August Commander
Ortega Saavedra invited President Suazo Cbrdoba to
visit Nicaragua, That invitation was declined.
29. In this context, President JosC Mpez Portillo ofMexice and President Luis Herrera Campins of Venezuela sent
letters in September last to Commander Ortega Saavedra,
Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta of National Reconstruction, and to President Suazo Cordoba of Honduras,
expressing their concern at the serious situation prevailing
in Central America and pointing out that the most serious
and distressing factor, in their opinion, was the serious
deterioration in relations between Honduras and Nicaragua, a situation which could lead to an armed clash
between those two fraternal countries.

35, In closing, we avail ourselves of this opportunity to
express our thanks to the representatives of Mexico, Zimbabwe, Seychelles, Algeria, Grenada and Ethiopia for
their important statements, for their concern, and for
their efforts to achieve peace in Central America and put
an end to aggression against Nicaragua.
36. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Honduras, on whom
I now call.

30. The heads of State of Mexico and Venezuela stressed
at that time the importance of initiating a frank and constructive dialogue as soon as possible in order to defuse the
situation. Subsequently they expressed willingness to take
part in joint talks with the heads of State of Nicaragua and
Honduras and proposed that they be held at Caracas on 13
October last year. Nicaragua immediately accepted the
proposal, but Honduras again declined.

37.

Mr. ORTEZ

COLINDRES
(Honduras) (interpretaI should like to reaffirm the respect
which the Council has always deserved, both from my
Government and from me personally, which is more
than enough reason for me not to dwell now on the
personal insults gratuitously addressed to me by the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, the Reverend
Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, whose language and tone
were, perhaps, in harmony with the aggressive mode of
the Commanders who govern Nicaragua today and who
have brought to a sorry pass not only their own country
but also this supreme organ of the United Nations. As
the representative of a non-permanent member of the
Council, he is all the more obliged to maintain his composure and to present his arguments with the moderation
called for by his dual capacity as the director of his country’s foreign policy and the ideologist of the new “People’s Church” of Nicaragua,
tion from

31. At the end of December the invasion started, sponsored by the Reagan Administration,
from Honduran
territory against Nicaragua. The preparation for that
invasion was denounced by Commander Ortega Saavedra in the Council in March 1982 [2335th meeting]. Consequently, in March of this year Nicaragua was again
obliged to draw the Council’s attention to the consequences of that invasion.
32. In the context of this debate, Nicaragua is again
emphasizing the need for bilateral talks with Honduras
in order to bring about peace, and it sent a letter to the
President of the Security Council on 4 April [S/15682]
appealing to the Contadora Group to make every
endeavour and to use its good offices within the framework of its initiative to bring about a dialogue between
Nicaragua and Honduras and between Nicaragua and
the United States.

Spanish):

38. Regarding that unusual conduct, which all members of the Council witnessed, I should like merely to
recall the words spoken by the then President of the
Council, Sir John Thomson, at a recent meeting, on 29
March. He said,
“I must confess that I have had moments of considerable discomfort during the debate on this agenda item
[regarding Nicaragua and Honduras]. It would have
been embarrassing for me to have ruled speakers out
of order, but equally I was embarrassed not to rule

33. Nicaragua regards direct dialogue with Honduras in
the presence of the representatives of the Governments of
4

them out of order.. . . Some have spoken on matters
well outside the agenda item under discussion. Some
have also used.. . language which went beyond the
bounds of civility. All this is bad for the Council’s
standing, whereas the Secretary-General in his report
on the work of the Organization has stressed the
urgency of enhancing its standing. This prospect is
one which should give Council members pause and
should set limits to their own conduct in the Council
as well as the standards they would expect of others.”
[See 2427th meeting, para. 75.1

of the situation in our countries, since many of them
have accredited diplomatic missions there.
44. Furthermore, the Minister of Nicaragua has said
and has just repeated that Honduras is merely an instrument of the foreign policy of the United States. This
charge is completely false; it is nothing new. It had
already been made by one of the Sandinist leaders who
are temporarily directing the fate of Nicaragua, including
the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta, who cannot
manage to understand that the concert of nations is governed by laws and that these nations have as a legitimate
source of power the sovereign will of their peoples. The
Minister has condemned a number of events which, he
claims, took place while the Council was in recess in the
last few days. In that regard, all I have to say is that the
Government of Honduras has promised the Council, and
has kept its word, not to interfere or to mobilize its
troops. Indeed, the photographers who have been sent
and who have given information to The New York Times
say that the only thing that Honduras has at its frontier
posts is a simple chain, which could be jumped over by a
little girl playing jump-rope.

We fully agree with those well-founded comments, and
we agree that there should be respect for the great
responsibility of the Council as a deliberative, consultative and, ultimately, decision-making body.
39. I cannot, however, disregard the detrimental allusions to the dignity of my country and my Government
which are also hurled at us. The Minister of Nicaragua
called into question the representativity which entitles me
to speak on behalf of the people of Honduras, That
inconsistent attitude deserves analysis.

45. Let us now consider the efforts that have been made
on both sides and see whether there is a possibility of
agreement. Certainly, the Minister is right concerning the
various peace efforts we have made. What is happening
is that everyone is reading his own book. There are children who read only their primers. Now I am going to read
from my book.

40. The peaceful, customary and traditional method,
recognized by law, for determining the majority will of a
people is through the holding of free and honest
elections.
41. The Government of Honduras came to power as a
result of elections which, without undue modesty, may
be regarded as exemplary. More than 82 per cent of the
electorate went to the polls in an atmosphere of peace
and security, while neighbouring countries, such as Nicaragua, have been floundering and continue to flounder in
a bloody armed struggle. It is that duly elected Government that I represent; it, in turn, represents and is supported by the people of Honduras.

46. There have been ministerial meetings. It was my
pIeasure to meet with the Nicaraguan Minister in January at Tegucigalpa, where there was discussion of existing problems and of ways to seek solutions. That was
followed in April by bilateral meetings at Tegucigalpa.
We also had meetings in May at San Jose, Costa Rica.
The fourth time, we met at the inauguration of President
Betancour of Colombia.
I am referring to meetings
between highest-levei representatives of our Governments, the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
and the Foreign Minister of Honduras, Mr. Edgardo Paz
Barnica. Again, in August, we had a meeting in the
Dominican Republic, We also had meetings in September and October attended by Mr. Diego Cordovez,
Assistant Secretary-General, who is fully conversant with
the communique that was issued. Under the auspices of
the Secretary-General, Secretariat services were made
available to both missions in an attempt to establish a
bilateral dialogue. We also had meetings in November
under the auspices of the Organization of American
States (OAS). In addition, we had meetings at Managua,
attended by the Deputy Minister for External Relations,
Mr, Tinoco, because the Minister was at the funeral of
Comrade Brezhnev. We had meetings in March at
Buenos Aires.

42. But, we may wonder, what are the credentials of the
Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua? Can it be
said that he represents the Nicaraguan people when, after
holding power for four years, he cannot even consider
holding elections in his country? Can it be said that he
represents his people when that people is subjected to
ruthless repression in every sphere of activity, as is demonstrated by the thousands of Nicaraguans who have
taken up arms against the regime? It is demonstrated also
by the 25,000 of his countrymen who have come to Honduras seeking refuge, a number which grows alarmingly
each day and has begun to swell with the massive surrender of Nicaraguan militiamen, who last week voluntarily surrendered, with their arms and their families, to
our border authorities in front of the international press.
They numbered 17 militiamen and 133 family members,
including old people, women and children. These troops
are made up of humble peasants, sent to the front without training to fight for a cause which they do not understand owing to their ignorance and humble way of life.

47. There have also been meetings of chiefs of staff at
Tegucigalpa, and on the last occasion, my country, Honduras, suggested that efforts be made to establish a
demilitarized zone on the Atlantic and the Pacific, having

43. The international community can weigh the differences involved. Furthermore, the Council is not unaware
5

as the borderline the 15th parallel. This suggestion is still
pending.

son I would like to ask the following. Is it not impertinence to call upon or to request a head of State or a
president of a republic to enter into bilateral talks
through the Secretary of State of the United States, Mr.
Shultz? Is it not an insult to my country to suggest that
the official notes of the proposed bilateral talks should
not be officially transmitted from Foreign Office to Foreign Office, or even through our Charge d’Affaires in
Nicaragua, but rather through Mr. Shultz, who would
thus seem to be the owner of Honduran sovereignty?
Why should he have to send us carbon copies of the
notes from the Government of Nicaragua? In my view
that is not a dialogue, nor can it be considered proper
diplomatic procedure in keeping with the principles of
French diplomacy and the tradition of the Foreign
Oftice.

48. What I mean is that the bilateral talks we have tried
to hold did not come about, because what we are seeing
between brothers is what sometimes happens in impossible love affairs, where what is called for is the intervention of a priest so as to create the proper atmosphere
between the parties so that everyone can deal openmindedly.
49. However, it is touching and interesting to read how
an American boy, in the ingenuous way that children
have, described his thoughts about the conflict between
Honduras and Nicaragua. We are interested in what
children are thinking, particularly children of other continents, such as the statement which appeared yesterday in
The New York Times, to the effect that in the port of San
Juan de1 Sur in Nicaragua a fishing port and a fishprocessing plant had been set up. Indeed, those fish were
so big that no child could carry them. As is clear, we are
talking about little children and big fish, It is elegant,
human and sensitive to learn from children, as the Minister of Nicaragua said. But we also have to learn from the
fables, among them that of the wolf in sheep’s clothing,
and that famous story of the Trojan horse, which served
to bring down the fortress that was preventing the conquest of the desired objective.

55. The excuse is sometimes offered that the men who
have fought in Nicaragua are people who came down
from the mountains, but they are now leaders of government who must act responsibly, with the tact and decorum which the national dignity of a country demands.
56. We wish to be positive, and here we are going to
state a few key points of the dialogue that we are seeking
to achieve most anxiously.
57. First of all, Honduras declares that we are more
than ready to arrive at serious, responsible agreements as
a result of a regional consensus in which, in addition to
our two countries-Nicaragua
and Honduras, which are
the parties directly involved-Costa
Rica, El Salvador
and Guatemala should take part. Such agreements do
not preclude our dealing with bilateral problems as part
of the context, but we continue to believe that Central
America as a whole has to take part in building a permanent peace for the region. To give one example: the matter of the quantity of arms passing through our territory
cannot be resolved only or exclusively by bilateral talks,
because it affects El Salvador, a Government which is
also bloodied by the massive arms traffic through Nicaraguan territory.

50. My Government gave its firm promise, and has
kept its word, not to mobihze troops at all, and I can
officially state that it will not do so except to defend its
integrity and national sovereignty, as is only logical,
since this is a categorical provision of our Republic’s
Constitution.
51. In closing I should like it to be noted that it is
unusual in this lofty forum, whose primary responsibility
is the maintenance of peace throughout the world, to
hear threats of war such as those made by the Minister
for External Relations of a sister country, Nicaragua.
52. Of course, it is sometimes ill-advised to speak without thinking. If we correctly analyse the basis of this
institution, the United Nations, we must not forget that
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter which governs us
clearly provides that

58. Secondly, we support the endeavours made to this
end by the Contadora Group, the members of which are
Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, who have
made considerable progress in seeking to organize talks
among the parties involved and who, together with our
five States which formerly made up the Federal Republic
of Central America, should be given the opportunity of
fully applying their diplomatic talents and efforts to seeking a constructive settlement, without additional factors
or interference, which could be the case if the SecretnryGeneral of the United Nations were forced to participate
urgently and without first having in his difficult task the
consensus and support of the five Central American
countries which are the fundamental political and legal
basis on which the mandate of the Contadora Group
rests. That might even endanger the progress andresults
so carefully and intelligently achieved thus far by that
Group, which as a peace-loving people we would have to
deplore.

“All Members shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state,
or in any other manner inconsistent with the Purposes
of the United Nations,”
53. These discussions must be weighed by the Council,
particularly taking into account that Nicaragua is party
to a dispute with my country. For this reason alone its
readiness to participate in passing Council resolutions by
its vote becomes reprehensible and partial.
54. My country wishes merely to make a contribution
to the discussions, with all due customary respect, in the
quest for solutions to the problems raised. For this rea6

59. Thirdly, we consider that it is within the regional
and continental Context that we must continue to seek
positive solutions to our differences, since any forum outside our inter-American system has fewer elements of
cohesion, which might weaken pan-American solidarity,
60. The Charter of the United Naiions contains specific
chapters to the effect that States should work together,
and it is logical that, when we talk about Africa, we
would like to see African problems dealt with in African
consultative and institutional forums, The Europeans
have their own organizations for human rights and political and economic affairs. We Latin Americans, too, have
our forum. Both Honduras and Nicaragua are still
members of the OAS, and if for any reason one of the
countries disapproves of that body, it should say so,
There are specific legal channels for making the necessary complaints.
61. Finally, we regard as contradictory and precipitate
the action taken by Nicaragua before the Council, bearing in mind that we had unanimously given the Contadora Group a mandate and that that mandate still stands
and enjoys the support of all the parties. This will never
prevent our taking a decision to maintain consistent conduct in accordance with international law and faithful to
the commitments
assumed under the charter of the
Organization of American States and the Charter of the
United Nations.
62. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretation from French):
It is a pleasure for my delegation and me to repeat our
words of welcome and heartfelt congratulations to you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. You have come at a time when the Council needs someone of your calibre. Your diplomatic and
political reputation has placed you in the forefront of
Zaire’s national life and has admirably suited you for the
functions assigned to you by the President and Founder
of the People’s Movement of the Revolution, Marshal
Mobutu Sesse Seko Kuku Gbendu Wa Zabanga. My
delegation is convinced that, given your qualities and
ability-and
the first consultations that you have held
already augur well-you will discharge your functions
competently and steadfastly and, in particular, with the
enthusiasm which is characteristic of the representatives
of Zaire to the United Nations, who are past masters in
the art of the gavel.
63. To your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the
United States representative, we express our hearty
thanks for having conducted the Council’s work last
month. Thanks to her patience and tenacity, she guided
our thinking on the future of the Organization.
64. I should also like to welcome among us Mr. Miguel
d’Escoto Brockmann, the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, who came specially to tell US Of his
Government’s concern at the situation prevailing in his
Country.
65. Have the technological developments of our world
today, which give rise to the highest hopes with respect to

the quality of life and increased longevity, which enable
man, so infinitely small, to conquer outer space, which is
so infinitely large and formerly the realm of the gods,
already made us forget that during the first half of this
century two great scourges, in the space of one human
lifetime, inflicted unforgettable sufferings on humanity?
Are we already forgetting, too, that, mindful of their
common destiny, men-and when I say “men” I exclude
the champions of the abhorrent philosophy of apartheid-have sought to create a universal society where
basic human rights, dignity, equality, justice, freedom
and fraternity prevail? Are we, whether guilty parties or
accomplices, accepting the trampling underfoot of these
grand principles, the rallying point of our distressed
humanity, without which the law of the jungle woutd
again hold sway?
66. But, unfortunately, we have to admit that we are
passing through a decade which is increasingly characterized by serious localized conflagrations in the third world
that may spread-and the winners will not be the apparent belligerents but those who cynically arm them. It will
be the victory of the arms dealers and those who use their
creative genius to control matter for purposes detrimental to the master plan of the Gieat Architect of the
Universe.
67. My country cannot remain indifferent to the conflicts that are shaking the brother States of Central
America. Therefore it is our duty as a member of the
Security Council to appeal to the parties, in the words of
the Secretary-General, “to make a serious effort to reinforce the protective and pre-emptive ring of collective
security which should be our common shelter”.’ It was
precisely that shelter that was envisaged in 194.5 by the
representatives of our peoples emerging exhausted from
two deadly wars; they thought that future generations
would never again know war. Why are we today desecrating the inheritance of our forebears?
68. If we consider the present situation in Nicaragua,
we see that the facts are at once relevant and disturbing.
That citizens discontented with their Governments
should rebel and take up arms against those Governments is part of the peripheral aspectsof power and must
be dealt with as a domestic matter, The uprising would
even be legitimate if power no longer served the common
good. In this particular case, however, is it a mere internal uprising? Is it a demonstration of the popular will
seeking to restore legality and democracy? That would
seem not to be the case, because, in the opinion o*
delegation, the situation in Nicaragua is complicate
rivalries among the great Powers. Each of them be1
that the other is trying to expand its influence in the
region and takes steps to oppose that expansion. That is
what complicates the internal situation in Nicaragua
delegation is convinced that if the people of that co1
were given the means of resolving their problems wit
any foreign interference, they could overcome their
ent difficulties. By overthrowing the dictatorial regime 01
Somoza, the Nicaraguan people demonstrated its 1

adopt as a watchword the Stoic concept of virtue Originated by Zeno, envisaging the appearance of a world
State where national antagonisms would melt in common brotherhood.

69. Except with specific connotations, the meaning and
value of that notion must be subject to express reservations as regards the developing countries. There is
nothing more relative than democratic freedoms; their
value varies in time and space. Therefore it is misguided
to consider this notion in our countries according to scenarios which claim to be universal. Democracy is linked
to the nature of things; it depends on the customs, the
culture and the state of development of each people.

76. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make a statement.
77. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): First of all, Sir, my delegation
wishes to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are convinced that your knowledge of international
affairs and your diplomatic experience will assist the
Council to resolve this serious crisis following the acts of
aggression against Nicaragua. I should like to take this
opportunity also to express our admiration for the way
in which the representative of the United States, Mrs.
Kirkpatrick, guided the work of the Council last month.

70. The people of Nicaragua is merely asking to be
allowed to live in peace, protected from East-West rivalries, to devote itself to the enormous task of national
reconstruction.
71. Another point of concern to my delegation is the
frenzied introduction of all sorts of weapons into the
region. The arms race is no longer the madness of the
great Powers alone; the small countries too have been
contaminated, and we wonder how they can reconcile
that madness with development needs.
72. If lack of confidence and mutual fear have made
States in the region overarm themselves, might this proliferation of weapons not awaken desires on the part of
certain States that consider themselves powerful enough
to impose on their neighbours their model of society? It is
precisely a Macbeth-style tragedy that we are witnessing
in Central America, one of the acts of which is being
played today in Nicaragua. My delegation sincerely
hopes that the curtain can be brought down on this last
scene and that the word “disarmament”, a basic concern
of the United Nations, can be introduced to the region.
This means that we must assist all the neighbouring
States to become aware of the ideal of the Organization
and particularly of their interdependence. In that regard,
a thorough analysis leads us to believe that all the political, economic and social problems of the region and
therefore all the crises that engulf it are closely related
and that any solution guaranteeing lasting peace must be
comprehensive.

78. My delegation has asked to speak to express its
total solidarity with Nicaragua, which is the victim of
aggression directed, financed and protected by the
United States, using counter-revolutionary elements. The
number of these elements infiltrated from Honduras is
now 7,000 combatants, armed to the teeth, according to
information supplied by the press agencies.
79. The basic purpose of this meeting is to review this
serious situation and consider what measures can be
taken, bearing in mind what the Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua has called a new stage in the
invasion of Nicaragua by Somozist forces hostile to the
progressive Sandinist regime.
80. We would stress that our delegation and many delegations of non-aligned countries gave warning in March
1982 of a plot being hatched against Nicaragua. We
repeated that warning following the execution of this plot
two months ago. But today, we are facing an act of
aggression of which Nicaragua is the victim, and all the
States Members of the United Nations must shoulder
their responsibility under their Charter commitment to
eliminate aggression by the most effective and rapid
means.

73. Therefore my delegation welcomes the initiative of
the Contadora Group and endorses its conclusions of 21
April [see S/15727, annex] and 13 May [see S/15762,
annex]. It calls upon the States involved in this tragic
situation to support it and appeals to all the members of
the OAS to refrain from any actions or statements that
might envenom the situation and to do everything possible to bring peace to their neighbours, who so sorely
need it, irrespective of the types of society they have
freely chosen. We make this appeal in the name of the
ethical principles which govern relations among human
beings, of which the primary law is tolerance.

81. It is noteworthy that, since the beginning of this
new crisis created by the United States in Central America to put an end to the Sandinist movement, Nicaragua
has been trying to establish friendly and constructive
relations with all its neighbours, while its enemies have
been trying to intensify bitterness against Nicaragua by
Various means, including economic blockades and military provocation on the ground, in the air and at sea and
the sabotaging of the country’s vital services.

Thus my delegation is not seeking, in this painful
ation, to condemn or to justify anyone. Any value
ement would severely test our already sorely tried
nization, because what we must do is preserve this
re for harmonizing the actions of nations”.

82. Nicaragua has repeatedly appealed to Honduras
and to the United States to take part in talks at the
highest level, and it has asked the members of the Contadora Group to follow up their initiative and ask the
Secretary-General to participate in getting negotiations

conclude by calling upon every member of the
il and particularly the parties to the dispute to
8

with Honduras and the United States under way. The
most recent of these appeals was made by Mr. D’Escoto
Brockmann, the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua, in this very chamber on 9 May, when he said:
“we have come in search of peace before those with
the highest responsibility on Earth for safeguarding
international peace and security, We have not come
looking for condemnation;
rather, we have come in
search of peace.” [See 2431st meeting, para, 44.1
The Minister also proposed that this dialogue take place
at United Nations Headquarters. To date, however, these
appeals have not received a positive response, although
the head of the United States delegation, in her statement
on 25 March, appealed for negotiations and reconciliation, advising everyone to renounce violence. She even
gave us all a lesson by quoting a famous writer, as follows: “Whoever has once announced violence as his
method must inexorably choose lying as his principle.”
[See 2423rd meeting, para. 118.1We wonder, today, who
is practising violence; who is evading conciliation and
avoiding negotiation.

mean the “Reagan doctrine”. There are several doctrines: the Truman doctrine, the Eisenhower doctrine,
the doctrines of former Presidents of the United States
and of the present President. In this last there are a
number of “doctrines”, based, as we see it, on three concepts. First, the United States has the absolute right to
judge Governments which have or have not betrayed
their revolutionary principles. Secondly, the American
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and its agents in all
the regions of the world bear the responsibility for protecting the principle of revolutions, to prevent their being
perverted. And, finally, every revolutionary Government
should be exterminated by the commandos of the CIA,
especially if the revolution was carried out with the use of
the gun. It is as if President Reagan had forgotten the
history of the revolution of his own country, that of the
French Revolution and that of the revolutions of which
the great majority of those in this room are proud.
86. In that same statement, President Reagan said the
following concerning Nicaragua:
“If they want to tell us that we can give money and do
the same things as we have been doing so far-giving
money, providing assistance and so forth to these
people directly-and
making it overt instead of
covert, that’s all right with me. I just don’t want the
restrictions put on it that they might put on.”

83, It is the United States that is preparing and training
saboteurs and sending them to Nicaragua. This has been
the sub.ject of news items in the American press. United
States senators and representatives are not in agreement
as to whether or not they should linance these operations
of aggression. What is the nature of these actions? Are
they open military operations, or are they clandestine
operations that do not fall within the purview of the
United States Congress’? That is the big question which
ordinary Americans and American officials are asking,
as if the dispute were not about the principle of the use of
force but about the way to make use of it.

87. The new American doctrine opens up new dimensions. It entails the exporting of “made-in-America”
democracy by force-that is, the export by force of
American democracy manufactured in the laboratories
of the United States as if the principle of the non-use of
force laid down in the Charter did not apply to America
when it was determined to export democracy via the CIA
and as if it were indeed possible to export democracy by
way of armed violence and sabotage. President Reagan
voiced similar ideas in his speech before a joint session of
Congress on 27 April when he spoke of Central America
and of Nicaragua in particular. We do not have time to
go into all the “democracies” the United States has
exported, Foremost among them are the Israeli democracy, the democracy of South Africa and the democracy
of the late Shah of Iran. I shall confine myself to mentioning those three since I am loath to enter into a debate
with the imported democracies.

84, The New York Timesof 5 May quoted a statement by

President Reagan. This has already been quoted by others
in this chamber but, according to an Arab proverb, one
benelits from repetition. It is this:
“President Reagan said today that insurgent groups
in Nicaragua receiving covert aid from the Central
Intelligence Agency were ‘freedom fighters’ opposing
a Government that had betrayed its revolutionary
principles.
“He said it would be ‘all right with me’ if Congress
wanted to require that assistance to the rebels be
‘overt instead of covert’, but added that there would
have to be no further restrictions imposed on their
activities.

88. Nicaragua is being subjected to aggression, and that
aggression is unleashing violence designed to overthrow
the Government and to change the revolutionary regime
that exists in that country. There has indeed been overt
armed intervention, as has been admitted officially. It is
an act in violation of the most elementary principles of
international law, the Charter of the United Nations and
the resolutions of the General Assembly, in particular the
Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.*
The Security Council must take steps to stop the aggression and put an end to it in a manner appropriate to the
situation.

“The President said the Sandinist regime in Nicaragua, which took power in a revolution in 1979, Was ‘a
Government out of the barrel of a gun’, and he questioned its right to retain powers2*
85. That statement is a declared principle of the theory
of President Reagan of the United States. BY theory 1
* Quoted

in English by the speaker-

9

born determination to follow a traditional Policy based
on the repression and destruction Of Popular ~a~hd
uprisings against the outdated comrVatiVe
political,
social and economic structures that seek to Preserve sYstems based on oppression and exploitation and that serve
as military and economic outposts of American
imperialism.

89. As a State which throughout its history has experienced both direct and indirect aggression, Syria Cannot remain silent at this action, which endangers the security of this region of small, poor nations. Once again
we declare our full commitment to the decisions of the.
Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of
Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March,
reached prior to the latest aggression against Nicaragua.
More than 100 States took part in that Conference,
which devoted a large part of its political consideration
to the unfortunate and serious situation prevailing in
Central America and the Caribbean. The Syrian Arab
Republic concurs with the analysis contained in the Political Declaration of the Conference, in the paragraphs
relating to Central America [S/15675, annex, sect. Z
paras. 132-1651, and we believe it to be our dutyalthough we do not have the time at our disposal to
quote them in extenso-to recall certain paragraphs in
order to make Washington realize that its position is one
of political confrontation with the non-aligned countries.

94. Conditions in Central America will not improve as
long as the United States and the organs of the CIA do
not loosen their grip on those countries. We have no
hope of seeing a new day dawn of stability, progress and
well-being for the peoples of that region as long as they
are not given the opportunity to exercise their right of
self-determination
in complete freedom. Given the
nature of this region, we believe that it is appropriate to
encourage bilateral dialogue between Nicaragua and
Honduras, with the participation
of the Contadora
Group, We call upon the United States to recognize the
interests of the peoples of that region and not to view
them solely from the standpoint of its own special interests. The Secretary-General must use his good offices to
resolve the problems that threaten peace in Central
America within the framework of the Contadora
principles.

90. The Conference denounced-I
shall not quote
directly, but merely sum up what was said-in its Political Declaration the new and increasing threats and sabotage and the growing seriousness and increased numbers
of acts of aggression against Nicaragua, particularly the
violation of its airspace and territorial waters, use of the
territory of foreign countries in and outside the region as
bases for aggression and the training of counterrevolutionary forces, the commission of terrorist actions
and sabotage, particularly the attacks of armed groups of
the guards of Somoza- of the former President-across
its northern border, which resulted in considerable loss
of life and property. The Conference also denounced the
measures of economic pressure being taken at the international level, which are seen as part of a deliberate plan
to harass and destabilize the country, as had been
acknowledged by a foreign Power-that governed by
President Reagan, the United States of America.

95. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
96. Mr. ROA KOURf
(Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): Sir, allow me to express my delegation’s satisfaction at seeing you assuming the Council presidency
for this month. I am confident that your wide experience
in international affairs and your well-known ability will
contribute to the successof our deliberations in the difficult circumstances in which Nicaragua’s complaint with
regard to aggression against it is being considered. I
should also like to express my gratitude to the members
of the Council for allowing me to participate in the
debate.

91. The participants in the Conference appealed to all
States to refrain from acts of aggression, threat or use of
force and intervention in the internal affairs of other
States. The Conference affirmed the right of every State
to choose its own political, social and economic system
and to pursue its economic development free from any
form of foreign intervention or pressure, It commended
the peace initiatives of Mexico, France, Venezuela,
Colombia and Panama.

97. Only a few days ago one of the representatives who
spoke before me referred to the sometimes unreal atmosphere that often permeates diplomatic
arguments in
international forums, where words become merely Pharisaical exercises used in Orwellian “newspeak” whereby
aggression is redoubled peace, and duplicity Gospel
truth.

92. We share the opinion of those who say that the
crisis in Central America is to a very great extent the
result of the traditional structures of the forces of repression and national economic structures that create POV?rtY, kKpality
and destitution, all of which have been
lgravated by the interference of many kinds from which
>se countries have suffered since the end of the last
tury.

98. It is an extraordinary experience to hear the representative of the United States say that the United States
“does not invade small countries” and that “Our neighbours need have no such concerns” [see 2431st meeting,
para. 1021. Since it is obvious that one wishes to transPort us to the land of fairy tales, I would compare that
assertion with what was said by the Big Bad Wolf to
Little Red Riding Hood after he had gobbled up the
proverbial grandmother. I do so on the understanding
that it becomes superfluous to list the acts of intervention
and plunder perpetrated by this angelic Power in Latin
America from the end of the last century until now,

That is why we believe American interference and
se of force by the United States against certain Cenme&an countries can only be interpreted as a stub10

99. 1 repeat: it is an extraordinary experience to hear
the representative of the United States accuse Nicaragua
interference in the affairs of its neighbours, when
Of
scarcely two weeks ago President Reagan declared, u&i
et orbi, that he would agree, if Congress requested it, to
lend assistance “openly instead of cbvertly” to the mercenaries who, financed by the CIA, were operating
from
Honduras against Sandino’s fatherland and to those
who, with singular brazenness, he described as “freedom
fighters”.

history and are using against Nicaragua the same weapons they brought to bear against the will of our people:
economic aggression, such as the elimination of the sugar
quota-which,
now as in the past, spineless Governments Will surely take advantage of-the blockade of
international sources of credit, pressure against third
countries and the organization of mercenary bands,
trained, financed and armed by the CIA, which are using
the territory of a Latin American country, as had previously been done against Cuba, in a vain attempt to turn
Nicaragua back into a vassal to serve its economic and
political interests.

100. It is timely to ask the members of the Council,
who have such specific lofty responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations, what they think such a
statement by the head of State of a permanent member of
the Council deserves. Can any member here ignore its
moral, legal and political implications in the light of the
principles of international law and the Charter?

104. The intellectual and material creators of the sickening tyranny of Somoza and promoters of the death of
Sandino have little or no ground for calling the Nicaragua revolution to account. By what right? How can anyone who for five decades wasjointly responsible for and
beneficiary of the exploitation, martyrdom and humiliation of the Nicaraguan people seek to teach patriotism to
those who yesterday risked their lives-and today continue to do so-for the freedom, happiness and wellbeing of their beleaguered country? Who said that that
oligarchic system of government is the measure of all
things and the imposed panacea fbr the woes of our
people?

101. In this instance the United States Government has
abandoned any pretence at morality or legality. After
proclaiming to the four winds that its aggressive policy
against Nicaragua was designed only to prevent alleged
arms-trafficking from that country to El Salvador, it now
confesses its real and true purpose: to bring down the
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction and destroy the Sandinist revolution. Threats against those who
do not embrace its creed have not been directed solely
against third countries. In his statement to a joint session
of Congress, the President of the United States did not
fail to warn his opponents that they would also be guilty
if they did not support his warlike designs in Central
America. That is, without any doubt, a fateful warning in
an electoral campaign year in this-we
are tolddemocracy par excellence.

105. It is no secret to anyone that the Honduran military high command is implicated to the hilt in United
States aggression against Nicaragua. They even state-or
so we are told-that they are ready to take direct part in
the venture, because they can rely on United States naval
cover and have air superiority over Nicaragua. It is also
obvious that the Honduran Government can do nothing
against the decision of the allied generals of the Pentagon. The military leaders who might have opposed the
insane idea have been dispatched abroad or are now no
longer in their posts. Neighbouring Governmentswhich should be concerned at the unforeseeable consequences of the internationalization of the conflict-reactionary, as they are, fundamentally feel pleased that a few
compliant strutting militiamen should pull the chestnuts
out of the fire for them, drowning in blood the people’s
revolution in Central America.

102. The arguments-or,
better, the pretexts-adduced
in the Council and outside it to justify the anti-Sandinist
wild insanity of the United States leaders seem drawn
from a textbook for political illiterates. These inveterate
players of interventionist
poker who invoke the picturesque “domino theory” of subversion, according to
which the only nuclear Power in the hemisphere is running an imminent risk because the famished, exploited
and wretched people of Central America wish to throw
off the rapacious, bloody oligarchies; these plunderers of
a considerable part of’ the territory of Mexico who are
still occupying Puerto Rico and are responsible for interventions in many Latin American countries; the daily
despoilers of the fruit of the labour of our peoples; those
who extol the alleged virtues of the OAS-where, as distinct from other truly regional bodies, if all fools wore
white caps, we should seem a flock-and
of the 1947
Inter-American
Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, characteristically disregarding the British aggression against the
Malvinas and attributing to a shady conspiracy of “international communism”
the insurgence of the peoples of
our America: they are the knights errant of’ the outdated,
inoperative and putrid “Monroe Doctrine”.

106. They should be warned. Those who suppose it to
be an easy victory against the Nicaraguan revolution are
wrong. Those who, because they feel protected by Yankee power, think it feasible to stem the tide of history and
ruin Nicaragua are wrong. Sandino’s people did not fight
in vain for the conquests of the revolution or for a free
country, No people in America, I assure you, will stand
by
impassively
in the face of imperialist
aggression
against that sister nation.
107. The Minister for External Relations of the Republic of Nicaragua, Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, wascategorical in his condemnation of the aggression being
waged today against his country, and of its perpetrators,
but he was also categorical in expressing Nicaragua’s
wish for peace and its readiness to seek peaceful solutions, in accordance with the letter and spirit of the
Charter.

103. Twenty-four years after the triumph of the Cuban
revolution, thev are still clinging to a WillY-nillY vision Of
11

its achievements have oscillated between hope and frustration, On the scale of time and space the spent force of
my emotions just now is like a pendulum at rest in a
crepuscular zone that preserves just enough light for faith
to survive, That this might be, after all, the right frame of
mind receives support from Kierkegaard’s and Andre
Malraux’s advocacy ofpessimisme actl$ The same active
pessimism is found in Albert0 Moravia’s latest book,
entitled 1934, where he states that “stabilized despair is
intellectual
lucidity without any consolation
whatsoever”.

108. That readiness-which was stressed one year ago
in this room by the Co-ordinator of the Governing Junta
of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra [2335th meeting], and which has
once
always been reiterated by his Government-was
again borne out when Nicaragua accepted the proposals
of the member countries of the Contadora Group, at the
urging of Costa Rica, to send observers to the border
between the two countries with a view to guaranteeing
Costa Rican neutrality in view of the improper use of its
territory by mercenary forces that are enemies of the
Nicaraguan revolutionary Government. It was further
confirmed in the statement by Minister D’Escoto Brockmann this afternoon.

114. In such circumstances one gropes for certainties,
assurances, and one stumbles upon a passage like this
one from an article entitled “Global Paternalism: the
U.N. and the New International Regulatory Order”:

109. The draft resolution that is being drawn up by the
non-aligned members of the Council also confirms the
Nicaraguan Government’s peace-loving character and its
adherence to principles. Setting aside the condemnable
offences-indeed, the aggressive actions of a permanent
member of the Council and of a neighbouring countrythe draft resolution is limited to requesting the continuation of the efforts undertaken by Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela, the member countries of the
Contadora Group, to find peaceful solutions to the problems which affect the region and to asking the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with Charter provisions, to assist
such efforts and, if necessary, to make available his good
offices to help achieve the peaceful objectives we all
desire. Nothing less would suffice, indeed, in these grave
circumstances.

“Politics at the United Nations takes a rather pure
form, worthy of our state legislatures at the turn of the
century. There is a good deal of vote trading, armtwisting, demagoguery, playing to the galleries, a certain amount of buying and selling, log-rolling and
pork-barrelling..
. , There is widespread cynicism and
tacit understanding that a good many of the declarations of intentions that are made will never be
implemented.”
Such an analysis is therapeutic. It shocks us out of Utopian complacency and points to more realistic directions
in our conduct of international affairs. That reminds me
of club-footed Talleyrand, who, on his return to Paris
from Vienna, was asked by a lady: “And what did your
Excellency do during the Convention?” “Madam,
I
limped”, he answered and was rightly understood as referring not merely to his physical mishap.

110. Cuba has already stated in previous meetings of
this supreme body its unequivocal support for any effort
to achieve a negotiated settlement of the problems affecting Central America today, particularly the aggression
aimed at Nicaragua. We are aware of the real economic
and social roots of those problems, which have nothing
to do with a confrontation between East and West, and
of the exogenous sources that tend to exacerbate them,
transforming them into a threat to regional and international peace and security. For these reasons we consider
it essential for the Security Council, as the main body
responsible for maintaining that peace and security, to
take action.

115. The questions we shall try to answer at this Council meeting on Nicaragua will be: Are welimping along
too? Why? And what can we do to improve progress?
116. When I addressed the Council on the same issue
on 24 March [2422nd meeting], I said that there seemed
to be, in principle, widespread agreement among the
States involved about the necessity of defusing the
situation-and
the sooner the better, Aware of the fact
that the problem has wider international dimensions, my
delegation called for the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral to help in the process of negotiations that would
include bilateral and multilateral actions likely to bring
together both the countries directly concerned and the
Latin American States on the periphery, A draft resolution likely to be presented here has been distributed. Its
penultimate paragraph requests the Secretary-General to
assist the Contadora Group of countries and to use, if
necessary, his good offices in the achievement of its
peaceful objectives. We recommend this to the consideration of the Council.

I1 1. Perhaps it is not too much to recall to members
the serious responsibility which falls to the Council at
this time of decisions, when we repeat our confidence
that your adherence to the principles of the Grganization
and your sense of duty will guide you once again down
the path of the defence of peace and justice.
112. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation front French):
The next speaker is the representative of Mauritius. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

117. There is indeed little indication that the measure of
agreement that existed last March has been impaired by
subsequent developments. It is gratifying to note that at
the regional level the greatest aspiration of the Central
American States is to unite around the concept of a great

113. Mr. MAUDAVE
(Mauritius): I should like, first
of all, to make an unusual and candid remark, Since my
arrival here a few months ago my personal feelings about
the complex machinery of the United Nations and about
12

homeland, a patria grande. The countries in the region
already have much in common in terms of cultural and
linguistic traditions and affinities, It is also an economically deprived area where resources, both human and
natural, are sorely needed for development programmes,
Those resources should not be wasted upon a military
buildup. True, cultural and linguistic ties and shared economic deprivation do not necessarily guarantee harmony
and co-operation. History provides numerous examples
of such dichotomy. That social and cultural affinities
should ideally lead to unity is a complex issue. It therefore belongs to the good will of the Council and to the
enterprising drive of the Secretary-General to build from
already propitious premises a sound platform for the
establishment of dialogue and understanding.

through years of questionable practices by men like Metternich, Talleyrand himself, Bismarck and some of their
successors, who epitomized the art of equivocation and
ambiguity in international relations. There were probably good reasons for such practices at the time. Further,
since the end of the Second World War diplomacy has
often been blunt. Members of the Council may recall the
remark made to John F. Kennedy in Vienna in the early
1960s: “What is mine is mine. What is yours is negotiable.” There is a wider degree of free will than is usually
thought as to whether one would trust or distrust. Distrust debilitates because it is fundamentally negative,
Faith that eventually good sensewill prevail preserves in
our human nature, however frail, corruptible or querulous, a deep craving for sanity and peace in international
relations. On the point at issue in Central America I
would like to hope that all remains negotiable, and we
should build on trust.

118. The statements that were made here on 9 May
[24.31st meeting] reinforce the feeling we had in March

that a basis for agreement already exists,
123. My country this month presides over the meetings
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) at the
United Nations, and my Government firmly believes in
non-alignment. Though I would be repeating what many
others have already said, I should like to reaffirm the
position which the organizations we belong to have
adopted on many occasions, the latest being in New
Delhi last March, namely, that they are concerned at the
development of the present crisis in Central America,
which threatens the peace and security of the world.
They have urged all States to adhere scrupulously to the
principles of the non-use of force or the threat of force,
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, and respect for the politica independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
States of the region and for their right to be free from any
interference or external pressure of any kind. How are we
going to achieve that?

119. The Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua
stressed the importance of restoring peace in Central
America and mentioned the efforts made by the Contadora countries to find a solution. These efforts represent,
he said, the most important Latin American peace initiative in the area. He went on to quote the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the work of the Organizatiox? to the
thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly about the
role the Security Council could play in world affairs if
better means could be found to implement its resolutions. The Nicaraguan Minister then added that, under
the auspices of the Council and of the Secretary-General,
his Government would co-operate with the initiatives of
the Contadora Group for constructive dialogue with
Honduras and the United States.
120. The representative of Honduras in the concluding
remarks of his statement said that his Government was
not against dialogue. He stressed, however, that as the
issue interested the whole region, all the countries concerned should join in. He emphasized the need for
regional consultations and negotiations, adding that that
did not exclude dialogue.

124. Like the President of the Security Council in
March, we believe that at the meetings of the Council
strong language has been used in the past. Vindication of
that has rested on the reasoning that some here have
cried in silence for so long in the wilderness that they now
open wide the sluice-gates of pent-up frustrations. That
argument deserves sympathy and understanding. None
the less, my delegation thinks that, however desperate
conditions may have been, self-control always commands respect, Extreme posturing is not helpful, nor is it
conducive to the creation of a climate of trust and understanding, especially here in the sanctum wzctorum of the
United Nations, where the Council’s primary responsibility and objective are, according to the Charter, the maintenance of international peace and security. The Council
is a deliberative, consultative and decision-making body.
We sllould by all means enhance its prestige and improve
its efficiency by observing due restraint in our
interventions.

121. The United States representative stated that her
country would not invade smaller States situated along
the frontiers of her country which had no forces of occupation stationed anywhere in the world. The neighbours
of the United States need have no fear, she guaranteed.
French writer and journalist Jean-Francois Revel in an
analysis of Mrs, Kirkpatrick’s speeches on foreign policy
has concluded that “she understands that truth is the
main weapon of democracy”. We accept her statement as
true. Given those assurances and considering that in
these circumstances whatever gap remains can only be
narrow if we are all saying what we really mean, one
would venture the hope that, like Talleyrand, we are
limping along towards a settlement.

125. Secondly, we wish to make some ProPoSitions
which would be likely to help US move closer to Our
objective.
The basis of these propositions is the Charter
of the United Nations and those of the other interna-

122. There is, however, an ingrained belief in popular
thought and in the media that diplomacy is synonYmous
with duplicity. That was grafted in our COnscioUSneSS
13
t

130. Last but not least, Mr. President, in the language
which is one of the elements of our common heritage,
and using the familiar tu form which is a sign of our
special relationship as Africans, I wish to applaud your
assumption of your lofty post and, assuring you of my
loyal co-operation, to wish you good luck and every
success.

tional organizations we belong to, like the OAU, the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the OAS and several other groups that all adhere to the fundamental principles of non-intervention,
self-determination,
sovereignty and so forth enshrined ‘in the norms of
international law, A practical corollary to these principles is the immediate cessation of all acts of hostility
which have been taking place in the confrontation zone.
It would also be helpful if the restraint we advocated
earlier could apply also to official declarations in a
number of States. In any talks which, it is to be hoped,
may be agreed upon before we part, we recommend a
commitment to avoid any ideological and political polarization of the issues confronting Central America.
Regional co-operation should be fostered by all possible
means, and to ensure that this is achieved it would be
wise to exclude from these endeavours all interests foreign to the area and alien to its ultimate aims of national
and regional reconstruction, economic development,
social, cultural, artistic renaissance and general wellbeing within a democratic framework. The Charter of
the United Nations has provisions for the implementation of those regional arrangements.

131. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Guatemala. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
132. Mr. QUIRONES-AMEZQUITA

(Guatemala) (inof Guatemala,
through the delegation which I represent, congratulates
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We hope that your knowledge and vast experience, together with your spirit of impartiality, will help
you guide the Council’s debate to a successful outcome.
We wish also to express our gratitude to Council
members for having allowed us to participate in this
debate.
terpretation from Spanish): The Republic

126. Finally, we suggest that the Security Council
adopt measures that would contribute to a cessation of
hostilities and pave the way for meaningful negotiations
both regionally and bilaterally. Among such measures,
the Council could consider sending, with the consent of
the parties concerned and when appropriate, a commission to supervise the normalization of the border region
where there have been confrontations or territorial violations. Some representatives, notably the representative of
Peru [2426fh meeting], mentioned similar propositions
last March. We here subscribe to the views they
expressed.

133. Barely six weeks ago we were apprised of Nicaragua’s request, when that country complained that subversive forces had entered its territory. At that time [2427fh
meeting] Guatemala expressed its concern that there
might be further bloodshed among Central American
brothers. At that same time my country expressed its
desire to take part in a meeting of Central American
Foreign Ministers, so tha.t we Central Americans could be
the first to seek a solution to our own problems. In the
course of that debate we listened to lofty ideas fervidly
expressed: several countries, particularly those of Latin
America, advocated dialogue and the quest for solutions.
We also heard Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela, members of the so-called Contadora Groupcountries whose wishes do indeed carry weight with
Central Americans-call for dialogue, for political negotiation, for the search for solutions with a view to furthering economic and social development. We also heard the
delegation of Cuba, which said,

127. I do not know how much of all this can be
achieved within a short time, before the situation completely escapes our control. There is ground for moderate
optimism. Transposing to the sphere of international
relations the chiaroscuro elements we sometimes find in
Flemish painting, which correspond to my feelings as
outlined at the very beginning of this statement, the
Council might yet hope to achieve a Rembrandt-like
quality in the work it is doing here on the Central American canvas.

“For these reasons, my delegation hails the peace initiative launched on the Panamanian island of Contadora by the Governments of Colombia, Mexico,
Panama and Venezuela, which has been accepted by
Nicaragua, as a genuine effort . . . at finding a just and
lasting solution of these conflicts,” [See 242lst meet-

128. Before I resume my place at the side of the Council
chamber, I should like to conclude with what it is customary to begin with at United Nations gatherings.

ing, paru. 49.1

129. I wish first to pay a tribute, Mr. President, to your
predecessor in the Chair, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick of the
United States, for the way in which she conducted the
Council’s affairs during the month of April. Marcus
Aurelius, in ancient Rome, insistently advised that “we
must be clear-headed and realistic”. To that advice, Mrs.
Kirkpatrick has added clarity of expression and spirited
repartee.

Other countries of Latin America and North America
expressed themselves in the same, or similar, terms. All
these statements awakened great and comforting hopes
when it was eventually concluded that there would be
more than just the fiery language of rhetoric and that the
search for solutions would be the driving force behind the
dialogue.
134. It was in that spirit that Central American countries welcomed the kind visit of the Foreign Ministers of

[The speaker continued in French.]

14

its firm conviction as to the need to respect the principle
of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other countries in the area. It considers that since Nicaragua, during
the earlier debate, agreed to take part in an initiative such
as that of the Contadora Group, such multilateral talks
are expected and should be undertaken, so that Central
American solutions may be found to Central American
problems. They are the people best acquainted with their
problems and, with the co-operation of neighbouring
countries, a satisfactory solution could be found. Any
attempt to seek partial solutions to general problems
through bilateral talks would hamper the search for
appropriate answers. The hardest thing is to relate cause
to effect and effect to cause, and only a comprehensive
approach to the problems can bring about an appropriate solution.

the countries members of the Contadora Group and that
they met at Panama City in April. There the Central
American Foreign Ministers, with the assistance of the
Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico, Panama and
Venezuela, discussed and agreed upon the need for a
comprehensive settlement of the problems ‘of the Central
American region. They understood the need to discuss
the problems of the destabilization of Governments, the
introduction of excessive arms into the region, the desirability of dispensing with military advisers, subversion,
how to seek all-round development
the timeliness of
seeking ways to re-establish the common market, the
need for mutual respect and respect for human rights and
non-interference in the affairs of other countries. In sum,
it was a dialogue seeking to unite disunited peoples, and
seeking not only a short-term solution but also the avoidance of future tensions.

140. Last Friday [2432&meeting]
the representative of
Mexico indicated agreement with a draft resolution prepared by developing countries non-permanent members
of the Council in which the countries involved in the
Contadora endeavour are given additional support in
continuing their task. Furthermore, the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to use his good offices, in
co-ordination with the Contadora Group, in the search
for a solution to the problems affecting peace in Central
America.

135. The Central American Foreign Ministers understood that outside interests must not seek to divide peoples united by tradition, religion, the Spanish language
and similar ideals. Ceritral Americans do not want desolation and death; we wish to delete from our dictionary
the abominable word “war’‘-especially
if it be war
among brothers.
136. Among Governments with differences, silence is
not the best counsellor. At the Panama meeting there
was agreement on a further round of talks to be held in
May in order to lay down the basis for an open dialogue,
honourable in purpose, with the aim of preventing Central American society from foundering in chaos and disillusionment, and avoiding a situation where the tears of
our peoples would move the consciences of those who
reject dialogue.

141. My country knows that the Contadora Group has
convened the five Central American countries to a
further meeting at the end of May this year. No other
body or person has been asked to take part in that meeting, because that would be like acknowledging in
advance the failure of that move without even trying it.
Our country recognizes, appreciates and commends the
high moral and intellectual qualities of the SecretaryGeneral, but, in the first instance, would like the Central
Americans, with the Contadora Group as witnesses, to
be the ones to discuss and seek a solution to their problems, without the intervention of other bodies or persons.
We reiterate our faith in multilateral talks among Central
Americans and the Contadora countries on the basis of a
general approach to Central American problems and our
deep-rooted belief in the spirit of Central Americanism,
which will manage to find peace with justice.

137. We know that the problems are difficult and their
solutions complex but, for my country’s part, there is
more than enough determination to face up to them and
to help to resolve them. Guatemala believes that peoples
live only when they have a spirit of struggle and sacrifice,
and that spirit exists only when there is freedom and
understanding. This is not a time to laugh or to cry; it is a
time to seek how to remedy the difficulties.
138. We believe that, since the spirit and desire to seek
Central American solutions to Central American problems have been affirmed, and since certain principles and
bases have been laid down, the efforts of the countries in
the area should be pursued in the quest for solutions,
with the collaboration of the Contadora Group, whose
members are Latin American countries, all of them adjacent to the Central American area. To seek the intervention of other countries or organizations at this stage can
only be counter-productive. We think that first of all it
must be Central Americans who make the effort to find
solutions. They must be the ones to restore order and set
the objectives, but in a spirit of frank dialogue, for otherwise multilateral talks could seem to be lighting the way
to a solution but would fail for a lack of truth.

142. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
shall now call on representatives who wish to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
143. Mr, D’ESCOTO
BROCKMANN
(Nicaragua)
(Interpretation from Spanish): I simply wish to express
surprise at the fact that the representative of Guatemala
has informed the Council that just over two weeks ago a
meeting was held in Panama-according
to him-of Foreign Ministers of Central America and Foreign Ministers
of the Contadora Group. First of all, at no time was
there any meeting of all the Foreign Ministers of Central
America with the Contadora Group countries. Tn Panama, the second round of consultations was held by the
four Contadora Foreign Ministers separately with each
of the Foreign Ministers of the Central American coun-

139. With reference to the request from Nicaragua
which gave rise to this new debate, Guatemala reiterates
15

tries. It is also untrue-I
hope because of Iack of information and not for any other reason-that, as the representative of Guatemala said, at that meeting of Central
American Foreign Ministers, agreement was reached
that henceforward the problems of Central America
would all be discussed comprehensively or regionally.

Nicaraguan problem. It is a problem between the United
States and Nicaragua, but since the United States is using
the Government of the fraternal Republic of Honduras
as a base for attacks against my country, we have a problem here which, because of Honduras’s complicity in the
aggressive policy of the Reagan Administration which is
threatening peace between our countries, is an eminently
bilateral one.

144. I venture to quote from the information bulletin
published by the Contadora Foreign Ministers at the end
of this second round of consultations in Panama some
two and a half weeks ago [s/15727, annex]:

150. We have indeed always been ready to meet the
Governments of the other Central American countries in
order to deal with matters that are highly Central American in nature. That is why I am surprised at this hypocritical attitude-I
am sorry, but I can find no other word
for it-on
the part of the United States Government,
which now presents itself before international
public
opinion as the “champion”
of Central American cooperation and co-ordination.
What is the truth?

“It was agreed that rigid and inflexible approaches
which might obstruct the common purpose of bringing about dttente and promoting
peaceful coexistence must be avoided. To that end, agreement in
principle was reached”.
145. In other words, the Contadora Foreign Ministers,
after holding separate consultations with each of them,
agreed on the procedures of consultation and negotiation
that would have to be followed in the near future, in such
a way as to accommodate the diverse nature of the topics, be they regional or bilateral in character. So, for
topics of a regional character, as was said at that timeeverything relating to the Central American common
market, and so on-they suggest that in the future we
should aclopt a regional approach; but for topics clearly
bilateral in nature the procedure should henceforward be
bilateral.

151. I shall not relate the entire history of the United
States position and policy over the years, which hampered even the achievement of the dreams of our countries once the Central American Federation broke up
although we managed again to reunite. I shall simply
refer to something that happened in recent years and of
which some representatives will have memories of their
own, I am sure.
152. From 15 to 17 March 1980, something was
achieved in Central America which was very important
for Central American co-ordination and co-operation.
After eight years during which no meeting was held
among the Foreign Ministers of those States, one was
held at San Jo&, Costa Rica, at which an institutional
framework was given to the Association of Central
American Foreign Ministers, as a result of the now
famous San Jose Declaration.
I.
153. I shall be brief about this as I may have to go into
great detail about it later. I shall simply say that the
United States, that great “champion” of Central American co-operation and unity, was not happy to see us
Central Americans getting together in this way and
looked for a way to put an end to this Association of
Central American Foreign Ministers. It did so by creating what was at the time called the Central American
Democratic Community.
The purpose of that Democratic Community
was to exclude Nicaragua from the
Central American
dialogue; that was how it was
construed by everyone. The Government of Mexico very
clearly and categorically declined to attend that meeting
and said that Mexico did not belong to tlitist or exclusive
clubs. Representatives will also remember how often
President Royo of Panama very clearly denounced that
Central American Democratic Community as something
which had as its fundamental purpose the isolation of
Nicaragua.

146. This was the burden of the consultations of the
Contadora Foreign Ministers with the Foreign Minister
of Honduras as to his readiness to enter into bilateral
talks with Nicaragua in the presence of the Contadora
Foreign Ministers.
147. Foreign Minister Edgardo Paz Barnica agreed to
enter into talks with Nicaragua in the presence of the
Contadora Ministers. He agreed, further, that his willingness to do so should be made public at a dinner held in
the Holiday Inn in Panama, at which the guests were the
Contadora Ministers and which was attended by all the
Central American Ministers. The only time we were all
together was at that dinner.
148. Acting as spokesman of the Contadora Group, the
Foreign Minister of Mexico announced that, after the
consultations between the Group and each of the Central
American Foreign Ministers, there would be a HonduranNicaraguan meeting in their presence and that Honduras
had already agreed to that. Unfortunately,
at the time
that the dialogue was to take place Honduras again
declined-despite
the fact that it had previously agreed,
as confirmed by the Foreign Ministers of the Contadora
Group and made public by them.
‘49. I must stress something which is obvious. The reptentative of Guatemala said that we must have Central
lerican solutions for Central American problems. I
k he means that, for Central American problems, the
ltries of Central America should get together. The
-d States invasion of my country is fundamentally a

154. At that time I had occasion to talk with the then
President of El Salvador, Jest Napolebn Duarte, whoand I speak quite frankly-told
me personally that it was
obvious and could not be denied that this whole idea of
the Central American Democratic Community had been
16

cooked up by the United States. Of course he gave me
some explanations as to why it was of interest to the
United States, but he admitted that the driving force was
the United States.
155. The Central American Democratic Community
failed, and the State Department was then obliged to try
something else. So it came up with the famous Enders
forum, called the Forum for Peace and Democracy.
Representatives know that that was another failure and
was also condemned in many countries and the international press as a further attempt to isolate Nicaragua.
156. Now that the United States Government considers
that it has a greater capacity to bring pressure to bear on
various Central American countries than when we organized the Association of Central American Foreign Ministers at San Jose, it says that it is ready for Nicaragua to
take part in a dialogue with the other countries, What is
the purpose if not to protect its tool in the aggression
against Nicaragua, namely the Government and army of
Honduras?
157. That was what I wanted to make clear so that no
one should be mistaken in thinking that the Government
of the United States is the champion of the cause of unity
and co-operation in Central America. It has been and
continues to be the main enemy of such unity and cooperation
158. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
The hour being late, I shall try to be very brief.
159. I would simply note that one hears here a very
great deal of falsification of history and of current events.
The first point that I should like to make concerning
these most recent falsifications is simply that the United
States is neither a champion of Central American cooperation nor an opponent of Central American cooperation. If the countries of the region desire to meet
together to try to work out solutions to their problems,
the United States poses no obstacle to that. No more do
we pose obstacles to the desire of, shall we say, Libya and
Chad to try to find solutions to their problems within the
framework of the OAU or that of any other nations of
the United Nations that have come before this body and
prefer to find regional solutions, The United States
neither champions that nor opposes it. We believe in
general in the right and the practicality of nations most
immediately involved in conflicts seeking to work out
solutions to their problems.
160. Secondly, the United States has not invaded Nicaragua and does not intend to do so. The most the United
States has been reproached with or accused of by serious
people is providing arms and advice to Nicaraguans
fighting for their right to national self-determination.
161, Thirdly, concerning one more falsification-who
has done what with regard to what meeting at what Past
time-the past is always less important than the present.
The principles that are presumably at stake here are rela-

tively clear, 1 think. The Central American Democratic
Community, to which the Nicaraguan Foreign Minister
objects, issued a declaration, the San Jose Declaration,
which contained principles many of which have also been
identified by the Contadora Group as pertaining to problems of the area. Those include an end to the importation
of all arms from outside the area into the area, with
verification of that, and an end to the importation and
LlSeof foreign advisers throughout the area, with verification of that. In addition, there has been a recent reaffirmation, in the most current information bulletin of the
Contadora Group [S/15762, annex], of some other principles which were affirmed at San Jose. These include:
“self-determination and non-interference in the affairs
of other States,. . . the obligation not to allow the territory of a State to be used for committing acts of
aggression against other States, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition of the threat or
use Of force to resolve conflicts”.
162. To the best of my knowledge, the basic problem
that confronts the region is that one State in the region,
namely, Nicaragua, is unwilling to affirm respect for the
territorial integrity of other States and is unwilling to
affirm its obligation not to allow its territory to be used
for acts of aggression against another, yet still claims for
itself unique enjoyment of those rights.
163. I believe that the Security Council should see very
clearly that the United States, and, I suspect, all the other
States involved in the Contadora process, except perhaps
Nicaragua, are willing to agree in very short order to
respect the principles of self-determination, noninterference in the affairs of other States, the non-use of
the territory of one State for acts of aggression against
another, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition of the threat or use of force to resolve conflicts.
164. There has been a reference to the dreams of the
people of Central America. The people of Nicaragua
have dreams too, and those dreams have been very
cruelly betrayed. I believe that, if the Government of
Nicaragua would simply keep the promises it has
solemnly made to its own people-which promises we
have frequently reviewed here-with respect to human
rights and democratic processes, if it were willing to live
jn peace with its neighbours, if there were the will to do
those things and to respect the principles of the Charter,
the precise format in which those questions were discussed and decided would turn out to be quite
unimportant.
165. Mr.

D’ESCOTO

BROCKMANN
(Nicaragua)
On this occasion, as on
many former occasions, it is hard to understand imperialist logic, and why, in the light of the unquestionable fact
that my country is being attacked from a neighbouring
country, Nicaragua should be described as the aggressor
country, I do not believe that I have to prove again something which I am sure the Council fully understands.
(interpretation from Q&r/r):

HOW

TO

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

OBTAIN

UNITED

publications
your bookstore
SE

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from booksrores
and distriburori
or write lo: United
Nations.
Sales Section.
New

PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies son1 en vente
du monde entier.
Informcz-vous
aup&
de votre
Section
des ventes,
New York ou Gentve.
KAK

I-lOJIYYMTb

M3~AHMR

OPl-‘AHMJAlJMM

kf,flaHHR
OpraHKIaUNH
06t.C,WHCHHblX
ware~rcTsaxsoacexpa~O~aXMHpa.
Mara3HHe
HJ-IW nWuWTe
no aapecy:
nponaw
ki3aawiR,
Hbkdlopti
ww

COMO

CONSEGUIR

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

NATIONS

UNIES

dans les Iibrairics
et les apences
dCpositairca
librairc
ou adresscz-vous
P : Nations
Unies.

OFbEAMHEHHbIX

HauHB

MOZUHO KyllHTb
B KHlI~HblX
HaBOnHTCcnpaEKw
O~H~~PHHRXBB~IIJ~SI
OpraHK3aUHI
06%CnHHCHHblX
HatuG?,
TeHeea.

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulle
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

DES

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

HAUMfi
uara31lHaY
KHII;);NO%I
CCKUIIR
no

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Unidas
estln en vcnta en librerias
y casas distribuidoras
en
a su librcro
o dirfjasc
a: Naciones
Unidas.
Seccidn
de Venras.

00400

90-60205-January

1991-2,050
