S/PV.8319

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8319th meeting

Thursday, 26 July 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Skoog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Sweden)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Michon
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/723)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-23988 (E)
*1823988*

S/PV.8319

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/723)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
today’s meeting.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Óscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo,
Vice-President of Colombia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/723, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault
Mr. Arnault: I appreciate this opportunity to
present to members of the Security Council the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/723) on the peace
process in Colombia covering the past four months,
which coincide with the conclusion of the mandate of
President Juan Manuel Santos.
It is an honour to share once again the floor with
Vice-President Óscar Naranjo Trujillo, who, throughout
this period, along with High Commissioner for Peace
Rodrigo Rivera and other members of the Government,
has been at the forefront of efforts to press forward with
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
2/19

26/07/2018

and to provide as firm a foundation as possible upon
which the next Government can build.
The Vice-President and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia have developed a
good working method, establishing common quarterly
priorities with regard to issues under United Nations
verification, and applying our respective resources and
leverage to meet those goals. Progress may have been
partial and delays have occurred, but we have been
more successful in pushing implementation working
together than we would have been working separately.
We are ready to adopt the same collaborative
approach with the incoming administration of
President-elect Iván Duque Márquez. As an example of
our common work during the past quarter, we have put
special emphasis on applying a gender approach more
forcefully in the reintegration of former combatants and
in the security guarantees for communities, with some
positive results, which are reflected in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
Since the report of the Secretary-General was
issued, on 20 July, Colombia’s Independence Day,
the new Congress was inaugurated. It includes
representatives of the political party the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), and its
procedures are aligned with the Law on the Status of the
Opposition — a key part of the peace-related legislation
adopted earlier this year that provides for a more level
playing field between the majority and the opposition
in all elected assemblies. The Law guarantees, among
other provisions, the presence of the opposition in the
governing bodies of both Chambers. The presence of the
political party FARC fulfils one of the core objectives
of the Final Peace Agreement, and this Congress is
among the more diverse, plural and representative in the
country’s legislative history. Within our mandate, we
are ready and willing to cooperate with all its members.
That is not the only achievement of the past month.
Special recognition must be given to the work of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The Peace Agreement
recognized the deep aspiration of Colombian society
to truth and justice, along with the termination of the
conflict. Unfortunately, the long delays involved in the
establishment of the Jurisdiction and the adoption of its
normative framework created, within public opinion,
a lingering sense that truth and justice were somehow
overshadowed by the political process.
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

The first hearings held by the Peace Jurisdiction
on 10 and 13 July involving a former army general and
the former general commander of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) were therefore extremely important to
start dispelling the perception of impunity. The pursuit
of accountability through the Jurisdiction and the
Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition
will continue to be critical to the legitimacy of the
peace process.
Time will tell, but the positive response from
victims and the recent decision of senior army officers
to voluntarily accept the jurisdiction of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace are an indication that the
Colombian peace process may well be close to striking
the right balance between the demands of peace and
justice — a balance that, as those present know, has
been elusive, more often than not, in the negotiated
settlement of armed conflicts. The international
community should therefore maintain its support for the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission
and the Special Unit for the Search for Persons.
I would also like to bring into relief the national
pact of repudiation of violence against social leaders,
which was signed by President Santos and Presidentelect Duque, among others. It is the first time that
violence against social leaders is received with such
a strong sense of outrage, expressed in the streets of
Colombia and cities abroad, in the halls of national
institutions and across the political spectrum. In the
polarized context of a protracted electoral campaign
and in a society at times indifferent to developments in
the zones of conflict, that national consensus against
attacks on social leaders is significant.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
the most important measures provided in the Peace
Agreement for improving the security of communities
have begun to be implemented, even if their impact to
date is clearly insufficient. We hope that this consensus
and sense of urgency on the part of Colombian society
will give momentum to the implementation of those
measures and will galvanize the efforts of the justice
system to prosecute those responsible for these attacks.
Supporting institutions in their efforts to curb
violence in the territories will remain a top priority
for the Mission. We very much hope that a similar
consensus can be forged around the central challenge
for consolidating peace — that is, to address the

S/PV. 8319

combination of poverty, violence and illegal economies
to which inhabitants of the zone of conflict continue to
be subjected. A tightly coordinated and well-resourced
effort by State institutions, in cooperation with the
affected communities and their organizations, will be
required to bring the rule of law, security and legal
productive opportunities to areas that have long been
prey to violence and State neglect. I would therefore
like to echo the Secretary-General’s report and call
for dialogue and cooperation among the new national
Government, local authorities, social organizations
and civil society in the territories. We believe that such
dialogue and cooperation are a prerequisite for success.
While the participation of FARC representatives
in the Congress is a major step, the reintegration into
civilian life of former FARC-EP members is unfinished
business. The Secretary-General has underlined in
past reports the difficult environment in which that
reintegration is taking place. Completing the work
started by the current Government will no doubt require
dedication and resources, but fulfilling the guarantees
given to those who have laid down their weapons and
now undergo the difficult transition to civilian life is
essential for Colombia. It is also essential for Colombia
to be a source of motivation for parties to conflicts
elsewhere in the world.
In concluding, let me express the Mission’s
appreciation to the Government of President Santos,
the leadership of FARC, Colombia’s institutions and
civil society, who have welcomed us and cooperated
generously with our work during the past two years. As
the new authorities take office, they can count on the
support of this Mission as they take on the hard work of
consolidating peace and achieving reconciliation.
The President: I thank Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by welcoming His Excellency Vice-President Óscar
Naranjo Trujillo back to the Council, and allow me also
to thank him warmly for the personal leadership he has
shown in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
and in working very closely with the United Nations and
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I
would also like to thank Special Representative Arnault
for his briefing today and for all the excellent work he
and his team have carried out in recent months.

18-239883/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

The United Kingdom welcomes the congressional
and presidential elections held between March and
June, which were the least violence and most inclusive
in Colombia for decades. On behalf of the British
Government, I would like to congratulate Presidentelect Iván Duque Márquez on his electoral victory and
also Vice-President-elect Marta Ramírez — the first
woman to take up that office in Colombia. For the first
time in a generation, elections were not dominated by
the conflict but defined by campaigns about issues
affecting ordinary people.
We also warmly welcome another remarkable
milestone brought about by the peace process. For
the first time, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) participated in elections and, last
Friday, joined the new Congress.
The speed of the transition continues to surprise
and inspire all who follow this journey, but as with all
such transitions the challenges remain considerable,
and as the special representative has just said, the
2018 elections mark the beginning of a new phase
of consolidating the peace process and broadening
its ownership to all constituencies. Dialogue and
cooperation will continue to be an essential part of that
work and FARC’s presence in Congress will enable
its voice to join others in building a consensus about
the future.
We commend the statement of President Santos
on Friday welcoming the FARC to the Congress and
lauding its commitment to working within Colombia’s
Constitution and democracy. We welcome Presidentelect Duque’s rejection of polarization and his
commitment to working for unity.
We recognize the enormity of the achievements in
the implementation of the peace agreement to date, but
as set out in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/723),
we also recognize the significant work that remains.
Although the elections were the most peaceful in recent
history, a significant achievement, we are concerned
by the security situation in some post-conflict areas,
particularly due to the proliferation of illegal armed
groups. Violence between these groups has brought new
fighting to some areas and displacements, especially in
the Pacific coast region. That has claimed the lives of
an increasing number of human rights defenders and
social activists, who in many cases are targeted because
they champion the rights of local communities.
4/19

26/07/2018

I welcome the steps taken by the Government to
reduce that violence, including the recent commitment
by both President Santos and President-elect Duque
to new special protective measures for social leaders
in rural areas. We hope that the measures will help to
address that challenge and we welcome the recruitment
of more women officers in the National Protection Unit
as a positive step.
As the Special Representative mentioned, on
social economic reintegration of FARC members, we
agree with the priorities that he has set out for the
coming months and we hope that the parties will seize
the opportunity to inject renewed momentum into
improving security and accelerating the reintegration
of former combatants, socioeconomic development
and crop substitution programmes. I also note that
negotiations with the National Liberation Army
continue in Cuba. We will welcome any developments
that lead to an end to violence.
Let me conclude by paying tribute once more to
President Santos, who took the bold step of coming to
the Security Council to ask for our support in 2016.
His Government started an extraordinary journey that
belongs to all Colombians, and the United Kingdom
remains committed to supporting them all the way to the
end. The Council has been incredibly proud to support
Colombia’s peace agreement over the past two and half
years. In a world where conflicts destroy so many lives
and cause untold suffering, Colombia’s peace process
offers inspiration and hope to us all. We look forward
to continuing to work with President-elect Duque and
his Government on continued implementation over the
months and years ahead to consolidate gains already
made for the Colombian people and to continue to
inspire peacemakers around the world.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Vice-President
Óscar Naranjo Trujillo to the Council. He has been
key in this process, and through him I would like to
congratulate President Juan Manuel Santos and his
entire Government on their commitment to the peace
process in Colombia. We also congratulate Ambassador
María Emma Mejía Vélez, who has also made decisive
contributions to the process. We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his briefing. We reiterate our
support for the important tasks he and his team
carry out.
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

On 20 July, Colombia celebrated 208 years as a
Republic. It was an opportune moment to acknowledge
the country’s recent developments, crowned by the most
peaceful and inclusive electoral process in decades. We
wish to highlight the legacy of peace of the outgoing
Administration and the democratic aspiration of the
Colombian people. We would like to focus on three
aspects of the endeavour that we consider critical and
are obviously interconnected — security, reintegration
and reconciliation.
Security requires a redoubling of efforts to combat
organized crime. We are concerned about its spread
due to the limited State presence in remote rural
areas previously controlled by the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). Peru knows well the challenge that drug
trafficking poses to security, State institutions and
democratic governance, just as it understands the
effectiveness of combating the scourge by addressing
its root causes with the help of the concerned civilian
population. We can thereby promote alternative,
comprehensive and sustainable development.
We believe that such development is also important
to the process of reintegration, which requires the
weaving of a new social fabric. In that process, we must
take into account the social and economic dynamics
of each region, along with its opportunity. It is also
important to promote the participation of the private
sector and international cooperation.
Upholding the rule of law is critical to promoting
the trust and legitimacy that all society-building
requires. In that connection, we welcome the launching
of the hearings of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace — a
commitment not only to all of the victims, but to all
Colombians. In that regard, we welcome the important
Pact of repudiation of violence against social leaders,
signed by all Colombian political parties, as well
as the massive mobilization of Colombian citizens
against such violence. The assassination of leaders,
activists and ex-combatants must cease and be subject
to the investigations and criminal prosecution that the
Colombian institutions have the power to carry out. That
is also important in order to promote reconciliation. On
that point, we note the importance of the participation of
women and youth, and welcome the increasingly active
role of the working group on gender of the National
Reintegration Council.

S/PV. 8319

The visit of youth leaders to an ecotourism
project of ex-combatants in Miravalle, organized by
the Mission, is a good practice that we encourage to
be replicated in other locations in Colombia and other
conflict situations worldwide, in line with resolution
2419 (2018) on youth, peace and security, adopted by
the Council in June.
The benefits of peace are numerous and concrete.
Recently, in the Lindosa mountain range in the
department of Guaviare, on land previously affected by
the conflict, a group of investigators discovered what
is considered to be one of the most important samples
of cave art in the world, resulting in the establishment
of eight protected zones. Like that finding, the peace
process seeks to rediscover and showcase a rich past
in order to build a more prosperous future. It is a task
that faces the natural challenges of a project that is as
complex as it is ambitious. Colombia has launched an
exemplary national project of maintaining peace and
sustaining development.
I conclude by reaffirming Peru’s commitment to
and support for the Colombian peace process and the
Mission deployed by the Council’s mandate, at the
request of the parties. We have followed the large and
complex peace process since its inception and are now
a guarantor of the peace agreement and its commitment
to all Colombians.
We are convinced that the Security Council will
continue to work constructively with the new authorities
in the interest of peace and security in Colombia.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting. I welcome Vice-President Óscar Naranjo
Trujillo to the Council and thank Special Representative
Arnault for his briefing.
The peace process in Colombia is a fine example of
the Council’s successful response over recent years to
regional hotspot issues through collaborative efforts. It
is of crucial importance not only to the achievement of
comprehensive peace and development in the country,
but also to the maintenance of stability in the region
as a whole. China commends the efforts of President
Santos, the Colombian Government and all parties
concerned in this regard.
In recent months, positive progress has been made
in the Colombian peace process, and the presidential
elections were held without incident. The Government

18-239885/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) have agreed on a strategy for the reintegration
of former combatants. Encouraging progress has also
been achieved with regard to the ceasefire between
the Government and the National Liberation Army.
Healing the wounds of war, however, will not be an
easy task. The comprehensive implementation of the
Peace Agreement requires efforts at the political,
security and development levels as well as in the area
of social cohesion. As such, it is a long-term project
that requires a systematic approach and the sustained
efforts of all parties in Colombia as well as members of
the international community.
The peace process is irreversible: such is the
consensus of the entire Colombian population and the
international community. China hopes that all relevant
actors in Colombia will remain firmly committed to
the peace process, continue to actively implement
the Peace Agreement and resolve any issues, as they
arise, through dialogue and consultation. The Security
Council and the international community should remain
seized of the situation and give continued support to
the pursuit of peace in Colombia, respect the ownership
of the Government and the people of Colombia of the
peace process, and provide constructive assistance to
facilitate their efforts.
China commends Special Representative Arnault
and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
for their important roles in promoting the peace process.
We hope that the Mission will continue to enhance its
communication with both the Government and FARC,
build mutual confidence and work with both sides for
the active implementation of the Peace Agreement.
In closing, let me say that China stands ready to
work together with other members of the Council
to make its contribution to continued progress in the
Colombian peace process and the early achievement of
comprehensive peace and stability in the country.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the Swedish presidency
for having convened this important meeting on the
consideration of the quarterly report on the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/723).
We also congratulate Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, on his
outstanding briefing.
On behalf of the Côte d’Ivoire delegation, I wish
a very warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Óscar
6/19

26/07/2018

Naranjo, Vice-President of the Republic of Colombia,
whose presence here today is an honour for us.
The report, which outlines recent developments in
the peace process in Colombia, comes at a time when
one the main players in that process, President Juan
Manuel Santos Calderón, is preparing to hand over
power to his successor, Mr. Iván Duque. My delegation
commends the various Colombian parties for having
met the challenge of holding legislative and presidential
elections in a peaceful climate with the participation of
all. It also welcomes the resolve of the President-elect
to strive to promote the unity of the country and to end
the polarization of Colombian society.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
significant progress made in the legislative sector and
in several cross-cutting sectors. At the legislative level,
my delegation welcomes the adoption by the Parliament
of the rules of procedure on the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, which has begun its work, as well as the
authorization given for the holding of a referendum on
measures to combat corruption.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the efforts made by the
Colombian Government to implement the necessary
legal guarantees for the reintegration of former Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) combatants. It also welcomes the
close cooperation of former FARC-EP leaders with the
Truth Commission, which is charged with investigating
human rights violations committed during the
conflict. The appearance by the head of the People’s
Alternative Revolutionary Force (FARC), Mr. Rodrigo
Londoño, before the Truth Commission on 29 June is an
encouraging sign in this respect.
As regards cross-cutting sectors, my delegation is
pleased with all efforts to involve young people and to
integrate the gender dimension into the peace process,
and it welcomes the measures aimed at ensuring the
protection of children.
Despite the progress made, the peace process
in Colombia remains a source of concern, not only
because of the difficulties related to the implementation
of the Peace Agreement signed on 24 November 2016
with the FARC-EP, but also the problems encountered
in reviewing some crucial provisions of the Peace
Agreement. The provisions in question — which
relate to the justice procedure, a key component of
transitional justice, land issues and the substitution
programme — are key areas of the Agreement, whose
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

implementation is strongly recommended in order to
foster trust between the various parties.
My delegation, furthermore, is concerned that
some of the developments seen in recent months
might undermine the achievements made in the peace
process, for example, the arrest for illegal activities
of the leader of FARC, Mr. Hernández Solarte, alias
Jesus Santrich; attacks against former combatants
and members of their families as well as human rights
defenders; and uncertainties with respect to the future
of the Agreement following the political handover.
Côte d’Ivoire urges the new Colombian leaders to
pursue the implementation of the Peace Agreement
with FARC and to undertake negotiations with the
National Liberation Army in order to create conditions
conducive to peace and sustainable development in
the country. The new Government should also devise
appropriate responses to economic, social, political
and security concerns and to the issue of the rule of
law in order to give the peace process in Colombia a
real chance.
To that end, my delegation believes that in line with
the conclusions contained in the report, the challenges
that need to be dealt with include the reintegration
of former combatants, security guarantees for
communities, combating violence in former conflict
areas, the proliferation of militias, appropriate measures
in the area of the coca economy, and the frustrations
and fears of former combatants and of communities
that feel excluded from the peace process.
My delegation welcomes the implementation
of a national political pact against violence and for
the peaceful exercise of politics, now that the Pact
of repudiation of violence against social leaders has
been endorsed by State institutions, all major political
expressions and civil society. Along those same lines, my
delegation would encourage the new regime to ensure
the protection of community leaders and human rights
defenders in order to achieve true political, social and
economic inclusion in Colombia. From this standpoint,
my country would urge the international community to
assist the peace efforts of the Colombian parties.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire expresses its full
support for the peace process under way and for the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and
reiterates its readiness to work with the other members
of the Security Council for the return and consolidation
of peace in Colombia.

S/PV. 8319

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to echo our colleagues by first of all warmly welcoming
the presence here of His Excellency the Vice-President
of the Republic of Colombia, Óscar Naranjo, and of
the Permanent Representative of Colombia, María
Emma Mejía Vélez. They have contributed to writing
one of the most outstanding pages of the history of not
only Colombia, but also our region. We also welcome
the presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, and we thank
him for his briefing and for his tireless work on behalf
of our Organization in Colombia. We also welcome the
presence at this meeting of a number of colleagues from
my region — ambassadors who are closely following
the progress made on this issue in our work here in
the Council.
Since the signing of the final Agreement, in 2016,
the peace process in Colombia has yielded positive
results that are unprecedented in any other peace
process. These include a definitive ceasefire between the
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP); the laying
down of weapons by FARC-EP; the setting up of a new
political party, the People’s Alternative Revolutionary
Force (FARC), its participation in the 2018 electoral
process and the assumption by its representatives of
their new legislative posts; and a reduction in the level
of violence in the country. According to the Victims
Unit, prior to 2012 clashes had led to an estimated 3,000
deaths per year. Since the signing of the agreement in
2017, 78 fatalities have been recorded. Furthermore, it
is worth underscoring the significant progress made
in the area of humanitarian demining. To date, more
than 264 municipalities have been declared mine-free,
which represents 40 per cent of the total number
of municipalities.
Every situation is different, but if we compare the
process at hand with various issues that we deal with
daily in the Council, we know from experience that
merely consolidating a definitive ceasefire takes years
to become a reality. That gives us an idea of how much
basic progress has been made thanks to the leadership
and the political will of President Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón and the FARC. The Government has
established institutions and developed an important
legal framework aimed at implementing what is, by all
accounts, an ambitious peace agreement. The agreement
not only establishes an understanding between the

18-239887/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

26/07/2018

two parties to end the violence, but also offers an
opportunity to address the fundamental problems in
Colombia comprehensively, and seeks to eliminate the
deep and historical differences between rural areas and
cities, poverty, inequality and the absence of the State
in areas affected by the conflict. That is why continuing
the process is a priority.

more acute during the reporting period, partially owing
to the detention of Jesús Santrich. Undoubtedly, that fact
has created frustration among former FARC members.
We therefore believe that is essential to respect the
spirit of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace with regard to
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.

It should be noted that during the recent holding of
elections, as some of my colleagues have mentioned,
there was wide voter participation among citizens in an
environment marked by calm that had never been seen
before. In our opinion, that demonstrates the benefits
of the peace process, which benefit not only one sector,
but the entirety of Colombian society and the region.

Thirdly, concerning the modest progress made in
the area of economic reintegration, we welcome the
issuance of a decree enabling access to landownership
for former FARC members organized in cooperatives.
Although that is an essential step forward, more than
a year and a half have passed without that part of the
agreement having been realized. It is necessary to ensure
timely access to that benefit and move forward in the
implementation process of the decree on cooperatives,
as only 8 of 70 such projects are reportedly operating,
according to the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/723).

Bolivia would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Mr. Iván Duque on his election as President
of the Republic of Colombia. We reiterate our sincerest
wishes for his success and reaffirm the brotherly bonds
that link our countries. We know that the challenges
ahead are many, but I believe that I speak for everyone
when I say that both the Latin America and Caribbean
region and the rest of the international community, as
a whole, are committed to working with Colombia,
for which consolidating stable and lasting peace is an
imperative. Clearly, the present situation presents a
very complicated landscape. I will refer to the issues
that my country believes to be of concern at this time.
First, concerning the murders of social leaders,
former FARC members and human rights defenders, we
are deeply concerned about and condemn such acts of
violence. Despite efforts made, it is necessary to work
even harder to extend the presence of public order beyond
territorial reintegration areas, as well as to consolidate
a State presence in areas formerly under FARC control.
We urgently call for pursuing investigations to find
those responsible and for the courts to punish them to
the full extent of the law. We would be remiss if we did
not mention and commend political leaders’ unanimous
support for the pact of repudiation of violence against
social leaders, as it demonstrates unity in responding
to such acts.
Secondly, there is a feeling of uncertainty and fear
among former FARC combatants with respect to legal
and political guarantees. Although it is a historical fact
that eight members of the FARC political party have
assumed their respective seats among the ten that were
created for them in the Congress, the controversies
resulting from the transitional justice system became
8/19

Similarly, additional support is needed for productive
projects and income-generating opportunities for
former FARC combatants — a situation complicated
by the fact that thousands of ex-members are scattered
throughout the country. The importance of promoting
and supporting a gender and ethnic perspective in
realizing productive projects deserves to be mentioned.
In that regard, the adoption of the strategy for the longterm reintegration of former combatants, covering an
eight-year period until 2026, will provide the incoming
Government with a plan ensuring a sustainable
economic future for ex-combatants.
My delegation hopes for the successful outcome
of discussions and negotiations currently under way
between the Government of Colombia and the National
Liberation Army. We are grateful for the contribution of
the Republic of Cuba in this and other peace initiatives
in our region.
Lastly, the challenges concerning this issue are
many, but we can state that this peace process is the
most important in the history of Colombia and requires
the continued support of the international community
not only to consolidate stable and lasting peace, but
above all it must continue with the leadership and the
political will that has been shown thus far.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I want to
thank Special Representative Arnault for his briefing
and welcome the participation of Vice-President Naranjo
Trujillo. With regard to our Colombian friends, I want
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

to take a moment to reflect on the hard-won opportunity
for a lasting peace that they have achieved, which
seemed like an impossible dream at times, as President
Santos Calderón has said. Through their tireless efforts
to address justice and reparations issues in their peace
agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), Colombia
is truly an example to the world. They should be proud
of what they have done, and we look forward to what
they will continue to achieve.
The Colombian Government is beginning to
extend its presence and provide services in areas that
have known conflict for decades. The United States
applauds the Colombian Government’s efforts to
build roads, hospitals, police stations and schools in
underserved rural and former conflict areas. Providing
security, infrastructure and public services is critical
to sustaining peace in Colombia. That has never been
more important than it is now, especially during this
time of transition and in the light of the recent killings
of human rights defenders and community leaders. We
commend the decision of President Santos Calderón and
President-elect Duque, as well as key State institutions
and political parties, to sign a national pact against
the violence. Protecting the fundamental freedoms
of all Colombian citizens, including social leaders,
depends on strengthening the rule of law. Particularly
important are successful prosecutions of those who
seek to silence the voices of human rights advocates
and community leaders.
The United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia has been vital to this process, and we
encourage Colombia to continue its important
partnership with the Mission to support security as
well as reintegration efforts for ex-combatants. We
trust that the Government will continue the momentum
established by the historic Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
and consolidate security gains that will bring about
a just and lasting peace for all Colombians. Ensuring
meaningful justice and accountability for perpetrators
of serious crimes committed during many years of
armed conflict is vital to reconciliation, and we believe
that the transitional justice processes outlined in the
agreement provide the opportunity to deliver justice
for victims.
At the same time, the successful implementation
of the peace accord is inextricably linked to our joint
efforts to dismantle criminal organizations and curtail

S/PV. 8319

narcotrafficking. In our own country, President Trump
has made substance abuse prevention a priority, and
we are devoting resources to reducing the demand
for cocaine. In Colombia, the United States continues
to work with authorities to cut coca cultivation and
cocaine production by half by the end of 2023. Together
we need to accelerate our counter-narcotics efforts
and deliver sustainable results to the people of both
countries through increased resources, the effective
use of all available tools and an integrated whole-ofGovernment approach.
Colombians are not alone in the fight. The United
States will continue to support them, including through
a unique, comprehensive strategy to reduce coca
cultivation, known as Antioquia libre de coca. Through
coordinated efforts of the Colombian police and
army, local and national Governments and the private
sector, the plan is already delivering infrastructure
and providing licit economic opportunities for local
communities, while pushing coca growers to transition
to licit crops. Importantly, owing in part to those efforts,
the United States Government’s 2017 coca cultivation
estimates showed a 20 per cent decrease in the region
being addressed for the first time in five years, thereby
bucking a national trend. Colombia continues to
establish the conditions for extended peace, and while
challenges remain, the Government has shown its
strength as a regional leader, especially by providing
shelter and services to nearly 1 million Venezuelans
fleeing crisis in their own country.
We are proud to have worked to support Colombia’s
response to the crisis, and we remain committed to
continuing our engagement with Colombia to provide
additional humanitarian support as needed. The people
of Colombia know better than most that peace is
precious but fragile. We stand with them in working to
preserve that peace and build a strong and prosperous
future for generations to come.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like
to begin by thanking Special Representative Jean
Arnault for his insightful and comprehensive briefing
and for the important work that the United Nations
Verification Mission is doing in support of the Peace
Agreement in Colombia. He may be assured of our
continued full support for his efforts. I would also like
to welcome Vice-President Naranjo to the Security
Council. We are grateful for his personal efforts
and those of his Government to establish peace in
Colombia. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is fully

18-239889/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

committed to supporting peace in Colombia, which is
also the message that my Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Stephanus Blok, conveyed during his recent visit
to the country. We follow developments in Colombia
with particular interest. Our Kingdom is made up of
four countries, of which Aruba and Curaçao are close
maritime neighbours of Colombia.
The recently held presidential elections mark an
important and commendable milestone in Colombia.
The elections were fair, inclusive and peaceful, and saw
the highest turnout in the country’s recent history. We
congratulate President-elect Iván Duque on winning
the election and welcome his expressed commitment
to seeking unity. The Prime Minister of Curaçao,
Mr. Eugene Rhuggenaath, looks forward to attending
the upcoming inauguration on behalf of our Kingdom.
We also look forward to working closely with the
new Government, based on the close friendship and
interconnectedness between our two peoples.
The change of Governments in Colombia provides
us with an occasion to take stock of what has been
achieved so far and the opportunities and challenges that
lie ahead. The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, which ended
the 50-year conflict, is historic by any standard. We
pay tribute to the Administration of President Santos
Calderón and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) for their courage and leadership in
advancing the peace process. We hope that Colombia
will now seize the opportunity to further consolidate
peace. In that context, I would like to touch on three
points — our concern about the security situation, the
need for the inclusive reintegration of former FARC
members and the importance of transitional justice.
With respect to my first point, the security
situation, we are deeply concerned about the high
levels of insecurity in the zones most affected by the
armed conflict. In these areas, social leaders, human
rights defenders and journalists are increasingly being
threatened and sometimes even killed. This often
happens in areas where armed groups proliferate and
continue to resist peacebuilding efforts. The Colombian
people, State institutions and political parties alike
have recently expressed themselves on this point in a
so-called pact of repudiation of violence against social
leaders, to which Mr. Arnault referred. The pact sends a
strong signal that Colombians are not willing to accept
the possibility that those who speak out are too often
made to pay the highest price.
10/19

26/07/2018

We are also concerned about the continued violence
against former FARC combatants. Their security
guarantees are central to the Peace Agreement and form
the bedrock of a durable peace. The Government has
taken initiatives to address the violence, strengthening
mechanisms to prevent, protect and hold the perpetrators
to account. But in order to make these mechanisms
work, a thorough analysis of the patterns behind the
violence, including identifying the intellectual authors,
would be useful. We look forward to a comprehensive
stabilization approach that effectively asserts the
presence of the State in the most vulnerable regions
and communities. It should include institutions for
security, infrastructure, education, health care and the
rule of law.
That brings me to my second point, concerning the
inclusive reintegration of former combatants, which
remains a core component of the Peace Agreement.
The stimulation of income-generating activities and
the provision of social services are important tools
for addressing the root causes of the conflict and
ultimately promoting self-reliance. We encourage the
Government, the former FARC combatants, the private
sector and the local authorities to jointly design a
comprehensive strategy aimed at fully reintegrating
the former combatants into society, as foreseen in the
Peace Agreement. It is essential that women and youth
have a voice in this process.
My third point concerns transitional justice, which is
an essential aspect of conflict resolution. Accountability
and reconciliation are two sides of the same coin on the
road to sustainable peace. This is why my Government is
actively supporting the transitional-justice institutions,
as well as victims’ organizations in Colombia, with
a contribution of €2.5 million. We underscore the
need for the swift, effective and properly resourced
implementation of the different transitional-justice
institutions. In this regard, we express our full support
for the workings of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
and welcome the fact that public hearings have started.
In this way, transitional justice offers the opportunity to
address past grievances, putting the 8 million victims
of the armed conflict at the centre of our peacebuilding
efforts. We hope this will turn the page in Colombia.
I will conclude in Spanish.
(spoke in Spanish)
The peace dividends I have just mentioned,
especially security, inclusive reintegration and
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

transitional justice, are intimately connected. A
sustained commitment to implementing the agreements
in a comprehensive manner can ensure that peace
in Colombia is stable and lasting. We call on all
stakeholders to work together to this end and to continue
to build on the great achievements that have been made.
The international community is with Colombia, and
Colombia can count on the continued support of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would first like to welcome Vice-President
Óscar Naranjo of Colombia to the Chamber today and
to thank Special Representative Jean Arnault for his
informative briefing.
The Security Council has met today to discuss
the situation in Colombia a year after the adoption of
resolution 2366 (2017) (see S/PV.7997), which heralded
the completion of the process of the laying down of arms
by former combatants and the country’s embarking on
a new, peaceful phase. The United Nations Verification
Mission established by the resolution was mandated to
monitor the Colombian Government’s fulfilment of its
part of the commitments under the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which brought to an end hostilities that had
lasted for decades.
We have seen a number of positive changes in the
country this year. The former guerrilla movement has
been transformed into a political party, parliamentary
and presidential elections have been held with record
turnouts and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace
mechanism has been launched. Despite the problems
of which we are all aware, these are all unquestionable
signs of an improvement in the situation. It will be
important to ensure that this progress continues, with
the support of society. We sincerely wish Colombia’s
newly elected President Iván Duque and his Government
every success on this path.
Mr. Arnault’s briefing confirmed Colombians’
resolve to work to advance the peace process, although
there is still a great deal to be done. Long-standing
disagreements are still hampering the consolidation
of sustainable peace, which is why we wholeheartedly
support the assistance provided to the Colombians
by the United Nations presence under Mr. Arnault’s
leadership. We are grateful to the Verification Mission
for monitoring the situation in the country. We are
seriously concerned about the disturbing reports of the

S/PV. 8319

ongoing murders of former combatants and community
leaders, seizures of liberated lands and problems with
the political and socioeconomic reintegration of former
combatants and the transitional justice system. All of
these require urgent solutions for which a responsible
approach on the part of the country’s leadership is clearly
essential, along with support from all sectors of society
and an overall commitment to the peace that was so
hard-won. The continued attention of the international
community — which sees Colombia as a good example
of post-conflict recovery — is also important, not to
mention a particular focus on developments with regard
to the National Liberation Army.
We will continue to emphasize that the Colombians’
demonstration of responsibility as a nation and their
desire to seek politically sustainable solutions made
possible the signing of the 2016 Peace Agreement,
which enabled the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral to support the peace process and must therefore
be upheld exactly as it is by all parties. For our part,
we once again affirm our willingness to continue to
support the people and the Government of Colombia
in their work of building a lasting peace and postconflict development.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/723). We
are pleased that the Vice-President of Colombia, His
Excellency Mr. Óscar Naranjo, is here with us today.
The first and second rounds of the presidential
elections, held on 27 May and 17 June, as well as the
congressional election held in March, sent a positive
message for all who closely follow the implementation
of Colombia’s Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, not only
because they were conducted in an entirely peaceful
and inclusive manner but because they have symbolic
significance in opening a new chapter in the country’s
political history following the end of five decades of
conflict. We congratulate both the Government of
Colombia and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) for their commitment and such
major achievements. We also congratulate the outgoing
President, Mr. Juan Manuel Santos Calderón, on the
courage and commitment he has shown in steering the
peace process.

18-2398811/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

While Colombians have continued to show patience
and perseverance in the face of the challenges presented
by the implementation process, they still face serious
problems in making the terms of the Peace Agreement
a reality, and the Council should continue to provide
all of the necessary support to the Colombian parties
in their efforts to handle those challenges and speedily
implement the full Agreement.
As the Secretary-General’s report noted, we are
very much encouraged by the intention expressed
by President-elect Iván Duque to turn the page on
polarization and build a consensus on the envisaged
goals of the Peace Agreement. While we are encouraged
by his intention to keep the fundamental parts of the
Agreement, we would also like to underscore the
fact that great caution will be needed when making
any improvements to it in order to avoid unintended
consequences that could affect the implementation
process. We recognize the Constitutional Court’s major
achievements in reviewing peace-related legislation,
including the legislative acts that created congressional
seats for the FARC, a land fund and other measures for
improving access to land and modifying the National
Protection Unit to include former combatants in the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) as close protection
officers. Such measures can strengthen hope and faith
in implementing the Peace Agreement.
We are also conscious of the sensitive issues that
still require careful handling. The increasing violence
in the conflict zones, the delays in the socioeconomic
reintegration of FARC-EP combatants into civilian
life, the issue of access to land ownership, the absence
or inadequate presence of State institutions in places
left by FARC-EP combatants, the continued killings
of community leaders, former FARC members and
their relatives, as well as other issues highlighted in
the report of the Secretary-General, could potentially
complicate the tasks ahead in consolidating peace
in the country. In that regard, the national pact
against violence and killings signed by the outgoing
and incoming Presidents, key State institutions and
political parties will be instrumental in dealing with
the increasing patterns of violence, especially in the
rural parts of Colombia.
With regard to the negotiation between the
Colombian Government and the National Liberation
Army, we are encouraged by the report that the two
parties have continued their sixth round of negotiations
12/19

26/07/2018

in order to achieve an improved ceasefire agreement.
We urge the parties to engage constructively in goodfaith discussions towards reaching a new ceasefire
agreement, as well as a permanent peace agreement.
We commend Special Representative Arnault and
the United Nations personnel in Colombia for all their
efforts in support of the Peace Agreement. We also
reiterate our appreciation to the countries of the region
and other international partners that continue to closely
support and accompany the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. Lastly, we take this opportunity to reaffirm
our continued support to the full implementation of the
Colombian Peace Agreement and to stand in solidarity
with the people and the Government of Colombia
as they open a new chapter and march towards
sustainable peace.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to welcome
His Excellency Mr. Óscar Naranjo, Vice-President of
the Republic of Colombia, to today’s Council meeting.
Let me also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, for a very
informative briefing.
The presidential and legislative elections that
took place in May this year were Colombia’s most
peaceful and inclusive in more than 50 years. We
congratulate President-elect Mr. Iván Duque and hope
for productive, sincere and open cooperation between
the new Administration and the Council.
As the peace process remains an undeniable
success of Colombian society, we would also like to
acknowledge the unquestionable role of President
Santos Calderón and the leaders of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), who
made it possible and turned an agreement from a piece
of paper into reality on the ground. It serves as a source
of inspiration worldwide and sends a message that
peace is possible, even if it seemed unimaginable just
a few years ago. Intense political will is still required
on both sides to drive the peace process forward. We
strongly believe that the parties will remain united. We
hope that despite the difficulties in the implementation
of the peace process, the general timetable for its
completion will be maintained. We take note of the
recently launched sixth cycle of talks with the National
Liberation Army in Havana and hope that it will bring
tangible results.
The acceptance by Congress of the rules of
procedure of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and its
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

first public hearings, along with the inauguration of the
new Congress with 10 representatives from the FARC
political party, sends a positive message.
The question of security remains an issue. We
are concerned about the continued insecurity in some
of the conflict-affected areas, including the increase
in the killings of human rights defenders and social
and community leaders. It fuels social mistrust of the
Government’s willingness to fulfil its commitments.
The Government’s Plan Horus, which has been
implemented in the most vulnerable municipalities, has
yet to produce the desired effect. Suffice it to say that
an additional 22 FARC members were killed during the
reporting period. Also, despite considerable efforts on
the part of the Government, coca cultivation is growing.
There is a close connection between drug trafficking
and the widespread insecurity in some regions near the
strategic drug-trafficking routes. We strongly believe
that the national pact rejecting violence signed on
9 July by outgoing President Santos and President-elect
Duque, as well as key State institutions and political
parties, is a major step towards ensuring that social
leaders will not fear for their lives.
The full political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of the former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP) is essential. We strongly believe
that the adoption of the landmark decree enabling
access to land ownership for former combatants will
offer the strongest possible incentive for the majority
of former FARC-EP members, greatly assisting them
in the uneasy process of reintegration. We hope that it
will be implemented as quickly as possible now that the
election period has ended. The efforts that the National
Reintegration Council has made to ensure a more
gender-sensitive approach to economic reintegration
are visible and have been well received. Once again
we underline that a durable peace can be achieved
only when women and men are equally involved in the
peace process.
In conclusion, Poland fully supports the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, which
continues to play a vital role in facilitating the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We also
commend the role of the country team and every United
Nations agency present on the ground. While the peace
process is making significant progress, further strong
involvement on the part of the United Nations in
Colombia remains crucially important.

S/PV. 8319

Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Óscar
Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and pay
tribute to him for his personal commitment to peace and
the role he played in the negotiation and implementation
of the Peace Agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP).
(spoke in French)
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Arnault, both for
the quality of his briefing and for his exemplary work
as Head of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.
The Colombian authorities, particularly President
Santos Calderón, have shown exceptional political
courage that has been a source of admiration and
inspiration for the entire international community.
Despite doubts and criticism, they initiated a historic
peace process with the FARC-EP and have redoubled
their efforts to implement it. Mr Jean-Yves Le Drian, our
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, is currently
visiting Colombia and will take the opportunity to
reaffirm France’s unwavering support for this process
and our readiness to continue to support the Colombian
people on the road to peace. That is the message that
he will convey to the President-elect, Mr. Iván Duque,
whom he will have the honour of meeting during
his visit.
The United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, have also played a key role in
implementing the Peace Agreement by providing the
necessary support for disarmament and the political
transition of the FARC-EP. With regard to the mandate
conferred on the second United Nations Mission in
Colombia, I would like to focus on three points today.
First, France reiterates its congratulations to
the Colombian authorities on their organization and
successful holding of presidential elections on 27 May
and 17 June. That democratic exercise, which followed
the parliamentary elections held in March, confirmed
the evolution of Colombian political life towards a
more peaceful climate and Colombian citizens’ broader
participation in the democratic process. In that regard,
we encourage the elected authorities to pursue the
implementation of every aspect of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace concluded with the FARC-EP. Particular

18-2398813/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

attention should be paid to the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which is the cornerstone of the comprehensive
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition system,
as well as to amnesty for detainees and the search
for the tens of thousands of persons assumed to be
missing. Those commitments by the Colombian State
are commitments to peace undertaken before the
international community and it is important that they
be fully honoured.
My second point concerns the security of the
women and men working for peace in the areas affected
by the conflict. France firmly condemns the killings of
civil-society leaders, human rights defenders and those
involved in coca substitution programmes. Despite
the Colombian authorities’ commitment to reducing
the level of violence, the situation remains extremely
worrying. In a context where illegal armed groups
are struggling to regain control of areas previously
controlled by the FARC-EP, it is taking a long time
for peace dividends to reach the local populations.
We therefore encourage continued efforts, including
the deployment of State services, both security forces
and civilian institutions, in those areas. Furthermore,
combating impunity for crimes committed in the context
of the conflict, including extrajudicial executions, is
crucial and must continue.
Finally, I would like to draw the Council’s attention
once again to another key point for reintegration and
the future of the peace process, which is access to
land and sources of income. Indeed, once the issue
of access to land is resolved and the restitution of the
lands looted during the conflict is the subject of legal
proceedings, it is socioeconomic projects that will give
former combatants prospects for a future within the
Colombian national community. That socioeconomic
reintegration, which is closely linked to the provision
of State services in the most vulnerable areas, is the
key to the lasting success of the peace process. It
is receiving major support from the international
community, including France and the European Union,
through various financial instruments. The restoration
of territories that have been ruined by half a century of
conflict depends on it.
Regardless of their political affiliation, all
Colombians can be proud of the Peace Agreement reached
with the FARC-EP. More than ever, consolidating that
peace requires the unity of the Colombian nation as
it enters a new era, one in which former combatants
will take their full place in Colombian society and
14/19

26/07/2018

other groups, we hope, will choose to turn away from
violence, as we expect the National Liberation Army
to do. France therefore encourages the new Colombian
authorities to continue implementing the agreement and
confirm the remarkable success of the peace process
in Colombia.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I would
like to welcome His Excellency the Vice President
of Colombia, Mr. Óscar Naranjo Trujillo, to the
Security Council. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing and the active
role of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.
Kazakhstan welcomes all the positive developments
in Colombia and commends the significant efforts that
have been made to ensure the irreversibility of the
peace process. In view of the recent presidential and
congressional elections, the first held in Colombia since
its achievement of a historic peace deal in 2016, we
hope its new Administration will respect and guarantee
the full implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, treasuring and building on the gains
achieved to the benefit of all Colombians. And with
the swearing in of the new Congress on 20 July, we
hope to see faster implementation of the peace-related
legislation, especially as it pertains to important rural
and political reforms.
It is gratifying to know that Colombia is the first
country to have created a transitional justice system.
We are confident that the Colombian legislative body
and political forces will remain dedicated to justice. It
is also essential that they commit to peace and ensure
the smooth functioning of the comprehensive system for
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition proposed in
the peace accord. Kazakhstan welcomes the holding of
the first public hearings within the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace and looks forward to the effective operation
of the other justice-system institutions, the Truth
Commission and the Special Unit for the Search for
Persons Deemed as Missing.
At the same time, we are deeply concerned about
the ongoing deadly violence against social leaders,
community activists and human rights defenders.
Kazakhstan welcomes the eight new measures
announced by President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón,
to be taken in addition to the previous launch of a
rapid response system and the reorganization of the
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

army. We hope that those measures, along with the
recently adopted pact of repudiation of violence against
social leaders, will guarantee the collective security
of all the threatened groups and curb their killings.
Kazakhstan is also dismayed by the current vulnerable
security state of former combatants of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo and their family members, which could very
likely jeopardize their reincorporation into society. We
believe, however, that the Colombian Government and
all the parties concerned will make every effort to avoid
an escalation of violence and do their best to guarantee
the peace process’s smooth continuation and success.
We welcome the continuation of the peace talks
between the Colombian Government and the last
remaining guerrilla group, the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN). However, Kazakhstan notes with
regret that the hostile activity of militia groups in the
Colombian-Ecuadorian border region has resulted in
the killing of innocent people. We hope that during the
sixth cycle of inclusive consultations, which started on
2 July, the Colombian Government and the ELN will
be able to achieve a new bilateral ceasefire. We also
urge Colombia’s incoming administration to continue
negotiations to that end.
Lastly, Kazakhstan reiterates its firm commitment
to the Colombian peace process and calls upon all
interested parties to do their best to foster reconciliation.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
express our appreciation for the briefing just delivered
by Mr. Jean Arnault, which not only provides a clear,
detailed and concise picture of the current situation in
Colombia, but also shows the ongoing effort that the
United Nations team is making to support the peace
process in the country. We also welcome the presence
of His Excellency Óscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo,
Vice-President of Colombia.
The successful conclusion of the recent presidential
elections held at the end of May and beginning of
June is a another step forward in the political process
in Colombia, which has been under way since the
triumphant legislative elections of 11 March. It
demonstrates the goodwill of the Colombian people
and the progress made, with the support of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, and thus
demonstrates the positive changes in its national policy.

S/PV. 8319

However, we note with great concern the
confrontations that continue to take place in the country
despite the signed pact, which is recognized by all
parties, institutions, political parties and the President.
We are concerned that all the progress achieved is being
reversed. We therefore urge all parties to the Colombian
political process, despite the change of Government,
to work together to ensure the implementation of the
Peace Agreement, which enjoys the unanimous support
of the members of the Security Council and concerning
which the representatives of the country’s main political
parties stressed the need to ensure irreversibility.
To guarantee the development of the Colombian
political process, the new Government must facilitate
the improvement of the gains already made with
regard to the reintegration and security of the former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). It must allow
that process to continue, establishing strategies and
taking necessary measures to reintegrate the members
of that group into society and to provide the necessary
protection and security in the areas formerly occupied
by FARC, protecting also thousands of children
and women who were displaced by the fighting and
guaranteeing their rights as members of civil society.
The Colombian Government is called upon to take
action in the interest and to the benefit of the people
of Colombia, who for so long have been victims of the
many differences that sadly persist to this day, though
on a smaller scale. We encourage the Government to
continue engaging in the negotiations being carried out
in Cuba with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional.
We note that in the case of any problem, the root
causes of the conflict must be tackled first, because
therein lies the foundation for the lasting peace that is
sought in this case. In that regard, we would like to
recall the words of the President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, His Excellency Teodoro Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, during the sixth national dialogue
round table, held from 16 to 23 of this month, between
the Government and the political parties of our country,
when he said,
“The chief guarantor of national unity, the
balance of State institutions by virtue of the attributes
conferred to them by law, is the Government, which
must ensure that the needs of the people are met in
order to defuse possible divisions and overcome the
challenges the country faces.”

18-2398815/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

Finally, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation for all the hard work that the Security
Council is doing in Colombia under the protection of the
resolutions adopted in this Chamber and with respect
for the Charter of the United Nations to put an end to
the situation that has affected the Colombian people for
several decades.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome again to the Security
Council Mr. Óscar Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President
of Colombia. I also thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his valuable briefing and his comprehensive
presentation on the most important achievements in
Columbia, as well as the challenges that are still facing
the peace operation there.
We reaffirm our full support for the peace process
in Colombia during the upcoming round of negotiations
between the Colombian Government and the National
Liberation Army. We hope that the negotiations will
be successful in ensuring that the aspirations of the
Colombian people — establishing a secure and safe
environment characterized by tolerance and integration,
while leading to progress and economic development in
Colombia — are met.
We commend the holding recently of successful
presidential elections and the high voter turnout by
Colombians in a safe environment that demonstrated
the sincere resolve of all Colombian parties to achieve
stability and lasting peace in their country. In that
regard, we congratulate the new President-elect,
Mr. Iván Duque, and express our hope that the new
Colombian Government will continue to work pursuant
to the Peace Agreement and implement all its items to
ensure the desired stability and peace.
We commend the efforts of President Santos and
the leaders of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC). The opening session of the
Parliament included FARC representatives, and that is
the best demonstration of the progress achieved. We
also commend the efforts of the current Colombian
Government to improve the security situation and to
advance in the areas of legislation, transitional justice
and the reintegration of former FARC combatants.
In that regard, we underscore the importance
of continuing to provide security, legal, social and
economic guarantees in order to reintegrate former
16/19

26/07/2018

FARC members. There is also a need to protect
the leaders of local communities and human rights
defenders, in addition to religious leaders. We call
for promoting attention to women and young people
so as to guarantee their participation in the various
initiatives linked to national reforms and policies.
They must be an integral part of the solution and
custodians of the future. Furthermore, we look forward
to the holding of a referendum on 26 August by the
Colombian Government on the management of public
resources in the context of combating corruption with
full transparency.
The State of Kuwait commends the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations Verification Mission, led by
Mr. Arnault, in coordination with national, regional
and local authorities, along with the civil society
and the private sector. Its role is to support national
initiatives and achieve stability and peace in Colombia.
We reaffirm our commitment to the Government
of Colombia and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in their efforts in achieving what
the Colombian people want — peace, security and
prosperity for their country.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.
I want to first thank Mr. Jean Arnault for his
excellent work and his briefing today. I want to reiterate
Sweden’s full support of his efforts and those of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
I also welcome Vice-President Naranjo to the
Chamber today. We thank him for his very important
personal contribution to peace in Colombia. Through
him I also want to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to President Juan Manuel Santos for his leadership, as
well as that of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia (FARC) for their determination to turn
a new page and to deliver peace for the benefit of all
Colombians. Indeed, FARC’s transition from guerilla
movement to political party is historic and irreversible.
We also congratulate the people of Colombia on the recent
elections and incoming President Duque, as he assumes
his office soon. The Colombian Peace Agreement
demonstrates that conflicts can be solved with dialogue
rather than guns. It is an inspirational example.
Ensuring that the full benefits of the peace
process are secured will require continued investment
in its implementation. We welcome that the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, a key component of the Peace
18-23988

26/07/2018

Colombia

Agreement, has started its crucial work. It was
designed and agreed with the objective of guaranteeing
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition, and the
fulfilment of this commitment should help heal the
divisions created by decades of conflict.
The continuing violence against, and the
increasing number of killings of, human rights
defenders, community leaders, FARC members and
their families, as outlined in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/723), is of grave concern. It underscores
the need for the State to fill the power vacuum, to
do its utmost to ensure respect for human rights and
accountability for violations and abuses thereof, and to
safeguard that the rule of law benefits all Colombians
in all of Colombia.
In that connection, we welcome the national pact
signed by both President Santos and President-elect
Duque and by key State institutions and political
parties. We encourage the Government of Colombia to
pair its efforts to provide security in conflict-affected
areas with a stronger presence of civilian authorities
and agencies providing basic services to communities.
The Peace Agreement has provided a historic
opportunity to bring socioeconomic development and
the rule of law to all parts of the country. To seize that
opportunity, a redoubled and sustained effort is now
needed from all parts of the State in support of the
wider Peace Agreement, including comprehensive rural
reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible peace
dividends for all Colombians.
The full political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration
of former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo members is of the utmost
importance. That includes progress on the setting up of
productive projects and the key issue of access to land
for reintegration.
We would like to highlight the important
recommendation in the report on the importance of
combating the drug trade as an integral part of the
effort to advance peace, development and the rule of
law in former conflict areas. We also want to stress the
importance of encouraging the voluntary illicit-crop
substitution programme, which can provide people with
a lawful and predictable income opportunity.
The Peace Agreement in Colombia is a model for
inclusion. To succeed in consolidating the peace, the
implementation of the peace process must continue

S/PV. 8319

to be inclusive. In that regard, I want to highlight the
important work the Mission has undertaken on gender
mainstreaming, as well as its engagement with women’s
groups and youth groups in Colombia.
Finally, we welcome the ongoing talks between the
Government and the Ejército Nacional de Liberación
and reiterate that the United Nations and the Security
Council should stand ready to assist the parties in a
meaningful way. As a member of the Grupo de Países
de Apoyo, we will assist the process as much as we can.
Over the last two years, the Council has travelled
the path of peace with the Government and the
people of Colombia. We look forward to continuing
our constructive engagement with the incoming
Government, given the Council’s commitment to
support implementation of the peace agreement.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Vice-President of Colombia.
Mr. Naranjo Trujillo (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Twenty months after signing the Agreement
that put an end to the conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and 12 days from
the end of the term of the President of the Republic, Juan
Manuel Santos, I bring to the Security Council, to the
United Nations and to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia an expression of gratitude from
my Government and 50 million Colombians. We are
grateful for what has been indisputable support for
peacebuilding in my country.
On this opportunity, as it is our final intervention,
having received the third consecutive report of the
Mission, I wish to issue a call in the Council to the
entire world and to our compatriots for the protection
and safeguarding of peace — the supreme, superlative
good of a society.
Safeguarding peace in Colombia means, in
principle, recognizing that the leadership efforts of
President Juan Manual Santos to reach it were not based
on any political calculation, but rather on the ethical
conviction that it was urgent to put an end to 53 years of
violence that, regrettably, cut short the lives of 220,000
Colombians. Putting an end to the conflict with that
conviction meant acknowledging that five decades
of internal clashes resulted in more than 8,400,000
victims in our country.

18-2398817/19

S/PV.8319

Colombia

Safeguarding peace means honouring our
commitments under the Agreement, with the
understanding that the promise is not that of one
Administration, but rather that of the State in its
entirety and of society in general.
Safeguarding and protecting peace means not
ignoring the great achivements — which representatives
have mentioned here — that have been made in record
time. After 53 years of armed conflict, there was a
surrender of arms in nine months — in record time, before
the year and a half timeline. FARC, an organization that
had taken up arms and defied the Colombian State and
society, transformed into a political party, in record
time. That political party now has a seat in Colombia’s
Congress, as we saw on 20 July.
Safeguarding peace means that the reintegration of
13,000 ex-combatants of FARC represents opportunities
for rights, services and personal safety. As has been
mentioned here, it provides political security, but also
the security of being linked socioeconomically to a
legal system.
Mr. Jean Arnault, Head of the Mission, has said
clearly that reintegration is critical. On that issue, I
wish to assure the Council that today, more than 12,000
ex-combatants are receiving a basic monthly stipend
equivalent to 90 per cent of minimum wage in my
country. I want to assure the Council that 9,000 are
linked to our security and pension systems. I assure
the Council that we are making progress, certainly not
as quickly as we would like, so as to make productive
projects a reality, but I do want to share a piece of good
news that has also been mentioned during the meeting.
The Government of President Santos is bequeathing
the next Government a mid-to-long-term public policy
document. That means that there is a clear road map
that will make reintegration sustainable.
Safeguarding and protecting peace means increasing
efforts in order to continue to reduce violence.
We will never tire of saying that in 2017, as a result
of the Agreement, Colombia saw the lowest murder
rate in the last 42 years. Sadly, we are facing a major
contradiction in this regard. Although the murder rate
is decreasing, the number of threats and attacks against
social leaders and human rights defenders has risen.
I would like to underscore, as the members of the
Council have done, the remarkable fact that under the
leadership of President Santos, the whole nation has
18/19

26/07/2018

been brought together under a comprehensive political
pact, with no distinctions from the local to the central
level. We hope that this political pact against violence
will be a very powerful tool, conveying the imperative
need to renounce the old culture of conflict in which
death seemed to be part of the solution. Now we are
trying to ensure that life is protected as a supreme,
exceptional and sacred social good. The logic of death
for life is the real challenge that we are facing in the
wake of 50 years of war.
Safeguarding peace means recognizing and
strengthening the legitimacy of our Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition. We wish to say today, without any
excessive optimism, that we feel great satisfaction
at the fact that the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
through its hearings, has prioritized dealing with three
tragedies of war: the tragedy of the abductions that
took place during the 53 years of conflict; the tragedy
of the recruitment of minors — children, girls, boys
and teenagers — in that war; and what is known in my
country as false-positive cases: the deaths of innocent
citizens within the context of the conflict.
These hearings are part and parcel of a functioning
transitional justice system whose goal is to bring to
justice and punish those who were in any way involved
in that internal armed conflict and who broke laws
and violated human rights. It gives us assurance that
we are moving forward, as we have said so often in
the past, in a manner that strikes a balance between
peace and justice, as is necessary in order to move
towards reconciliation.
Safeguarding peace means continuing to ensure
that our institutions, whose approach is based on more
than just counter-insurgency, are effective throughout
our territory — a territory that is now perceived not
as a theatre for military operations but as a land where
conditions are being created for the transformation of
communities. We are well aware of the fact that we
must continue to progress in our understanding in order
to change that logic and reach all of those territories,
no longer as police or the military, but as a unified
State that protects its communities. Safeguarding and
protecting peace means recognizing the invaluable
support of the international community, for which we
should like once again to express our gratitude.
If there is one unifying factor around peace in
Colombia, it is the unfailing support of the Council. We
18-23988

26/07/2018

S/PV. 8319

Colombia

say to our compatriots and to the entire world that we
have no words to express our gratitude for the unanimous
way in which the Council has supported peacebuilding
efforts in our country. Thanks to the work of the
Council and to observations and recommendations of
the Mission, we understand that challenges remain.
We know that as we travel the road ahead, we will
have to give priority to, first, safeguarding life in those
areas where leaders have begun to speak out in favour
of democratic participation in the country. Secondly,
we must also need to move forward in overcoming
Colombia’s historical tragedy: drug trafficking. In that
regard, we would stress that given the end of armed
conflict with FARC, for the first time in the 35 years of
that tragedy we have now a unique opportunity. Instead
of a strategy to combat illegal crop cultivation and the
production of drugs, we can set up, as we are doing,
a crop-substitution programme so that the 124,000
families that have expressed their desire to abandon
this illicit activity can earn their living legally.
We must also strengthen our efforts to combat
organized crime, because we are not naïve. Colombia
is now facing pressure from international cross-border
drug-trafficking organizations that wish to continue
with their illegal trade. The Council can be sure that the
Government of President Santos will, until the very last
minute of its mandate, be strengthening the country’s
capacity to contain this threat.
Safeguarding peace must also mean — and we say
this without any pretension — that the lessons learnt

from the Colombian process of seeking an end to the
conflict can serve as a lesson to other nations so that
they, too, can overcome violence and differences and
so that conflicts become a thing of the past. Perhaps we
are a little sentimental in a world that is suffering from
so many conflicts, but we feel that perhaps the case of
Colombia is a paradigmatic one.
We are aware that genuine, innovative efforts
were made here that were based on ethical standards,
political pragmatism and international support, and we
therefore, at the end of our term, express our gratitude in
that respect. The Council can rest assured: the incoming
Government of President-elect Iván Duque has said
that it will continue to give priority to the agreements
reached and ensure that Colombia continues down a
path towards sustainable peacebuilding.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
adjourn this meeting, I should just like to say — and I
am sure that I am speaking on behalf of all the members
of the Council — that we thank the Vice-President for
his pivotal, key, decisive and personal role in all the
progress made in the peace process in Colombia. We
thank him very much.
(spoke in English)
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

18-2398819/19
