94

General Assembly-'Iblrty-fourth Session

gency disaster relief assistance are now inadequate to
respond to requests for assistance from disaster-afflicted
developing countries,
Emphasizing once more the need for all involved in
relief operations to implement measures to expedite international relief assistance and to remove any obstacles
to its delivery,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of
the Secretary-General on the work of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator23 and the
statement made by the Co-ordinator on 2 November
1979; 24
2. Commends the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator for his continued efforts on behalf of those
who suffer as a result of disasters;
3. Calls upon recipient Governments to co-operate
with the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator by
informing his Office of the relief contributions offered
and received;
4. Requests the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator to develop further his working arrangements with donors and recipients of relief assistance;
5. Renews its call upon Governments and international organizations to provide the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator with detailed information on
their current and intended relief contributions, in cash
and in kind, in order to avoid duplication of effort and
to ensure the provision of all necessary assistance to the
survivors of disasters;
6. Invites Governments, intergovernmental agencies
and non-governmental organizations concerned with
relief operations to co-operate with the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in his efforts to ensure the
rapid and timely delivery of appropriate international
relief and to consider the adoption of appropriate legislative, administrative or operational measures to remove
obstacles and expedite international relief assistance to
the survivors of disasters;
7. Welcomes the decision taken by the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
at its twenty-sixth session to give consideration to the
inclusion of technical co-operation activities for disaster preparedness and prevention in national and regional programmes; 25
8. Requests that additional funds be provided in the
regular budget for the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator for the biennium 1980-1981
to permit the Co-ordinator to respond to at least twelve
requests for emergency disaster assistance in any one
year, with a normal ceiling of $30,000 per country in
the case of any one disaster;
9. Requests the Preparatory Committee for the New
International Development Strategy to take into account, in its deliberations, matters concerning disaster
relief, preparedness and prevention;
10. Urges all Governments to contribute to the
trust fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, taking into particular consideration the financial problems of the subaccount for emergency assistance as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
28

A/34/190.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Second Committee, 30th meeting, paras. 1-13.
25
Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1979,
Supplement No. 10 (E/1979/40 and Corr.I), chap. XXI, sect.
D, decision 79/17.
24

34 / 56.

Measures to be taken in connexion with the
earthquake in Montenegro, Yugoslavia

The General Assembly,
Noting with deep regret the tragic consequences of
the severe earthquake which struck the Montenegrin
sea-coast of Yugoslavia, causing the loss of many human lives and enormous destruction and leaving more
than 100,000 of the inhabitants homeless,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1979 /58 of 3 August 1979,
Noting the energetic and urgent measures taken by
the people and Government of Yugoslavia to provide
immediate relief for the victims of the earthquake and
to restore normal living conditions for the people,
Noting also the long-term needs for the rehabilitation
and reconstruction of the affected area and the measures
taken in this regard by the Government of Yugoslavia,
Taking note with appreciation of the assistance rendered, in the true spirit of international solidarity, to the
people of Montenegro by many nations, the organizations of the United Nations system and various nongovernmental organizations, and the role played by the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Noting, in particular, the assistance rendered by the
United Nations Development Programme and the loan
extended by the World Bank for the reconstruction of
the stricken area,
1. Expresses its profound sympathy to the people of
Montenegro and to the Government of Yugoslavia in
this disaster;
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/58, by which
all States were invited to consider what further assistance
they might be in a position to offer to Montenegro, and
appeals to them to assist in the reconstruction of the
stricken area;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the executive
heads of the specialized agencies and of the funds and
programmes of the United Nations system to bear in
mind the long-term needs for the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the area affected by the earthquake when
deciding on services to be provided to Member States
in the light of funds available.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
34/57.

Examination of long-term trends in economic
development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3508 (XXX) of 15 December
1975 on the examination of long-term trends in the
economic development of the regions of the world,
which initiated activities in that field in the United Nations system, and its resolution 32/57 of 8 December
1977, as well as Economic and Social Council resolution 2090 (LXIII) of 25 July 1977,
Recalling also its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VIO of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Conscious that better knowledge of long-term trends
in economic and social development can form a sound
scientific basis for policies and decision-making processes
in relation to development strategies and economic cooperation on a national, regional and global scale,
thereby usefully supplementing other efforts towards
this end within the United Nations system,
Considering that the prevailing economic and social
conditions in the regions of the world and on a global
scale call for international economic co-operation to
be given a long-term dimension,
Aware of the need for the continuation of efforts to
expand international economic co-operation as a development factor of ever-growing importance and an indispensable instrument in the process of establishing ~he
new international economic order as well as for the mternational development strategy for the 1980s,
Mindful of existin$ interrelationships and the importance of an interdisciplinary approach to issues of development and international economic co-operation,
Taking into account the views on long-term trends in
world economic development submitted to the Economic
and Social Council in 1978, 26
I. Takes note of the activities carried out heretofore within the United Nations system relating to longterm economic ·trends in the regions of the world and of
the Secretary-General's progress report on the subject; 21
2. Requests the Secretary-General and the United
Nations organs, organizations and bodies concerned to
continue their analytical work devoted to the examination of long-term economic and social trends and to
make it available in the process of formulation of economic policies and decision making, in particular with
regard to the development of international co-operation;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Committee for Development Planning
and taking into account the international development
strategy for the third United Nations development decade, to submit to the General Assembly at its thirtyfifth session his views on the possible outline and method
of preparation of an over-all socio-economic perspective of the development of the world economy up to the
year 2000, with special emphasis on the period up to
1990 and, in particular, on the problems of the developing countries;
4. Emphasizes the necessity of conducting the
above-mentioned work in close relationship with other
similar work carried out by various organs of the United
Nations system, in particular by the regional commissions and those working on the development strategy;
5. Invites all States, as well as the United Nations
organizations, organs and bodies concerned, to contribute in their respective areas of competence to the implementation of the recommendations contained in
paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
6. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
consider at its resumed second regular sessions of 1980
and 1981, respectively, an outline and a preliminary
draft of the over-all socio-economic perspective ensuing
from the analysis stipulated in paragraphs 2 and 3 above;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-sixth session an item entitled "Long-term
trends in economic development" to review the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution.
82nd plenary meeting
29 November 1979
2a See E/1978/138.
21

A/34/450.

34/58.

95

Health as an integral part of development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12
December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also the United Nations conferences held
in recent years on major issues relating to economic and
social development and the establishment of the new
international economic order, particularly the International Conference on Primary Health Care, jointly sponsored by the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children's Fund, held at Alma Ata, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, from 6 to 12 September
1978,
Noting that a substantial portion of the population in
many countries, developing as well as developed, la~ks
access to basic health services, and that people lackmg
adequate health cannot fully participate in or contribute
to the economic and social development of their nation,
Welcoming the important efforts of the World Health
Organization, the United Nations Children's Fund and
the other agencies of the United Nations system associated with the effort to attain the goal of health for all
by the year 2000, as expressed in World Health Assembly resolutions WHA 30.43 of I 9 May I 977 and WHA
32.30 of 25 May 1979,
Considering that peace and security are important for
the preservation and improvement of the health of all
people and that co-operation among nations on vital
health issues can contribute importantly to peace,
Cognizant of the vital role that health and health care
play in the development of countries, particularly developing countries,
l. Endorses the Declaration of Alma Ata, 28 in particular the view that primary health care, aimed at the
solution of the major world health problems through a
combination of promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative measures, constitutes the key to the ultimate achievement of a healthful society, especially when
primary health care is incorporated into the development process, particularly that of developing countries;
2. Notes with approval the decision of the World
Health Assembly, contained in resolution WHA 32.30,
that the development of the programmes of the World
Health Organization and the allocation of its resources
at the global, regional and country levels should reflect
the commitment of that organization to the priority of
the achievement of health for all by the year 2000; 29
3. Calls upon the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to co-ordinate with and support the efforts
of the World Health Organization by appropriate actions
within their respective spheres of competence;
4. Appeals to Member States to carry out the actions called for in the Declaration of Alma Ata;
5. Reiterates the appeal contained in paragraph 10
of World Health Assembly resolution WHA 32.30 to
the international community to give full support to the
formulation and implementation of national, regional
E/ICEF/L.1387, annex, sect. V.
Thirty-second World Health Assembly, Geneva, 7-25 May
1979, Resolutions and Decisions, pp. 27-29.
28
29
