IX.

263

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

(i)

The planning of its activities for the term of office
of its members, bearing in mind the desirability of
achieving as much progress as possible in the
preparation of draft articles on specific topics;
(ii) lts methods of work in all their aspects, bearing in
mind the possibility of staggering the consideration of sorne topics;
(b) To indicate in its annual report those subjects and
issues on which views expressed by Governments, either
in the Sixth Committee or in written form, would be of
particular interest for the continuation of its work;
6. Takes note of the comments of the International
Law Commission on the question of the duration of its sessions, as presented in paragraph 252 of its report, and expresses the view that the requirements of the work of
codification and progressive development of international
law and the magnitude and complexity of the subjects on
the agenda of the Commission make it desirable that the
usual duration of its sessions34 be maintained;
7. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the increased role of the Codification Division of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
summary records and other documentation ofthe International Law Commission;
8. Urges Governments and, as appropriate, international organizations to respond in writing as fully and expeditiously as possible to the requests of the International
Law Commission for comments, observations and replies
to questionnaires and for materials on topics in its programme of work;
9. Further urges Governments to give full attention to
the request of the International Law Commission, transmitted through the Secretary-General, for comments and
observations on the draft articles on jurisdictional immunities ofStates and their property 35 and on the status of
the diplomatic courier and the diplomatic bag not accompanied by diplomatic courier, 36 adopted on first reading
by the Commission;
10. Reaffirms its wish that the International Law Commission continue to enhance its co-operation with intergovernmental legal bodies whose work is of interest for the
progressive development of international law and its
codification;
11. Expresses the wish that seminars will continue to be
held in conjunction with sessions ofthe International Law
Commission and that an increasing number of participants from developing countries will be given the opportunity to attend those seminars, and appeals to States that
can do so to make the voluntary contributions that are urgently needed for the holding of the seminars;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the Commission at the
forty-first session of the General Assembly 37 and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate.
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/82.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,38
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,39
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of all missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security ofthe missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety of the personnel of those missions accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities ofthe host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Considering the issues raised by certain States Members
ofthe United Nations in response to the request and to action by the host country to reduce the size of their missions,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States in participating in the work of the Committee,
1. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 87 of its report;38
2. Strongly condemns any criminal acts violating the
security ofmissions accredited to the United Nations and
the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to take all necessary measures without delay to continue to prevent criminal acts,
including harassment and violations of the security of missions and the safety of their personnel or infringements of
the inviolability of their property, in order to ensure the
existence and functioning of all missions, including practicable measures to prohibit illegal activities of persons,
groups and organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration of acts and activities
against the security and safety of such missions and representatives;
4. Urges the host country and the Member States that
raised the issues in response to the request and to action by
the host country to reduce the size of their missions to follow the path of consultations with a view to reaching solutions to this matter, in accordance with the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations; 40
5. Stresses the importance of a positive perception of
the work ofthe United Nations, expresses concern about a
negative public image and, therefore, urges that efforts be
continued to build up public awareness by explaining,
through ali available means, the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and the missions accredited
to it in the strengthening of international peace and
security;

34 See resolution 331 S (XXIX), para. 5.
35 See Official Records of the General Assembly,

Forty-first Session,
Suft'ement No. JO (A/41/10), chap. 11, sect D.
Ib,d., chap. lll, sect. D.
37 /bid., Forty-first Session, Sixth Committee, 27th to 34th, 36th to
44th and 51st meetings and corrigendum.

38 /bid., Forty-first Session.
39 Resolution 22 A (1).
40 Resolution 169 (11).

Supplement No. 26 (A/41/26).

264

General Assembly-Forty-first Session

6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in ali aspects of the relations of the United Nations with 1he host count ry and to continue to stress the
importance of effective measures to avoid acts of terrorism, violence and harassment against the missions and
their personnel, as well as the need for any pertinent legislation adopted by the host country to be in accord with the
Agreement and its other relevant obligations;
7. Decides to consider at its forty-second session the
question of the composition of the Committee cm Rela·
tions with the Host Country;
8. Requests the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country to continue its work, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971,
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Report ofthe Committee on Relation~ with the Host Country".
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986
41/83.

Report of the Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening
of the Role of the Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, by which it established the Special Committee on
the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, and its relevant resolutions adopted at subsequent sessions, 41
Taking note of the reports of the Secretary-General 011
the work of the Organization submitted to the General
Assembly at its thirty-seventh, 42 thirty-ninth, 43 fortieth 44
and forty-first 45 sessions, as well as of the views and cornments expressed on them by Member States,
Having considered the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter ofthe United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization on the work of the
session it held in 1986, 46
Concerned that the Special Committee, since its establishment, has not yet submitted any conclusions to the
General Assembly on the question of the maintenance of
international peace and security,
Taking into account the work accomplished by the Special Committee on the basis of the working paper4 7 on the
question of the prevention and removal of threats to the
peace and of situations that may lead to international friction or give rise to a dispute,
Taking note of the progress achieved in the preparation
of a draft handbook on the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States. 12
Recognizing the importance that pre-session consultations among the members of the Special Committee and
other interested States rna:y have in facilitating the smooth

41 Resolutions 31/28 of 29 November 1976, 32/45 of 8 December
1977, 33/94 of 16 December 1978, 34/147 of 17 December 1979, 35/164
of 15 December 1980, 36/122 ot 11 December 1981, 37/114 of
16 December 1982, 38/141 of 19 Oecember 198\ .19/88of l.l Decemher
1984 and 40/78 of 11 December l98~.
42 Official Records of the Ci<'11era,' Assembly. rhmy-,even1h Se.rn"''·
Su¡f'ement No. 1 (A/37/1)
- /bid., Thirty-ninth Sesswn. Supplement No. I (A/39/1)
44 /bid., Fortieth Se.ssion. Supplement No. 1 (A/40/1 ).
45 /bid., Forty-first Sessio1,. Supplement No. 1 (A 141/1)
46 Jbid., Supplemelll No. 33 (A/41/3\\
4 7 A/ AC 182/I_ 38/Rev 2

conduct ofthe work ofthe Special Committee towards the
fulfilment of its task, especially as regards the composition
of the Bureau and the organization of work,
1. Takes note of the report of the Special Committee
on the Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization;
2. Decides that the Special Committee shall hold its
next session from 9 to 27 February 1987;
3. Requests the Special Committee at its session in
1987.
(a) To accord priority, by devoting more time, to the
question of the maintenance of international peace and
security in ali its aspects in order to strengthen the role of
the United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
and to enable it to discharge fully its responsibilities under
!he Charter in this field, and to work with the aim of submitting its conclusions to the General Assembly in accordance with paragraph 5 below, and in doing so:
(i)
To concentrate its efforts on the question of the
prevention and removal of threats to peace and of
situations that may lead to international friction
or give rise to a dispute, on the basis of the working paper4 7 and on any other proposals specific to
this question, with a view to completing its consideration thereof and elaborating appropriate conclusions thereon for submission to the General Assembly as soon as possible;
(ii) To continue its consideration of the proposal contained in the working paper48 on the role ofMember States and of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security;
(b) To continue its work on the question of the peaceful settlement of disputes between States in accordancc
with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 41/74
of 3 December 1986;
4. Requests the Special Committee to keep the ques11011 of the rationalization of the procedures of the United
Nations under active review;
5. A lso requests the Special Committee to be mindful of
the importance of reaching general agreement whenever
1hat has significance for the outcome of its work;
6. Urges mernbers of the Special Committee to participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to it;
7. Decides that the Special Committee shall accept the
participation of observers of Member States, including in
the meetings of its working groups;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to render ali assistance to the Special Committee;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
preparation of a draft handbook on the peaceful sett lement of disputes between States, in accordance with paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 41/74;
10. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report
on its work to the General Assembly at its forty-second
-..ession;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Report of the Spec,al Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and
nn the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization"
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

48

-\/AC 182/1 "~
