16

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

Considering further that the Latin American Economic
System is developingjoint activities with specialized agencies and other bodies and programmes of the United Nations system, such as the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization, the World
Meteorological Organization, the World Health Organization, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the
United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, the Office of
the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research,

43/6.

Observer status for the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean in the General Assembly

l. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General;

2. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary action to implement the present resolution.

The General Assembly,
Noting the desire of the Agency for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean for
co-operation between the United Nations and the Agency,
l. Decides to invite the Agency for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean to
participate in the sessions and the work ofthe General Assembly in the capacity of observer;

2. Expresses satisfaction with decision 282 ofthe Latin
American Council of the Latin American Economic System;
3. Expresses its gratitude for the constant efforts made
by the Latin American Economic System in promoting
co-operation among the countries of Latin America and
the Caribbean, and consultation and co-ordination of their
positions on subjects of vital importance to the region, as
well as in enhancing their economic and social development;
4. Welcomes with satisfaction the dialogue which the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Latin American and
Caribbean countries are holding on the occasion ofthe ordinary sessions of the Latin American Council of the
Latin American Economic System;
S. Urgesthe Economic Commission for Latin America
and the Caribbean to broaden and deepen its coordination and mutual support activities with the Latin
American Economic System, as well as its participation in
common efforts to harmonize action among the various
regional and subregional entities in the economic field;
6. Urgesthe United Nations Development Programme
to strengthen and broaden its support to the programme
that the Permanent Secretariat of the Latin American
Economic System is carrying out within the framework of
the 1989-1991 work programme approved by the Latin
American Council;
7. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations and programmes of the United Nations system to
continue to intensify their co-operation with the activities
of the Latin American Economic System;
8. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to promote, in close collaboration with the Permanent Secretary of the Latin American Economic System,
the holding of a meeting in 1989 between their respective
secretariats, with the aim of identifying those areas in
which it will be possible to broaden co-operation between
the United Nations system and the Latin American Economic System;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen and intensify
co-operation between the United Nations system and the
Latin American Economic System, and to inform the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session of the implementation of the present resolution.
32nd plenary meeting
17 October 1988

32nd plenary meeting
17 October 1988
43/7.

Emergency assistance to Jamaica

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/169 of 11 December 1987 on
an international decade for natural disaster reduction,
Deeply distressed by the number of afflicted persons and
the destruction wrought by hurricane Gilbert which, on
12 September 1988, struck the island of Jamaica,
Conscious of the efforts of the Government and people of
Jamaica to save lives and alleviate the sufferings ofthe victims of the hurricane,
Noting the enormous effort that will be required to alleviate the grave situation caused by this natural disaster,
Conscious also of the prompt response being made by
Governments, international agencies, non-governmental
organizations and private individuals to provide emergency relief,
Recognizing that the magnitude of the disaster and its
long-term effects will require, as a complement to the effort being made by the people and Government of
Jamaica, a demonstration of international solidarity and
humanitarian concern to ensure broad multilateral cooperation in order to meet the immediate emergency situation in the affected areas, as well as to undertake the process of reconstruction,
1. Expresses its solidarity and support to the Government and people of Jamaica;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the States, international
agencies and non-governmental organizations that are
providing emergency relief to that country;
3. Calls upan ali States to contribute generously to the
relief and reconstruction efforts in the affected areas;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the international financia) institutions and the bodies
and agencies of the United Nations system, to assist the
Government of Jamaica in identifying the emergency,
medium-term and long-term needs and in mobilizing resources, as well as to help with the task of reconstruction
of the country undertaken by the Government.
33rd plenary meeting
18 October 1988
