United Nations

S/PV.6770

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6770th meeting
Tuesday, 15 May 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mashabane
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2012/283)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-33979 (E)

*1233979*

S/PV.6770

endeavours reflect its good intentions and the pressing
desire to restore security and stability in Somalia and
to put an end to the suffering experienced by its people
for nearly two decades.

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on Somalia
(S/2012/283)
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of Somalia to participate in this meeting.
I request the Protocol Officer to escort His
Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President
of the Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic, to his seat at the Council table.
Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President of the
Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic, was escorted to a seat at the Council
table.
The President: On behalf of the Council, I
welcome His Excellency President Ahmed.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia, to participate in this meeting.

My thanks and appreciation also go to United
Nations Members, to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon —
who, at international forums, underscores the
importance of restoring security and stability in
Somalia — and to the African Union (AU) countries
that fully support the Somali Government and people. I
would also like to thank the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), which has issued
resolute and successful decisions on the Somali issue.
IGAD sent the finest young men to Somalia to stand by
our people and to protect innocent Somali citizens, as
well as our independence, freedoms, fundamental
rights and honour, which were being violated by the
advocates of war, looting and chaos. Its courageous
decisions brought about the expulsion of Al-Qaida and
Al-Shabaab from many areas that are now calm and
stable after our Government received the support of
AU forces, backed by the international community. I
would be remiss if I did not thank all States and
international and regional organizations that have
contributed to alleviating the suffering of our citizens,
who were in dire need of assistance in past years.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President of the Transitional
Federal Government of the Somali Republic.

Owing to the disorder and instability prevailing
in the country, the terrorist movements of Al-Shabaab
and Al-Qaida took the opportunity to launch a
merciless war against the Somali people and committed
crimes and atrocities in the name of jihad, under the
guise of religion, which is completely opposed to such
atrocities. That forced Somalis to emigrate and live in
camps in neighbouring and other countries, or to
become internally displaced persons. Our people
placed their hope in their Government and the
international community, in anticipation of a new dawn
of security and safety emerging.

President Ahmed (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to start my statement by extending my thanks to the
Security Council and by expressing our appreciation to
it for its continued and vital support to achieving peace
in Somalia. The visits by Council members to Djibouti
in June 2008 and to Nairobi in May 2011 to look into
and investigate the distressing events taking place in
Somalia and efforts to bring about peace, as well as the
relevant resolutions adopted by the Council on the
same topic, clearly demonstrated the Council’s
determination to resolve the Somali issue. All those

Our people, who suffered the worst acts of
violence and frequent crises, did not yield to the
violence and oppression, but continued to seek a
peaceful solution that was satisfactory to all. It strove
for the formation of a national unity Government in
order to lead the country to the security and stability it
deserves and to unite all sectors of Somali society,
without isolating any party from the other national
groups. Priority was given to a total of 15 reconciliation
conferences held in neighbouring countries, culminating
in the fourth Djibouti Peace Conference in 2009. That

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/283, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on Somalia.

2

12-33979

S/PV.6770

gave rise to the formation of this Government in order
to achieve lasting peace and prosperity, as well as the
well-being and comprehensive development of its
citizens.
The Government of the Somali Republic, which
receives the support and assistance of the international
community, has withstood the blows of its opponents
among Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and international
terrorists. It has succeeded in expelling them from most
of the country and has regained control in many
regions. Today, it administers its own affairs and
engages in reconstruction. It has returned the smile to
the faces of Somali children, exhausted by war and
constant sedition, having expelled those who sowed the
seeds of discord and internal disputes.
The Transitional Federal Government appreciates
the importance of the transition to normalcy through
the implementation of the policies set down in the road
map, outlining the development of a permanent
constitution for the country and its ratification by clan
leaders, intellectuals, members of the diaspora, social
organizations for young women, and community
members entitled to participate in its ratification. The
draft constitution is the result of eight years of
painstaking efforts sustained by Somali and international
experts to draft its provisions and study its contents,
with the aim of making it a comprehensive text that
takes the interests of Somalia into account and
responds to its requirements and current situation.
The new draft constitution is not the result of
happenstance or emotion, but has emerged from the
aspirations of the Somalis, who continue to await the
end of the transitional system and a return to the
regular system of governance. We hope and believe
that the constitution is one of the best in the world in
form and substance. It is the outcome of the
deliberations of Somali scientists and specialists,
supervised by committees of the clergy and senior
citizens. I assure the Council that the draft constitution
is responsive to the interests of the Somali people and
in line with Islamic principles, traditions, systems and
norms. Following its approval by the Constituent
Assembly, the draft will be reviewed and subsequently
voted on.
I left Mogadishu as the leaders of Somali clans
continued to meet with a view to selecting
825 representatives who are trusted by all the Somali
clans to ratify the draft constitution of the Somali

12-33979

Republic. Today, after all these efforts, we commit
ourselves before the international community and
affirm that we mean to pave the way for the selection
of a national parliament representing all sectors of
Somali society, including the clergy, youth, women and
children. The parliament must be ready to choose a
new president in order to form a Government of
national unity composed of qualified men and women
able to manage the key components of the State with
competence and wisdom, distributing our national
resources equally to all members of society on the
basis of the legislative, executive and judicial powers
of the State.
In addition to the steps we have already taken, we
would like to assure Council members once again that
the process of reconciliation through negotiation has
begun between the Government and the people of the
north in order to reach an agreement ending the dispute
with our brothers who have sought to secede
unilaterally. We will pursue these efforts until the
waters are calm and national cohesion is restored,
returning the situation in Somalia to what it once was.
The management of the country will be in the hands of
the Somali people in a democratic society where
everyone is equal and no one is marginalized.
We draw the Council’s attention to the fact that
we are on the threshold of a new phase. We have come
a long way in the implementation of the road map. We
need the international community to redouble its
efforts to assist us in completing the current stage on
time so as not to open an opportunity for the return of
anarchy and terrorism, to safeguard the achievements
made to date, and to justify the money that has been
spent and the blood shed to get where we are.
My country, which suffered a long period of
chaos and instability after the collapse of the
constitutional institutions and administrative services,
needs today to make further efforts to revive its
institutions so that they may perform their vital
functions and serve the people of Somalia. I believe
that the current stage is conducive to the
re-establishment of these institutions and that the
conditions exist to justify these efforts following the
defeat of Al-Qaida in Somalia and given the growing
international interest in developing our institutions as
well as the readiness of our people to participate in
making these institutions perform the desired functions.

3

S/PV.6770

The next stage will require us to create the
appropriate climate for this work. It is essential that
Somalia be stable, safe and free of chaos and violence
if it is to rebuild its infrastructure and Government
institutions and to select Government officials and
administrators to manage the various governorates and
the training of cadres capable of managing the
Government bodies, business services, hospitals and
schools, and of undertaking other tasks necessary to
serve the members of the Somali people. We therefore
expect the Security Council to support us in the
following tasks.
We must politically and economically strengthen
the work of the Constituent Assembly assigned to
ratify the new constitution by providing the financial
means necessary for the success of its work. In this
task, we have received none of the anticipated
international assistance.
We must promote reconciliation conferences to
preserve the national unity of Somalia and
comprehensive peace throughout Somali territory.
We must take a firm stand against those who
would hinder the achievement of peace in Somalia,
including those destructive individuals who would fish
in troubled waters and act to return the country to the
years of loss and fighting.
We must support the building of a Somali army
capable of protecting the homeland and its
independence and territorial integrity.
We must strengthen national security and train
the police forces and national intelligence officers,
arming them with up-to-date security equipment and
qualifying them to undertake the responsibilities
entrusted to them.

will not be possible unless the Council allows the
Somali Government to import the necessary weapons
for the security services and lift the arms embargo that
has been imposed on it.
Further, international bodies and organizations
and the international community in general should be
invited to contribute to reconstruction in Somalia and
to work to reactivate economic institutions and services
in the country.
Continued support for the forces of the African
Union Mission in Somalia should include an increase
in their numbers and military assets in order to improve
their combat efficiency and enable them to address the
Al-Shabaab terrorist movement, which recently
announced its complete merger with Al-Qaida.
Financial support should be provided to local
administrations that have been established in areas
newly liberated from Al-Qaida.
Current members of Parliament should receive
their allowances and salaries to compensate them for
the service they have provided to the nation during
their term of office. They should not be exposed to the
risk of neglect and oblivion.
The foregoing is a mere drop in a sea of turbulent
waves and represents only a small part of the larger
task that the Somali people face at this critical
transitional juncture. We believe that the Council is
well aware of the deteriorating situation in our country,
and of its own responsibility for protecting the Somali
people and their fundamental freedoms.

We must develop a comprehensive plan to
address the terrorist movements that are stepping up
their activities in Somalia. These movements will be
difficult to eradicate from the region unless concerted
international efforts are made to address them.

I hope that I am not being overly optimistic in
saying that the Somali people, who are an integral part
of human society, believe that the international
community will not leave them bleeding and that the
eyes of the world are upon them, in particular
following the recent London Conference, which was
attended by representatives of 55 countries, with a
positive outcome that showed genuine sympathy with
the Somali people.

Without effective security forces able to impose
law and order and to act as a powerful deterrent to
criminals and aggressors of the innocent and defenceless,
it will not be possible to protect fundamental freedoms
and human rights in a country rampant with gangs of
pirates and terrorist movements that are killing
innocent citizens and imposing ransom and royalties on
commercial ships crossing international waters. That

The British Government led by David Cameron
deserves our thanks and appreciation for organizing
and managing the Conference. We hope that it will
pursue its efforts to bring peace to Somalia, and we
extend our thanks and appreciation to all States,
international
and
regional
organizations
and
personalities who attended the Conference. We urge
them to maintain their commitment to achieving peace

4

12-33979

S/PV.6770

in Somalia and to attend the conference to be held in
Turkey next month.
The international community, through its
international and regional organizations, played an
effective role in the delivery of aid and humanitarian
assistance to those affected by famine and drought in
Somalia last year. Before concluding, I would therefore
like to invite all States and countries that pledged
contributions to alleviate the burden on the Somali
people, who are in dire need of assistance, to fulfil
their pledges. I thank them for their commitment and
for the assistance they extended to us during the crisis.
We hope that the outstanding aid and assistance will be
forthcoming, along with continued support to enable
those in need to resume their activities and a standard
of living appropriate to people living in the twenty-first
century. I also hope that they will help us to rebuild our
damaged infrastructure and to restore all the services
our citizens need.
In conclusion, I would like to extend all thanks
and appreciation to the members of the Council and to
wish them success.
The President: I thank President Ahmed for his
statement.
I give the floor to Mr. Mahiga.
Mr. Mahiga: I thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me this opportunity to present the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2012/283) and to provide
the Council with additional briefing on Somali. I thank
the Council for its continued support to me and to the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia. I also
recognize the presence of His Excellency Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, President of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) of the Somali Republic, who has
just addressed the Council. His presence here today is
an expression of his commitment to partnering with the
international community to end the transition. I also
wish to thank the President and the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia for the excellent
working relations we enjoy in Mogadishu in our
working with the Transitional Federal Institutions.
We are entering the most critical stage in ending
the transition in Somalia by August. We have made
considerable advances in preparing for that end state.
We have taken significant steps in the constitutionmaking process for Somalia, as required by both the
Mbagathi and Djibouti agreements. The draft

12-33979

constitution will be submitted to the principals,
pending its submission to a national Constituent
Assembly for provisional adoption later this month.
That is essential for ending the transition and sets the
stage for further deliberation on the document in the
post-August period.
To that end, we have brought together in
Mogadishu a group of 135 traditional elders who are
currently engaged in selecting 825 members of the
national Constituent Assembly, in line with the
traditional system of 4.5 clan representation. In the
absence of direct elections now, the traditional elders
are the basis of legitimacy for the Constituent
Assembly.
The elders, who have been brought from all over
Somalia, including the newly recovered areas, are a
symbol of national unity and of the commitment to
ending the transition. Furthermore, the elders will
dissolve the current Parliament and proceed to select
members of a new, leaner Parliament on more meritbased criteria. The new Parliament will proceed to give
us a new political leadership in July and a new
Government in August.
Since their arrival in Mogadishu, the elders have
engaged in a self-validation exercise on their authentic
origins and representativeness. The principal signatories
will meet later this week to appoint a technical selection
committee to manage the Constituent Assembly and
other issues related to the provisional adoption of the
draft constitution and the selection of the new
Parliament.
Those processes constitute one of the pillars of
the road map that will continue beyond August. The
inclusion of areas newly recovered from Al-Shabaab
insurgents remains a top priority in political outreach
and reconciliation as the Transitional Federal
Government continues to bring more territory under its
control beyond Mogadishu. Through the allied militias,
supported by an expanded African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the engagement of Ethiopia,
the insurgents are retreating and fast losing control of
swathes of territory.
The new territories bring with them a new
population under Government control. However,
Al-Shabaab’s retreat is creating new challenges.
Retreating insurgents are spilling over into the
relatively stable regional states of Puntland and

5

S/PV.6770

Somaliland from south-central Somalia. There is also
an increase in asymmetrical warfare behind AMISOM
lines in Mogadishu and other recovered areas.
Therefore, as Al-Shabaab retreats, the TFG must be
assisted in carrying out the following functions:
establishing local administration, which would include
previously elected leaders who were displaced by the
insurgents; establishing political and administrative
authority at the local level; and consolidating security
through local security committees. The recovery of
new territory must be accompanied by the provision of
basic social services, including the rule of law and
other social infrastructure, as well as economic
services, as part of a peace dividend package.
Efforts to strengthen outreach and reconciliation
with the regional and emerging administrations
continue. In that regard, both the Transitional Federal
Government and Somaliland have appointed committees
through which the two entities will engage in dialogue
on the future of Somalia, as called for at the London
Conference in February. The two stakeholders are
committed to dialogue and have sought my good
offices to keep the dialogue alive as we work out the
modalities, including the agenda and timing for the
discussions.
AMISOM, for its part, is now on a more secure
and predictable funding footing, following the adoption
and implementation of resolution 2036 (2012). That
should enable the force to project itself with greater
effectiveness in the three new sectors of its operations.
I would like to express my appreciation to the
international community for the generous contributions
it continues to make to AMISOM. In particular, I
would like to mention the support of the European
Union, which covers the allowances of AMISOM
civilian and military personnel. The United States of
America has also made significant contributions of
equipment and supplies to AMISOM. I would also like
to commend the United Kingdom, Japan and other
donors that have provided generous financial
contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund in
Support of AMISOM. Since the maintenance of
international peace and security is a collective
responsibility, I encourage other Member States to join
those traditional supporters in their commendable
efforts to support AMISOM.
At the meeting of the Joint Security Committee
held in Mogadishu on 7 and 8 May, the participants
agreed on more coordinated formation of Somali forces

6

and stressed the importance of integrating the
Transitional Federal Government’s allied forces under
a unified command. They also agreed, among other
things, on the importance of the National Security and
Stabilization Plan being put in place as an exit strategy
for AMISOM and on the need for greater coordination
and cooperation in dealing with disengaged former
combatants — or defectors, as they are sometimes
called.
I thank the Government of Japan for its
comprehensive assistance in building the TFG police
force. The security sector development of the TFG also
needs greater focus on developing the justice and
corrections system,
to
strengthen
rule-of-law
institutions.
There is progress in the area of promoting human
rights, and resources are needed in that area, including
in the protection of children and of human rights
defenders and journalists.
The humanitarian situation remains fragile in
Somalia. While a rapid scale-up in aid was effective in
ending famine conditions in the country, the gains are
very fragile and can easily be reversed without
continued assistance.
In our continued efforts to address the problem of
piracy, we held a ministerial-level meeting in London
on 12 May, at which the Djibouti Code of Conduct was
addressed, in accordance with article 13 of the Code.
There have also been significant efforts, following the
London Conference communiqué, in evolving a
comprehensive strategy against piracy, as an emerging
challenge that needs to be addressed both on land and
at sea. However, the fundamental issue in dealing with
piracy remains the establishment of the rule of law in
Somalia.
We face a number of challenges in our efforts to
complete the implementation of the road map,
including tight timelines and the unavailability of
resources. However, in the absence of the requisite
resources, and of financial, logistic and human
requirements, we can accomplish only so much. The
lack of funding for implementing the road map in the
remaining three months is of serious concern to all of
us, including the TFG, as President Ahmed has just
expressed.
Finally, allow me to raise the issue of the threat
posed to the peace process by spoiler behaviour in

12-33979

S/PV.6770

Somalia and beyond the region. We must deal with
those elements before they succeed in undermining the
peace process. The spoilers feel that the end of the
transition will jeopardize their privileged positions and
standing in Somalia. They are therefore employing
various methods to obstruct and reverse the gains made
in the implementation of the road map. On 1 May, in the
spirit of collaboration, UNPOS, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and AMISOM
issued a warning to all potential spoilers that
non-compliance with or active obstruction of the road
map will be followed by the naming and shaming of
individuals. People named could subsequently be
referred to the IGAD Council of Ministers, along with
our recommendations for the immediate imposition of
specific measures and restrictions, such as regional
travel bans on some individuals. The effectiveness of
such measures will of course be greatly enhanced if
they are supported by the authority of the Security
Council.
As Somalia faces the greatest opportunity to end
the transition, after so much investment by the
international community, we must complete the tasks at
hand. We must provide timely logistical and financial
support to enable us to complete the implementation of
the road map before August, with strengthened
international cooperation and coordination. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative of the Government of
Turkey to partner with the United Nations in convening
the international conference in Istanbul early next
month. The conference will add momentum and focus
attention on the road map to end the transition. It will
also define elements of the post-August strategy and
strengthen Somali ownership of the process, in
partnership with the regional and international
stakeholders. We look forward to that conference.
The President: I thank Mr. Mahiga for his
briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I am very
grateful to you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to
discuss Somalia at such an important time, to the
Secretary-General for his latest report (S/2012/283)
and to his Special Representative Augustine Mahiga
for the briefing he has just given us. We greatly
appreciate the Special Representative’s work and the
efforts of his team and all the United Nations agencies

12-33979

active in Somalia. I would also like to thank the
President of Somalia for being with us here today and
for his contribution to this debate.
I would like to address two key issues — the
political process, and security in Somalia. First, our
number-one priority now must be the political process.
There are only three months to go until the end of the
transition. It is imperative that we increase the
momentum, to ensure that the national Constituent
Assembly is convened as soon as possible, in a way
that is open and representative. The ultimate
responsibility for delivering the end of the transition
lies with the Somali leaders, but we, the international
community, must continue to provide the necessary
support. The United Kingdom is providing ₤1 million
to the United Nations to support the process, as well as
technical support staff. We call on others to provide
support in line with the needs identified by the United
Nations.
We must also support the process politically,
providing incentives to progress and being prepared to
take action against any who seek to block or undermine
the process. I welcome the letter from the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, addressing potential spoilers.
I reaffirm the United Kingdom’s commitment to taking
action against those who seek to spoil the process,
including any attempt to fix the selection of members
of the Constituent Assembly.
There are increasing reports within Somalia that
the public is not content with the process. I want to be
clear that disagreement with the process itself is not
spoiling action. Dissent is not a bad thing; it shows
engagement with the process. Public debate is a key
element of democracy, but it is vital that space be
provided within the process for those dissenting voices
to be heard and taken into account without derailing
the process in its entirety.
Much of the discontent appears to be fuelled by
suspicion and a lack of information. It is therefore vital
that the process be made as transparent as possible.
The United Nations and the Garoowe signatories need
to make public the list of elders, the process by which
they will select the national Constituent Assembly’s
members, and the process for dealing with contentious
issues within the constitution.
When ministers meet at the end of the month in
Istanbul, they will assess progress on delivering the

7

S/PV.6770

end of the transition. It is for the Somali leaders,
supported by United Nations Political Office for
Somalia to demonstrate delivery of progress against the
timelines set out in the road map and the Garoowe
principles by that point.
Secondly, while our focus is currently on the end
of the transition, it is no less important that we
continue to build security and stability across Somalia.
Resolution 2036 (2012) paved the way for an enhanced
and expanded presence of the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM). We welcome the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the countries of the region to
put in place arrangements to implement that mandate.
It is vital that those efforts continue and in particular
that the rehatting of Kenyan troops take place as soon
as possible.
Although resolution 2036 (2012) provided
enhanced support for AMISOM, there is still a
requirement for additional funding to provide key force
enablers and equipment. In the past year, the United
Kingdom has contributed ₤16 million without caveats
to the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM. We
call on others to continue to contribute to the Trust
Fund, and on additional donors to provide funding for
long-term requirements, such as the troop stipends
currently funded by the European Union.
But we also need to enhance our efforts to
develop Somali security capacity. AMISOM needs
effective Somali national security forces alongside
whom they can fight and to whom they can eventually
hand over. We welcome the AU efforts to identify the
immediate needs of the national security forces. We
believe that the existing provisions of the arms
embargo allow sufficient flexibility to meet those
needs and that there are important security benefits in
maintaining the embargo.
We also need to increase our efforts on longerterm capacity-building in the security and justice
sectors as a whole to provide security and access to
justice for people across Somalia. Enhanced security
will be key to underpinning efforts at stabilization and
the development of better governance, particularly in
newly recovered areas.
We are entering a critical period in Somalia. The
Garoowe signatories need to decide. Do they want to
play their part in bringing peace to Somalia after
21 years of war, improving the lives of thousands of
Somali people and setting Somalia on the path to

8

recovery? Or do they want to let this opportunity slide
and condemn their country to further years of conflict
and turmoil? I urge them to make the right choice. If
they do so, the United Nations and the international
community will work with them and provide the
support they need.
We look forward to discussing these issues
further in Istanbul.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for his briefing, and welcome
President Ahmed.
Somalia stands at a critical moment in its history.
One year ago, Al-Shabaab controlled and terrorized
large swaths of Somalia. Millions were at risk of
starvation, and the country’s leaders focused more on
feuding among themselves than on working to improve
the condition of the Somali people. one year ago in
Nairobi, the Security Council delivered a blunt
message to the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
that it risked losing international support if it did not
get its act together and resolve its differences.
Today, Somalia is in a different and better place,
but significant challenges lie ahead. The mandate of
the Transitional Federal Government comes to an end
in August. Any delay or back sliding in implementing
the transition is totally unacceptable. Somalia and the
wider region cannot afford to revert to the endless
cycles of violence and suffering that have plagued the
country and threatened the region for decades.
There are, encouragingly, signs of promise for the
country and its people. For the first time in a
generation, Somalia has a solid plan for creating a
functional State and the conditions for its
implementation continue to ripen. In the last few
months, the TFG, as well as other roadmap signatories
and the international community, have taken important
steps to implement the road map to end the transition
as defined by the Garoowe principles. A draft
constitution has been circulated to the road map
signatories. Elders have been selected to appoint
delegates to the Constituent Assembly and are meeting
now to do so. The security situation across the country
has also improved. Areas on the outskirts of
Mogadishu and the key cities of Beledweyne, Baidoa
and Jowhar in south-western Somalia have recently
been liberated from Al-Shabaab.

12-33979

S/PV.6770

The United States commends the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
National Security Forces for their significant military
achievements and security gains. The sacrifices made
by AMISOM and Somali troops are testament to their
will and dedication to bring peace and stability to
Somalia. Reflecting the improved security situation,
the United Nations Political Office for Somalia has
returned to Mogadishu. And although the humanitarian
situation remains extremely fragile, thanks to the
actions of United Nations humanitarian agencies and
non-governmental organizations and the generosity of
the international community, the famine has
substantially abated.
The unanimous adoption of resolution 2036
(2012) on 22 February, followed by the London
Conference on Somalia, demonstrated the strong and
unified commitment of the international community to
Somalia’s future. The United States welcomes the
upcoming second Istanbul Conference on Somalia,
which should push the political transition process
further towards completion.
While Somalis with international support have
made progress, we cannot afford to lose momentum.
Critical and difficult work remains, and the Somali
people will hold the TFG, road map signatories and
other stakeholders accountable for meeting the
transition timetable. As the London Conference
declared in February, the Kampala Accord deadline is
firm. There must be no extension of the TFG mandate
beyond 20 August. The Constituent Assembly should
convene to consider and adopt the interim constitution,
setting the stage for other important steps, including
the appointment of a new, smaller parliament and
indirect elections of a Speaker and President.
Informing Somalis about the draft constitution and the
road map implementation process is fundamental to
their ultimate success. But as the Secretary-General
observes in his report (S/2012/283), approval of the
interim constitution by the Constituent Assembly will
be the beginning, not the end, of the process.
Having noted some of the important progress
achieved since the Security Council visited the region,
let me now turn to the significant challenges ahead for
Somalia.
As we were tragically reminded only two weeks
ago by the suicide attack against a parliamentary
delegation in Dhuusamarreeb and last month by the

12-33979

suicide bombing at the national theatre, Al-Shabaab
remains a major threat to the stability of Somalia. Its
shocking and ruthless attacks on innocent civilians and
its ongoing ban on 17 humanitarian organizations
demonstrate its total disregard for the Somali people
and its disregard for human life. The United States
condemns all Al-Shabaab terrorist attacks, which kill
Government officials and innocent civilians alike.
Because Al-Shabaab will continue to perpetrate
terrorism and exploit any opening to sow instability
and derail progress in Somalia, it is of paramount
importance to expand security in stabilized areas in
order to prevent Al-Shabaab from regaining a foothold.
It requires AMISOM to be fully staffed so that it can
fulfil its mandate. The African Union and additional
troop contributors should quickly reach agreement on
AMISOM’s concept of operations. Failure to do so will
not only reflect negatively on AMISOM and the
African Union but, worse, undermine the security of
the Somali people.
Moreover, although Somali national security
forces will figure prominently in expanded AMISOM
operations, they are hampered by supply shortages and
gaps in logistical capacity. Since 2007, the United
States has contributed over $106 million to strengthen
the Somali security sector. We urge all Member States,
especially new donors, to help the Somali people take
the lead in providing for their own security and to
coordinate bilateral support through the Joint Security
Committee of the Transitional Federal Government,
co-chaired by the United Nations and the African
Union.
To ensure lasting stability in Somalia, it is
necessary but not sufficient to continue to pressure
Al-Shabaab and to strengthen national and
international security forces. Criminal activity that
finances terrorism, undermines domestic governance
and distorts the local economy must be addressed as
well. In this regard, the United States strongly supports
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
and will continue working with international partners
and Somali leaders to end the scourge of piracy.
Similarly, kidnapping for ransom imperils Somalia’s
progress and poses an increasing threat to all nations
and their citizens. We must work together to strengthen
law enforcement and other capacities to prevent
hostage-takings and ensure that hostage-takers cannot
obtain ransoms.

9

S/PV.6770

Finally, although the United Nations declared the
end of the famine in Somalia in February, the
humanitarian situation in southern and central Somalia
remains precarious. More than 2.5 million Somalis still
need emergency assistance. There are more than
980,000 Somali refugees, some of whom have lived in
exile for more than 20 years. We commend Kenya,
Ethiopia, Djibouti, Yemen and other countries in the
region for hosting Somali refugees.
Since 2011, the United States has committed
$1.1 billion to the humanitarian emergency in the Horn
of Africa, including more than $260 million expressly
for Somalia. The international community must do
more to provide immediate life-saving assistance; to
address the long-term needs of refugees, internally
displaced persons and others affected by drought and
conflict; and to build capacity in the region to mitigate
the impact of future shocks that we know will come.
Millions of lives are at stake.
I want to reiterate our strong support for
AMISOM and our commitment to working with the
international community to help Somalia face these
challenges and realize a brighter future. International
support, however, cannot be taken for granted. During
the next four months, we have a unique opportunity to
ensure that Somalia concludes its transition on time,
but the onus remains on Somalia’s leaders to seize this
moment and establish a strong foundation for peace
and stability. The people of Somalia, who have
suffered too long, deserve nothing less.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I thank you very
much, Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to
participate in this important debate. We wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/283), as
well as his Special Representative, Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga, for his detailed briefing on the
recent developments in Somalia. We also wish to
welcome to this meeting President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed of the Somali Republic, and we want to
thank him for his wide-ranging statement.
Somalia is on the verge of making a decisive
break with its most recent past, marked by conflict,
crisis and instability. Recent months have seen
determined and deliberate action by the Somali people,
supported by the international community, to address in
a sustained and concerted manner the political,
humanitarian and security challenges confronting the
country. In this regard, we welcome the significant

10

progress made by the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in implementing the September 2011 road map.
Most notably, the Garoowe Conferences I and II have
culminated in important principles and decisions that
should guide the political and constitutional processes
for ending the transition. We welcome in particular the
agreements reached by the stakeholders during these
Conferences.
With the end of transition, fast approaching on
20 August, South Africa welcomes the establishment of
the Implementation Support Unit in the Office of the
Prime Minister to expedite the delivery of key tasks
and benchmarks. We look forward to the finalization of
the nomination process of the 825 members of the
Constituent Assembly by traditional elders. In this
regard, it would be important to ensure that the
selection process is inclusive and transparent and that
the Constituent Assembly is representative and
comprised of the agreed percentage of woman
representatives. We are encouraged that the legitimate
and reasonable concerns of key stakeholders regarding
the Constitutional process will be taken into account,
particularly if they have the potential to frustrate the
outcome of this process.
In the remaining months, the Constituent
Assembly will have to adopt a provisional draft
constitution and agree on a new federal parliament. We
look forward to the speedy completion of these
important processes, to be followed by the election of a
new President and the appointment of a new Prime
Minister in July and August, respectively.
While we welcome these positive developments,
we note with concern that challenges remain that could
have negative impact on the implementation of the
road map. We urge Somalis across the political
spectrum to put their differences aside and focus on the
common good of the country. Progress and peace can
be achieved only by a united Somalia. We wish to
recall the readiness of both the African Union and the
Security Council to sanction spoilers who frustrate the
implementation of the road map.
The joint letter issued recently by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations reaffirms the
determination of the international community to give
full effect to resolution 1844 (2008), indicating that
action will be taken against those who obstruct and
undermine stability in Somalia.

12-33979

S/PV.6770

The future of Somalia must be determined by the
Somali people and the solutions to its current
challenges must be Somali-owned. My delegation
therefore wishes to urge the political leadership in
Somalia to set its differences aside and to put the
interests of the country above its own in order to seize
the existing window of opportunity for the country to
abandon the instability of its recent past.
South Africa notes the funding gap of $12 million
for implementing key aspects of the road map. We
share the concern of the Secretary-General that this
could jeopardize the significant progress achieved so
far. We call on the international community to continue
its support for the TFG during this critical time.
My delegation acknowledges the important gains
registered by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the security forces of Somalia’s
neighbours and the Somali national security forces.
These security gains have laid the foundation for
extending the authority of the TFG beyond Mogadishu,
providing an enabling environment for establishing a
United Nations presence in the capital, and creating a
security environment conducive to facilitating the
return of the international diplomatic and business
communities. The military successes must be
accompanied by reconciliation and stabilization, and we
encourage national efforts towards this end. The
international community must therefore continue its
investment in AMISOM and in the Somali national
security forces. In this regard, South Africa welcomes
the recent “uncaveated” support by the United
Kingdom, Sweden and Denmark to the AMISOM Trust
Fund.
We continue to condemn the asymmetric attacks
by the armed opposition against Government, civilian
and United Nations targets. We underline that the
strengthening of the Somali national security forces
must remain an important benchmark in the
international community’s efforts to ensure sustainable
peace. We are therefore concerned that the capacitybuilding of the Somali military and police force is
constrained by the limited ability to pay and equip
operational troops and pay arrears in police salaries.
We join the Secretary-General in encouraging Member
States with the necessary capabilities to assist
AMISOM and Somali forces in building their capacity
to prevent attacks and to improve civilian security.

12-33979

In addition to progress on the political and
security front, attention must also be given to the
humanitarian challenges still confronting the country.
We should further ensure stabilization and the delivery
of basic services in areas recovered from Al-Shabaab.
Funding by the international community for the
Mogadishu Stabilization and Recovery Plan therefore
remains a priority. Additionally, investment by the
international community in the private sector
development of Somalia, including its road, water and
energy infrastructure, would ensure the long-term
development of the country. In that regard, we look
forward to the upcoming second Istanbul conference on
Somalia, to be held from 31 May to 1 June, as an
important opportunity for the international community
to invest in the long-term economic future and stability
of Somalia.
In conclusion, South Africa will play its part in
supporting efforts that can help bring lasting peace,
security and stability to Somalia. In that regard, the
South African Government, on 13 March, signed an
agreement on the establishment of diplomatic relations
with Somalia, during the visit of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs to South Africa. South Africa is
committed to providing capacity- and institutionbuilding, socio-economic support, as well as specified
training in key Government sectors.
With three months of the transition remaining, the
political leadership in Somalia, with the support of the
international community, must take full advantage of
the opportunities in the political and security sphere in
placing the country on a trajectory of sustained peace,
stability and long-term development.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to welcome the President of the Transitional Federal
Government of the Somali Republic, Mr. Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative Augustine
Mahiga for their briefings and for their personal
commitment to stabilization in Somalia.
The Kampala Accord of 9 June 2011, the
Mogadishu road map of 6 September 2011, the
reinforcement of support for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) decided in September
2011, and the thorough reconfiguration of AMISOM
decided in February by the Security Council were all
decisive stages aimed at a single objective, namely,
stabilizing the political and security situation in

11

S/PV.6770

Somalia. Those stages have signalled an unprecedented
support by the international community for Somalia
with a view to altering the destiny of that country. The
international community has done its duty. It has the
right to maintain high expectations from Somali
political officials. Without their involvement, about
which we can still wonder, nothing is possible.
Today, almost a year after Kampala and three
months from the end of the transition period, where do
we stand? At the political level, we are concerned. The
road map had four main tasks, accompanied by specific
timelines, which the Transitional Federal Institutions
signed on to. Today, three of those four tasks have been
set aside in order to focus all efforts on adopting a
constitution and on reforming current institutions, thus
putting an end to the transition period that began in
2004. Unfortunately, even in that single area, certain
timelines that were set by the international community
and the Somalis themselves have not been met and the
political process is now delayed by several weeks.
We therefore need a new impetus, and that
impetus begins with appointing members of a Somali
Constituent Assembly. The clan leaders, currently
meeting in Mogadishu, must move forward and put
national interests before their own in order to appoint
without delay Somalis who would represent all
categories of society, in particular women, who will be
part of the Assembly in charge of reviewing the draft
constitution. That impetus would also involve
finalizing the text of the draft constitution. The drafting
experts must complete their work, bearing in mind two
elements: first, this is a provisional text that could be
subject to further improvement later on and, secondly,
the text must respect human rights in accordance with
Somalia’s international commitments.
Of course, the end of the transition period is not
to everyone’s liking. Some seem to be interested in
continuing the current instability in order to preserve
political influence or to derive financial benefit. To
those who want to prevent their compatriots from
living in peace, the international community is today
ready to say that they can no longer conspire with
impunity. The joint letter from the United Nations, the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, which was issued a few days ago by
Mr. Mahiga, is very clear. Those who continue to
undermine the political process will be subject to
sanctions from States in the region and from the United
Nations.

12

At the security level, much remains to be done.
Mogadishu continues to be subject to sporadic attacks
and a large part of the territory of Somalia is still not
under the control of the Transitional Federal
Government. But progress has been considerable.
Thanks to the efforts of the AMISOM soldiers,
Al-Shabaab has lost ground and life has resumed in the
Somali capital. We must pay tribute to the Ugandan
and Burundian contingents and to the action taken by
Ethiopia.
We support their efforts. Thanks to the adoption
of resolution 2036 (2012), AMISOM’s means are being
transformed. The force will finally have an airlift
capacity and its troops will be significantly strengthened.
The strengthening is made possible by greater support
from the United Nations, but also support from the
European Union, which, we must remember, has been
financing for several years the entire salary of AMISOM
troops, amounting to approximately $200 million per
year. No other country in the world benefits from such
support. I would like to urge States that would like to
increase their support for security stabilization in
Somalia to provide financial support for AMISOM
soldiers alongside the European Union.
In the long-term, Somalia’s security can only be
ensured by Somalis themselves. The training of Somali
national forces must be a priority. The European Union
is fully engaged along this path in the framework of the
European Union Training Mission for Somalia. A
restructuring of Government forces and strengthening
of the chain of command will still be necessary to
make those forces more effective.
As the transition period is nearing its end, of
course we have to strengthen our efforts for the
development of Somalia, but it is also up to the Somali
authorities and to the people themselves to do their
share and chart their path. One of the challenges in the
coming months will be the development of a new
administration, both national and local, that will be
able to provide basic services to the population, in
particular in the zones freed from Al-Shabaab control,
in order to establish the legitimacy of Somali
authorities. It is up to the Transitional Federal
Government to do its duty, as well as to meet the
expectations of the Somali people. In that regard, we
welcome the holding of the upcoming Istanbul
conference, which we hope will be an opportunity to
breathe new life into those issues.

12-33979

S/PV.6770

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to welcome the President of
the Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic, Mr. Ahmed. We are grateful to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Mahiga, for his assessment of the situation in
Somalia.
In view of the impending conclusion of the
transitional period, achieving the goals of stabilization
and foundation building for Somali statehood requires
more coordinated and vigorous actions on the part of
the international community, as well as a mobilization
of the political will of the Somali authorities. The
country now has a real chance to reach a new level in
its political process. It must take advantage of it and
implement the road map on time on the basis of the
Garoowe principles.
One element of major importance is the
cohesiveness of the Transitional Federal Institutions.
We commend the executive authorities’ willingness to
follow the measures agreed on for overcoming the
crisis. The success of such efforts will depend greatly
on the readiness of all political forces to refrain from
settling scores, set aside their personal interests and
mobilize efforts to advance the political process and
strengthen Government authority in the liberated
territories.
It is important to take the views of a broad crosssection of the Somali people into account and to work
on drafting a new constitution on that basis. This
would be a demonstration of genuine accountability
and the capacity to function during this historically
important period of the country’s development. We
believe that the provision of international aid must be
tied to tangible progress in the peace process.
We must not forget the task of crushing
Al-Shabaab as soon as possible. In that regard, we
regret the loss of momentum in attacking the
extremists’ positions in the south and centre of the
country. While the extremists are surrendering
positions, they still control a large part of Somalia and
are continuing their active resistance, strengthening
alliances with local and foreign sympathizers alike, as
attested to by the ongoing terrorist acts in Mogadishu.
In this situation, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) remains a key element in the struggle with
the extremists. Its rapid expansion, in accordance with
resolution 2036 (2012), will not only make the process

12-33979

of ridding Somalia of Al-Shabaab irreversible, but will
also help create the conditions necessary for further
strengthening the Somali security forces, which will
bear responsibility for the country’s stability after
AMISOM’s departure.
As ever, illegal arms are still entering Somalia
unimpeded, ratcheting up the spiral of violence. It is
more important than ever to strengthen the arms
embargo overall and to cut off the channels that supply
arms to the extremists, including those operating from
Libya and other turbulent regions in Africa and the
Middle East. More thorough verification of compliance
with the embargo is also needed. The acute
humanitarian crisis in Somalia is not diminishing.
Against the backdrop of the ongoing fight against
Al-Shabaab, we cannot expect a drop in the number of
refugees.
As the peace process advances and the extremists
are marginalized, the challenge of economic
development becomes increasingly stark. We hope that
the forthcoming conference on Somalia in Istanbul will
not only help to promote a settlement but will impart
momentum to the country’s economic development.
We support measures designed to broaden the presence
and coordinate the actions of the United Nations
entities in Somalia, while taking all security needs into
account, under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Augustine
Mahiga.
Despite some reduction in the number of
successful attacks, pirate activity along the coast of
Somalia is still not declining. Piracy remains one of the
chief destabilizing factors in the region and continues
to inflict significant economic damage on the
international community. A reliable solution to this
problem is possible only through coordinated action on
land and at sea within the framework of a
comprehensive piracy strategy. Integral to that strategy
would be the fight against impunity, through the
creation of an effective mechanism for the criminal
prosecution of pirates with international participation.
The Russian Federation will pursue its policy of
providing comprehensive assistance to Somalia and
participating actively in the international community’s
efforts to promote a settlement in Somalia.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me first welcome
President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed to this meeting.
We greatly value this timely exchange of views

13

S/PV.6770

between the Council and the Somali leadership. The
transition will end soon, and it is vital that we address
all necessary issues. I would also like to welcome the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Mahiga, and to thank him for his exhaustive
briefing and for his commitment and leadership under
very difficult circumstances.

Let me come to my second point. Three months
ago, the Council reacted very swiftly in adopting
resolution 2036 (2012), which endorsed the new
AMISOM strategic concept and considerably enlarged
the Mission’s scope, mandate and support. That was
another sign of the commitment of the United Nations,
the Security Council and its members to AMISOM. We
welcome AMISOM’s achievements and reiterate our
I will focus briefly on three points: first, the
strong support for the Mission. In the past, my country
political process and the situation on the ground;
has contributed considerably to it and will continue to
secondly, the achievements of the African Union and
do so, bilaterally and within the framework of the
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM); and,
European Union.
finally, the role of the international community and
especially of the European Union (EU).
AMISOM has been key to improvements in the
security situation in Somalia, and without it we would
On my first point, with the end of the transitional
not be where we are today. Apart from its military
period in sight, it is crucial that the targets laid down
achievements, the Mission has contributed to the
by the road map be achieved. Another extension of the
establishment of the Somali National Security Forces.
deadline is inconceivable and unacceptable, and would
Now, it is essential that the Transitional Federal
certainly not be in the interest of Somalia and its
Government finally succeed in establishing a
people. We agree that some progress has been made,
functioning command-and-control structure. The
and in that regard I would like to commend the
Government and the Somali forces must become less
recently launched convention of Somali elders, who
dependent on AMISOM. Responsibilities need to be
will select the members of the Constituent Assembly.
handed over to national forces and administrations,
However, great challenges remain. We are especially in regions where Al-Shabaab has been
worried about the ongoing infighting in and among the driven out.
Transitional Federal Institutions. In particular, the
Let me come to my final point. As I mentioned
continuing deadlock in the Transitional Federal
earlier, Germany has supported Somalia, among others,
Parliament is having troublesome effects on the whole
through the European Union. In that context, I would
transitional process. Let me be very clear — the
like to recall the substantial contributions the European
international community has always supported Somalia,
Union has made so far. The training of Somali security
especially since the country has found itself in dire
forces in Uganda by the European Union Training
straits and dealing with instability. The United Nations
Mission for Somalia, in close cooperation with
has deployed some of the largest peacekeeping
AMISOM, is only one example. Furthermore, and in
operations in the country, and many regional and
addition to its counter-piracy engagement at sea, the
individual actors have stood and still stand by the
European Union will launch an additional mission to
country and its people.
enhance the capabilities of the States in the region in
The past 20 years have taught us one lesson. the field of maritime security and to develop their legal
There is no solution to the conflict without strong frameworks. In Somalia, in addition to support for the
political will on the part of the Somali political actors legal system, a coastal police force will be trained in
themselves and without their earnest efforts to provide order to help end the criminal activities of pirates that
for a better, peaceful future for all Somalis. Looking at add to the instability and insecurity in Somalia, and
past and current support for Somalia, we simply do not thereby to the misery of Somalia’s people.
agree that what is lacking is international support. Nor
The transitional process will end in August. In the
must such language be used as an excuse for delays
few weeks that are left, it is crucial to focus and work
and failures in the transitional process. There are many
effectively to achieve that goal. That is first and
tasks remaining unresolved that do not even require
foremost the responsibility of the Somalis themselves.
financial support. Let me also stress that future support
They can be assured that the international community
will depend on results. We cannot accept a call for
will continue to support them.
more when there is no real progress.

14

12-33979

S/PV.6770

Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
first like to welcome to New York the President of the
Somali Republic, His Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed, whose participation in this meeting of
the Council testifies to his Government’s commitment
to all initiatives aimed at finding a solution to the longstanding crisis in Somalia. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Augustine Mahiga for his detailed briefing,
his presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Somalia (S/2012/283) and his
ongoing commitment in support of peace and stability
in the country.
The commitment of the international community
to peace and institution-building in Somalia since the
last report (S/2012/74) gives grounds for optimism
about the country’s future in the light of the progress
made, even if there remains a need for further progress
in the transition process. That commitment has allowed
the Transitional Federal Government and its allied
forces to exercise their authority beyond Mogadishu,
particularly in important strategic cities in the south
and central part of Somalia and in newly recovered
areas. Moreover, real progress has been made in terms
of security, the drafting of the constitution, political
openness and reconciliation and good governance,
despite the delay in implementing the road map due to
the lack of resources and the crisis that now exists
within the Transitional Federal Parliament.
Notwithstanding that progress, a number of
important questions remain with respect to the
implementation of the agreed principles. For example,
we would mention here the need not to limit provisions
in the draft constitution having to do with fundamental
rights and freedoms. Moreover, as was noted by the
International Contact Group on Somalia and the
London Conference, it is necessary to take appropriate
measures against spoilers of the peace process.
In terms of security, despite repeated attacks in
March, especially the explosion that took place in April
at the National Theatre of Mogadishu, which the
Council firmly condemned in a press release, it is
undeniable that Al-Shabaab continues to lose ground,
even while it has aligned itself with other militia in
Puntland. As indicated in the report of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission of 20 March, the
defections that have taken place in its ranks are likely
to further weaken that terrorist movement.

12-33979

None of that would have been possible without
the work done by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), whose operational effectiveness
allowed for the achievement of encouraging results. In
that respect, Togo welcomes the establishment of the
Military Operations Coordinating Committee, whose
cooperation with other bodies has allowed the structure
of the enhanced force headquarters to be reworked and
wide-scale operations to be conducted in a number of
sectors.
The hope that is being reborn in Somalia thanks
to the efforts of the Transitional Federal Government
and the international community must not lead us to
overlook the fact that it is primarily up to the Somalis
themselves to provide for the security of their country.
They are the only ones who can sustainably establish
the security and stability that the population has
aspired to for a number of decades. It is also urgent to
achieve an independent security sector as soon as
possible. We share the opinion that the independence of
the sector requires strategic planning and orientation,
training and equipping the military and the police,
modernizing the justice and prison systems, and
establishing
a
programme
for
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of combatants who
have abandoned Somali rebel groups. Togo takes this
opportunity to once again thank the European Union,
the United States, the United Kingdom and all other
partners that are providing different forms of
substantial support to AMISOM and to the Somali
Government forces.
The report indicates that piracy continues in the
high-risk area and is seen through increasingly
ambitious attacks, a hardening of violence and an
upsurge in the amounts of ransom demanded. Togo
believes that piracy can only be eliminated by
combining enforcement activities and broader efforts
for stabilization in Somalia, by promoting good
governance and the rule of law, by strengthening
Government
institutions
and
by
promoting
socio-economic development.
All of those actions require substantial logistical
and financial means, which neither Somalia nor the
States of the subregion can find by themselves.
External partners therefore need to continue to support
those States in the fight which, once won, will be
beneficial not only for peace in the subregion but also
for freedom of commerce and navigation.

15

S/PV.6770

On the humanitarian side, Al-Shabaab’s ban
imposed on United Nations humanitarian organizations
and non-governmental organizations working in areas
under their control remains in force, as indicated in the
report. The ban contributes to the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation in the regions in the southern
part of the country, which is the homeland of the vast
majority of those affected by the crisis, who are
suffering in particular from malnutrition.
Moreover, reports indicate that targeting killings
by Al-Shabaab are taking place in areas they have
recently lost. Cases of rape and sexual violence against
displaced women and girls have also been noted. Togo
believes that Al-Shabaab’s violent behaviour in areas
they are losing is unacceptable and requires more
vigilance and spontaneous reactions from Government
forces and AMISOM in securing areas taken from the
terrorist organization.
Togo welcomes the 23 March Human Rights
Council resolution requesting the Secretary-General to
draft a report containing concrete proposals for a more
integrated approach across the United Nations system
for the protection and promotion of human rights in
Somalia. We hope that the international conference on
Somalia to be held in a few days in Turkey will be an
opportunity to further debate the question.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country’s appreciation to the troop-contributing
countries, AMISOM, donor countries and organizations
for the invaluable sacrifices they continue to make to
provide for a return of stability to Somalia and to
maintain peace and security in the entire Horn of
Africa region.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to welcome the presence here
today of His Excellency President Sheikh Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed and to thank him for having shared with
Council members his assessment of the situation in his
country, his concerns and his expectations from the
international community. I would also like to thank
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his commitment and his
dedication to his mission of peace and reconciliation in
Somalia.
Morocco welcomes the ongoing interest that the
Security Council is attaching to Somalia in order to
assist a country that has been ravaged by a bloody war
for 20 years and to bring its people out of violence and

16

instability. That interest has been amply shown by the
London Conference held on 23 February, the results of
which, we hope, will be consolidated and built upon by
the Istanbul conference scheduled for the 31 May.
Morocco is pleased with the steps taken and the
progress made on the political and security fronts in
Somalia, which have been implemented through
establishing the Djibouti peace process and the road
map in order to turn the page on the transition. The
openness of the Transitional Federal Government in the
areas it has recovered and the agreement on modalities
for a Constituent Assembly represent real progress for
the Somali people.
However, in spite of that progress, the situation
remains fragile and reversible, as has been noted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
because not only do some portions of the national
territory remain outside of the control of the central
Government, but the central Government is confronted
with terrorist acts by Al-Shabaab, particularly in the
north of the country, with all of the human and
humanitarian consequences flowing from it for
hundreds of thousands of refugees and displaced
persons.
My country emphatically condemns the terrorist
activities of Al-Shabaab and the acts of piracy that
have been staged off the shores of Somalia in spite of
the efforts of the international community to secure the
waters off the Horn of Africa. These efforts, both on
land and on sea, need to be strengthened and bolstered
by the establishment of the rule of law and capacitybuilding for the Somali Government in this area.
Morocco stands in solidarity with the people of
Somalia and supports their legitimate aspirations to
peace and stability. My country remains committed to
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and national unity of Somalia.
However, meeting these objectives will require an
inclusive dialogue, the will to reconcile, and respect
for the commitments undertaken under the peace
agreement, the road map and the Kampala Accord to
end the transitional period. In this respect, we call on
all parties to intensify their efforts to finalize the draft
constitution and create the conditions for elections to
take place smoothly. These timetables are critical to
opening up reassuring and promising prospects for the
post-transition period.

12-33979

S/PV.6770

Somalia finds itself at a crucial juncture, as noted
by all Council members. Somalis, as it stands, must
overcome their differences and put their country’s
peace, stability, reconciliation and unity above their
personal ambitions and partisan differences. They will
need to exhibit the political will to unite to confront the
challenges of terrorism, insecurity and threats to the
unity of the country.
Somalia owes a great deal to the United Nations
and to the international community for the progress it
has made to date in the political and security fields and
for the assistance generously provided to displaced
persons. In particular, we welcome the efforts of the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, which has headquartered
in Mogadishu since 24 February, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), chaired by the Permanent Representative
of India.
However, more solidarity and commitment are
required on the part of the international community to
make the critical period immediately following the end
of the transitional period one in which the gains made
thus far are maintained and consolidated. Morocco and
all of Africa are prepared to pursue their efforts to
support the people of Somalia in its quest for stability,
unity and reconciliation.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this debate only three months before the end of the
transitional period in August. Allow me to also
welcome and commend the statements made by His
Excellency Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, and
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, whose briefing was a clear
illustration of the situation and the current challenges.
While we view with optimism the progress made
in the implementation of certain tasks established in
the road map, we understand that the current
humanitarian, political and military situation in
Somalia is not free from risks or difficulties. Given the
fragile situation, we must redouble our efforts to
strengthen the gains we have made in different areas
and to lay the foundations for restoring peace and
stability and fostering sustainable social and economic
development.

12-33979

Although the security situation, especially in
Mogadishu, has improved, the situation in the outskirts
of the city and in some parts of the south and centre of
Somalia remains unstable. Despite the progress made
by the Somali forces and the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), the terrorist attacks of
Al-Shabaab continue to be a serious threat for the
Transitional Federal Institutions, the AMISOM forces
and the political process itself.
It is increasingly important to effectively use the
mechanisms established by the Organization, including
the regime under resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009), to impose appropriate measures on internal and
external actors seeking to undermine the peace and
reconciliation process in Somalia; to identify the
leaders of armed groups who impede the provision of,
access to and distribution of humanitarian assistance;
and to apply the relevant sanctions in order to restrict
the charcoal trade. It is also crucial to step up our
monitoring and identification of arms embargo
violations and to impose selective sanctions, when
necessary, in order to reduce the effects that this could
have in the Somali context.
We acknowledge the significant contribution of
AMISOM to the quest for peace in Somalia. We note
the progress achieved with the expansion of AMISOM
after the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) and its
deployment beyond Mogadishu for the first time since
its establishment. Nonetheless, we must persevere in
our efforts to establish a presence in the four sectors
established under the strategic concept. It is also
crucial to continue to provide equipment, technical
assistance and financing for the salaries of the troops
and unconditional financing for the Mission through
the United Nations Trust Fund for AMISOM.
Similarly, we must provide greater technical,
financial and training resources to the Transitional
Federal Government forces so that they can deploy on
land and in coastal waters and play a more important
role in the operations under way.
Taking the long-term perspective, any sound and
lasting solution to the problem of piracy off the coast
of Somalia must be part of a broader initiative aimed at
national institutional capacity-building in which the
economic, security, judicial and penal dimensions are
implemented simultaneously.
We must harmonize and synchronize political and
military efforts with a view to a genuine stabilization

17

S/PV.6770

of the situation in Somalia. We therefore feel that it is
important to support the Transitional Federal
Government’s efforts to reach areas that were recently
recovered, and in particular the national policy for the
reconciliation and stabilization of the freed areas in the
south and centre of Somalia.
Given the imminent end of the transitional
period, Somali leaders must work together, set aside
their differences, put the interests of the Somali people
before their own personal interests, and thereby
complete the implementation of the road map on
schedule. A commitment in this direction will pave the
way for them to move together towards a general and
lasting solution to the situation in Somalia in this
critical phase of the political process.
While the Transitional Federal Government has
the primary responsibility for restoring security,
political stability, the rule of law and economic
development, it is also crucial that the international
community continue to provide its support for
institutional strengthening and national capacitybuilding. The upcoming Conference on Somalia to be
held in Istanbul will be an ideal forum in which to
tackle the immediate challenges facing Somalia and to
begin to plan for long-term solutions that would
establish the conditions to foster sustainable economic
and social development.
In conclusion, I would like to urge the Somali
authorities and other relevant actors to continue to play
a constructive role and to comply with their obligations
in implementing the road map so that the deadlines set
for the end of the transition period in August can be
met. The impetus for and the vision of a stable and
stronger Somali State must be upheld as the primary
long-term objective.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to thank
Special Representative Augustine Mahiga for his very
helpful briefing and analysis. Allow me also to thank
His Excellency President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
for his presence and for his statement.
Portugal welcomes the progress made to date in
the implementation of the Kampala road map. However,
we are concerned about delays in implementing some
of its key tasks, as well as the negative impact of the
long-lasting impasse in the Transitional Federal
Parliament. With only three months to go until the end
of the political transition in Somalia, we must reiterate
that it is up to the Somali leadership to seize this

18

opportunity and to implement its commitments to
ensure that the 20 August deadline is met.
It is crucial that the Somali authorities implement
the Garoowe principles, which provide a solid basis for
the way forward with the establishment of new
institutions and the adoption of a new constitution by a
representative Constituent Assembly in full transparency.
The constitution, subject to a national referendum in
due course, must be underpinned by respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms, including the rights
of women and of persons belonging to minorities, and
must create a framework for all Somalis to take part in
public life. At the same time, it is essential to guarantee
the accessibility and deliverance of basic services to
the population, to support sustainable peace and
development, to build an effective Government, and to
re-establish an independent judiciary.
While the international community’s will and
determination in continuing to support the Somali
people are clear, as demonstrated by the continuous
hard work of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Augustine Mahiga, whose efforts I wish to
commend, and by the upcoming Istanbul Conference
on 31 May and 1 June, as well as the International
Somalia Contact Group meeting in Rome on 2 and
3 July, responsibility for the delivery of a political
solution lies with the Somalis themselves. Portugal
echoes the Secretary-General’s view that appropriate
action should be taken against those who are judged to
be blocking or undermining progress.
Portugal recognizes and commends the crucial
role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in bringing security to the country. The
adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) and the significant
strengthening of AMISOM that it authorized are a clear
expression of the political importance and
appropriateness of the continued and significant
support to allow the Mission to fulfil its mandate.
Through the United Nations and the European Union,
Portugal will continue its support to AMISOM.
In that regard, allow me to call on the new troopcontributing countries to fully integrate their forces
into the AMISOM command and control structure, in
line with the aforementioned resolution. Allow me also
to call on other donors to contribute to sustainable
funding for AMISOM and to provide force enablers to
allow the Mission to operate effectively.

12-33979

S/PV.6770

Furthermore, I would like to acknowledge the
efforts made to date by all partners involved in military
action in Somalia to minimize the negative impact of
military intervention on Somali civilians and to protect
their human rights. I encourage them to continue to do
so.
The unbroken commitment of the Somali
authorities to effective governance and security is
central to consolidating AMISOM’s military gains on
the ground and to ensuring the governance of
territories previously under Al-Shabaab rule. We take
this opportunity to call on the Transitional Federal
Institutions to fully embrace the leadership of that
process. Through the European Union Training Mission,
to which Portugal will provide 16 military troops in
2012, we will continue to support the development of
the Somali national security forces. We encourage
other donors to join that process.
Likewise, we recall the importance of continued
support and humanitarian assistance to Somalia. We are
concerned about the impoverishment of the population
owing to the prevailing conflict and the persistent
drought, as well as the implications of such a situation
with the growing number of refugees in the region. As
the Secretary-General underlines in his report
(S/2012/283), the humanitarian situation continues to
be fragile and the progress made remains reversible.
Portugal urges all parties to ensure full and unhindered
access for humanitarian aid across the country so that
vulnerable people can be reached.
As the security and political situation registers
progress, the achievements made to date in Somalia
will only be sustainable if all stakeholders continue to
pursue a multifaceted response to the country’s
underlying causes of instability, including by building
stability at the local level and by stepping up the action
to tackle the threats posed by piracy and terrorism.
Portugal has always argued that piracy is a
problem of organized crime, with onshore roots in
Somalia. Its causes are related to the conflict that has
ravaged Somalia for over two decades and the severe
impoverishment of the population, particularly the
coastal communities. We are especially worried about
the expansion of piracy attacks throughout the Indian
Ocean, reaching as far south as the coast of
Mozambique and eastwards towards the shores of India.
In concluding, allow me to underline that time is
of the essence. As the Secretary-General clearly said,

12-33979

despite the challenges, there is a real opportunity to
move the country to a new phase in the political
process. For that to happen, Somali leaders must unite
in the commitment to ending the transition in August.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, we would like to welcome the President
of the Transitional Federal Government, His
Excellency Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, and to thank
him for his presence. It reaffirms his commitment to
the struggle to resolve the conflict that has devastated
his country for many years. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Augustine
Mahiga, for presenting the report before us
(S/2012/283) and for his tireless work as head of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia.
Over several months, we have seen encouraging
signs and important and positive developments in
Somalia, in particular in the context of its situation in
recent years. We acknowledge that the coming months
represent a possible turning point for the future of
Somalia, and hence for the entire Horn of Africa region.
Guatemala welcomes the efforts made to date,
which have the potential to launch a new phase in the
quest for stability and peace. From our own past
experiences, we understand the importance of acting
decisively and resolutely and of not tolerating any
impediment that could overturn the set goals. Allow me
to make a few specific comments.
On the implementation of the road map, my
delegation believes concluding the drafting and the
adoption of the new constitution to be a priority. The
adoption of the constitution is also a starting point for
national reconciliation. We commend efforts to
establish the Constituent Assembly, which is a
fundamental requirement for the process to succeed.
The new interim constitution should reflect the
aspirations of all Somali people and must meet
international standards of human rights, including the
rights of women and children.
The election of the members of the Constituent
Assembly and the new parliament is of paramount
importance. The credibility and legitimacy of those
bodies depend on it. Members must represent the broad
diversity of the Somali people.
Guatemala considers it essential to end the
transitional period on 20 August, in line with the road
map and as reaffirmed in Garoowe Conferences I and II

19

S/PV.6770

and Gaalkacyo. We agree with the Special
Representative of Secretary-General that the transition
should be Somali-led. At the same time, the people of
Somalia must know that that the international
community, and especially the Security Council, will
support them throughout the peace process.
Like other delegations, we take note of the joint
letter from the United Nations, the African Union and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
Resolution 2036 (2012) reaffirms the decision of the
Security Council to take action against internal and
external actors involved in actions aimed at
undermining the peace process. My delegation will
support all actions necessary to ensure the full
implementation of the road map and to end the
transition by 20 August. There can be no more
extensions.
On the security strategy, we believe that the peace
process largely depends on the successful expansion of
the security strategy across Somalia. We believe that
the strategic coordination and expanded operations of
AMISOM are already showing positive results, and
hope for its timely deployment to the sectors outlined
in paragraph 91 of the Secretary-General’s report. We
fully support the expansion and implementation of
stabilization plans to the recovered areas. The
establishment of local administrations capable of
providing basic services to their population will be
essential. We are grateful to all international partners
for their continued support to Somalia, in particular to
the troop-contributing countries for their sacrifices, and
to donor countries.
To ensure that the political process continues, we
must redouble our efforts to end terrorism. Despite the
successful military operations of AMISOM, Al-Shabaab
is still a threat, attacking innocent Somalis and others.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia and the Gulf of Aden
continues to pose a serious threat to maritime safety
and economic development of countries in the region.
We reiterate that piracy is a consequence of the
challenges facing Somalia on land. It is therefore
important that the Security Council support Somalia in
addressing the underlying causes of piracy. Although
the number of acts of piracy has decreased, thanks to
the concrete measures taken, it is disturbing to note
that criminal activity is still entrenched, as mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General, and that there
are still many cases of piracy and hostage-taking, even
beyond the coast of Somalia.

20

On the humanitarian situation, although we are
pleased that Somalia is no longer suffering from
famine, the situation remains fragile. We hope that by
improving the security situation, conditions conducive
to undertaking unhindered humanitarian activities will
increase, especially considering that Al-Shabaab
continues to prevent several humanitarian organizations
from working in the areas it controls, which
significantly hampers the provision of assistance to
people in need. The international community needs to
show greater solidarity with the people of Somalia
regarding the provision of humanitarian assistance.
We remain concerned in particular by the plight
of Somali women and children, many of whom are
vulnerable to higher levels of sexual violence because
of their gender. We urge the international community to
continue to provide vital assistance to these and others
in need in Somalia and its neighbours.
Finally, we commend the Government of Turkey
and the Secretary-General for organizing the next
conference in Istanbul at such a crucial moment for
Somalia. We will be represented at the meeting.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by welcoming President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed
to the Security Council. His participation and statement
in the meeting today underscore the commitment that
the leadership of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) has shown towards the stabilization of the
situation in Somalia. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine
Mahiga for his insightful briefing.
Clearly, the political process in Somalia has
entered a decisive phase towards ending the transition
in August. Against this backdrop, today’s debate should
help the Council to take stock of the progress made so
far in the implementation of the road map, identify the
challenges, and decide on the ways and means to
address those challenges.
During the past year, significant progress has
been made by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the TFG and allied forces in the security
sector. Though Al-Shabaab has carried out some
spectacular terrorist attacks, security gains have by and
large been sustained in Mogadishu. This has facilitated
the revival of economic activities. The relocation of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu in January this year was an important
milestone in this regard. Security forces, led by

12-33979

S/PV.6770

AMISOM and assisted by Kenyan and Ethiopian troops,
have also recovered several areas from Al-Shabaab in
southern and central Somalia. In this connection,
strengthening AMISOM with more predictable and
sustainable resources, in accordance with resolution
2036 (2012), should facilitate further gains against
Al-Shabaab.
Al-Shabaab, however, remains a potent force and,
with its recent affiliation with Al-Qaida continues to
pose a serious threat to peace and security in Somalia
and the larger region. The recent attacks in Mogadishu
and southern Somalia confirm its capability. It is
therefore necessary to expedite stabilization and
reconciliation in the liberated areas and to restrict
sources of Al-Shabaab’s revenue and weapons. All
parties should strictly implement the ban on the trade
in charcoal, in accordance with resolution 2036 (2012).
We have noted that the TFG has set up district security
committees as part of its outreach efforts in the liberated
areas. We think that adoption of a national security and
stabilization plan will facilitate stabilization and
reconciliation in these areas and should be expedited.
Given the fragile security situation, our continued
support to AMISOM remains critical, in addition to the
capacity-building of Somali security forces. We have
noted the progress made towards the full deployment
of AMISOM’s mandated strength and its deployment
plans. We commend the troop-contributing countries
for their commitments in that regard and we hope that
the Council will further expand its support for AMISOM
in accordance with the recommendations of the African
Union (AU). India, on its part, made an uncaveated
contribution of $2 million in 2011 to the AU and
United Nations Trust Funds for AMISOM, and will
make another contribution of $1 million this year.
The gains on the security front need to be
matched by the progress on the political track. We hope
that the Transitional Federal Institutions and other
Somali stakeholders will fully cooperate and
implement the decisions of the first and second
Garoowe Consultative Constitutional Conferences in a
time-bound manner. In that regard, we have taken note
of efforts that are being made in Mogadishu and the
regions and hope that those efforts are as broad-based
as possible to ensure inclusivity in the process by
taking into consideration the traditional social structure
and accommodating existing regional authorities into
the federal system.

12-33979

The problem of piracy and hostage-taking off the
coast of Somalia remains a matter of serious concern
for India. In spite of counter-piracy measures, the
number of attempted pirate attacks increased by 65 per
cent in 2011. Pirates are currently holding 16 ships and
nearly 300 hostages. We would therefore like to
reiterate the need for the international community to
adopt a comprehensive counter-piracy strategy that
also addresses the inhuman conditions in which pirates
hold hostages.
In conclusion, I would like to say that, as we
approach the end of transition in Somalia, the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, should remain vigilant of forces that have the
potential to undermine the process. The international
community should also remain engaged with Somali
stakeholders and provide assistance in political,
security and humanitarian spheres, as required by the
post-transition Somali authorities. As noted by the
Secretary General, the investment of the international
community will be fundamental to the long-term
recovery and development of Somalia. In that regard,
we welcome the conference scheduled to be held in
Istanbul later this month and hope that it will build on
the gains of the London Conference held in February.
India, for its part, will continue to partner with all
stakeholders for the stabilization of the situation in
Somalia. India will also continue to extend its support
for the capacity-building of Somali national institutions
through human resources development. We recently
increased the number of scholarships for Somali
students and experts. We will also continue our
cooperation in the information technology sector in
Somalia.
We hope that, with our collective efforts, the
people of Somalia will be able to turn a new page in
their history in August and achieve sustainable peace
and enduring stability in the country.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Mahiga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia, for his briefing. I
would also like to welcome to this meeting His
Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President
of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.
The Somali peace process is at a key stage. We
welcome the steady progress made in implementing the
road map on ending the transition period, the headway
made in efforts to draft a constitution and hold

21

S/PV.6770

parliamentary elections, the military gains that have
been achieved and the noteworthy improvement in the
humanitarian situation in the country. We also note that
the peace process continues to face many difficulties.
Tensions have increased within the Transitional Federal
Parliament, with and adverse impact on the
implementation of the road map. The potential for new
conflicts is emerging in various regions. And the
humanitarian situation in Somalia continues to be
fragile.
China believes that national reconciliation is the
only way to restore peace and stability in Somalia. We
support Somalia in continuing to implement the
Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement,
the Kampala Accord and the Garoowe principles, as
well as in fully implementing the road map and ending
the transitional period on time. We hope that the parties
in Somalia will place the interests of the country and
its people first and, in a spirit of solidarity and
reconciliation, overcome differences through dialogue
and consultation as soon as possible, so as not to
unnecessarily disrupt the peace process.

Mahiga and his team for their important work in
Somalia.
With the approaching end of the transition period,
in three months’ time, a new page is being turned in the
history of Somalia. It is our shared hope that August
will be a propitious month with regard to ending the
conflict and bringing lasting peace to Somalia.
Domestic political consensus among all Somali
stakeholders is essential to usher in a new era. We
recognize the progress achieved at the two Conferences
held in Garoowe and at the follow-up meetings to work
for a representative post-transition Government in
Somalia, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter,
the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala Accord and the
transition road map.
Each step in that challenging journey is
invaluable, since progress towards constitutional
development and State-building is fraught with myriad
obstacles. No one should underestimate the complexity
of addressing such intricate and complex issues as the
nature of federalism, the codification of religious and
tribal traditions and the composition of the Constituent
Assembly. We would therefore like to send a message
of encouragement and solidarity to the Somali people
and their leadership at this critical hour.

We support the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) in further enhancing capacity-building in order
that it can govern effectively the entire territory of
Somalia as soon as possible. We hope that the parties
In the same vein, it is also essential for all
in Somalia will reject violence and join the peace
process unconditionally at the earliest possible moment. political stakeholders in Somalia to seize this moment
in history, rise above their differences and work
In the current circumstances, the international
towards a broader agreement on pending road map
community should continue to support the mediation
issues. The unique opportunity that is presenting itself
efforts of the United Nations, the African Union (AU)
in form of unanimity on the broad contour of future
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
governance and the political framework, as well as the
support the TFG in strengthening capacity-building,
sustained engagement of international community,
and encourage the parties to implement the road map in
must not be lost.
good faith. China welcomes the AU report published
Political progress in Somalia will remain fragile
on 20 March on its Mission in Somalia. We hope that
the United Nations will continue to strengthen its without corresponding gains in the area of security.
logistical support to the Mission and to effectively The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
implement resolution 2036 (2012). We welcome the (AMISOM) in ensuring security and development, and
successful London Conference on Somalia and look thereby consolidating political gains, is absolutely
forward to the same positive results at the conference critical. The African Union and countries contributing
troops to AMISOM deserve special praise and all
to be held later this month in Istanbul.
possible assistance. We welcome the increased role of
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
AMISOM in enhancing the effectiveness of Somali
Mr. President, for arranging today’s meeting. We
forces.
warmly welcome His Excellency President Sharif
Sheikh Ahmed to the Security Council and thank him
The Secretary-General’s latest report on Somalia
for his briefing. Our appreciation also goes to Special (S/212/283) rightly underscores the scarcity of
Representative of the Secretary-General Augustine resources as undermining progress on the integration of

22

12-33979

S/PV.6770

Somalia’s armed forces, on the development of civilian
police and justice systems and on programmes for
demobilized combatants. The Secretary-General has also
highlighted the fact that, besides the impasse within the
Transitional Federal Parliament, the lack of resources
also obstructs the smooth implementation of the road
map. While appreciating all financial contributions made
in Somalia, we hope that the issue of resources will
merit our due attention, as rightly pointed out by
President Ahmed, who called for financial and
capacity-building support for various institutions of
Somalia.
Pakistan supports a comprehensive approach to
addressing maritime piracy off the coast of Somalia
and in the Gulf of Aden. We have consistently
emphasized the need to tackle that menace by
addressing its root causes, which include, inter alia,
economic downturn, unemployment and environmental
damage to Somali coastal areas. To counter piracy, we
support the addition of a maritime component to
AMISOM, as well as the actions of the international
naval coalition against piracy. Pakistan is an active
participant in that coalition. We also urge that we not
lose sight of the plight of many hostages, including
Pakistani nationals, being held by the pirates and that
we work towards their early release. Any help that the
Government of Somalia can possibly extend in that
regard would be highly appreciated. The entire
Pakistani nation is worried about the hostages. The
President of Pakistan, His Excellency Mr. Asif Ali
Zardari, is personally overseeing efforts for their
release.
We share the concerns expressed by previous
speakers about the humanitarian situation in Somalia.
Despite improvement with regard to the famine
situation, humanitarian challenges persist and require
our sustained attention.
In conclusion, we commend the initiative of
Turkey in hosting the forthcoming Istanbul conference
on Somalia. We hope that the event will contribute to
realizing the aspirations of the Somali people for a
better life and future. We also hope that it will promote
the objective of long-term peace and stability in
Somalia with full respect for its unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We wish the initiative every
success.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.

12-33979

At the outset, I would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed, President
of the Transitional Federal Government of the Somali
Republic, and to thank him for his statement. We are
also grateful to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Augustine Mahiga for his briefing and for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/283).
I would like to reiterate to the Somali authorities
our strong support for their efforts to overcome
difficulties, to achieve reconciliation and to build a
secure, stable, united, democratic and prosperous nation.
Azerbaijan stresses the importance of a consistent,
strong commitment on the part of the Security Council
and the broader international community to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and unity of Somalia.
We welcome the progress in recent months on the
political and security fronts in Somalia, which
confirms the commitment of the Transitional Federal
Government to the implementation of the road map to
end the transition. We are encouraged by the fact that,
despite some difficulties and delays, the implementation
of the road map is proceeding. Considerable tasks have
been accomplished. As the Secretary-General notes in
his report, there is a real opportunity, which must be
seized, to move the country to a new phase in the
political process.
It is obvious that Somalia is responsible for its
own peace, stability, development and prosperity and
that the leadership and all political stakeholders in
Somalia must unite in the commitment to ending the
transition in August and to addressing the challenges
ahead. At the same time, continued international
support to the process remains critical.
Azerbaijan pays tribute to the United Nations, the
African Union, the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the troop-contributing countries for
their continuing commitment to bringing peace and
stability to the country. We are encouraged by the
further consolidation of the partnership between the
United Nations and the African Union. I would also
like to commend the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation for its contribution to achieving peace and
national reconciliation in Somalia and for mobilizing
assistance for the urgent needs of the peoples affected
by the humanitarian crisis in that country.

23

S/PV.6770

Both the International Contact Group on Somalia
and the London Conference highlighted the need for
action against spoilers of the peace process. It is
crucial to continue all necessary efforts to effectively
address the threats and challenges to the successful
implementation of the road map, including through
supporting and implementing measures against those
internal and external actors or groups who seek to
undermine or block the peace process in Somalia.
Non-conventional attacks by Al-Shabaab are a
matter of serious concern, as are the reports about its
announced strengthened alliance with Al-Qaida and
other militia groups in the country. As Somali forces
and AMISOM continue to make territorial gains, it is
critical, among other measures, to continue assisting
them to build their capacity to effectively confront and
prevent asymmetric attacks and to improve civilian
security.
The long-awaited durable peace in Somalia
demands the economic recovery of the country through
integrated national and international efforts. We concur

24

with the Secretary-General that the end of the transition
should encourage the international community to invest
seriously in the long-term recovery and development of
Somalia. We look forward to the Istanbul conference
and its outcome as a next important milestone in the
international community’s collaboration for the sake of
peace and development in Somalia.
The humanitarian situation in Somalia requires
continued attention. We stress the importance of lasting
support to Somalia in that regard, as well as the need to
redouble efforts to find long-term solutions for
internally displaced persons.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12:40 p.m.

12-33979
