81

Resolutions adopted on the report& of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its third report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session. 6
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

D
VOLUNTARY FUNDS ADMINISTERED BY THE UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES

The General Assembly
l. Accepts the accounts of the voluntary funds administered by the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees for the financia) year ended 31 December
1965 and the certificates of the Bqard of Auditors ;7
2. Takes note of the observations of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
as set forth in its fourth report to the General Assembly
at its twenty-first session. 8
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.
2140 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies In
the memhership of the Committee on Contributions
A

The General Assembly
l. Appoints the following person as a member of
the Committee on Contributions:
Mr. John I. M. Rhodes;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes to be appointed for a period
beginning on the date of the present resolution and
ending on 31 December 1968.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

B
The General Assembly
l. Appoints the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions :
Mr. Amjad Ali,
Mr. Jorge Pablo Fernandini,
Mr. Evgeny Nikolaevich Makeev,
Mr. Maurice Viaud;
2. Declares Mr. Ali, Mr. Fernandini, Mr. Makeev
and Mr. Viaud to be appointed for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 1967.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 November 1966.

•

•

•

As a result of the above appointments, the Committee on
Contributions will be composed as follows: Mr. Amjad ALI
(Pakistan), Mr. Raymond T. BoWMAN (United States of
America), Mr. Jorge Pablo FERNANDINI (Peru), Mr. LouisDenis HuDoN (Canada), Mr. F. Nouredin KIA (lran), Mr.
Evgeny Nikolaevich MAKEEV ( Union of Soviet Socialist Re8 !bid.,

Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, docu-

ment A/6378.

7 !bid., Twenty-first Session, Supple»u!'nt No. 6C (A/6306/
Add.3).
8 Jbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 72, document A/6379.

publics), Mr. Stanislaw RACZKOWSKI (Poland), Mr. John I. M.
RHODES (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Jreland), Mr. David SrLVEIRA DA 1foTA (Brasil) and Mr. Maurice
VIAUD (France).

2141 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the membership of the United Nation11
Staff Pension Committee

The General Assembly
l. Appoints the following persons as members of
the United Nations Staff Pension Committee:
Mr. J ohn I. M. Rhodes,
Mr. Wilbur H. Ziehl;
2. Declares Mr. Rhodes and Mr. Ziehl to be appointed for a period beginning on the date of the present resolution and ending on 31 December 1967.
1452nd plenary meeting,
26 October 1966.

•

•

•

As a result of the above appointments, the members and
alternate members elected by the General Assembly to the
United Nations Staff Pension Committee will be the following:
Ml!lMRERS
Mr. José EsPINOZA (Chile);
Mr. John I. M. RHODES (United Kingdom of Great BritaiJJ

and Northern Ireland);
Mr. Wilbur H. ZIEHL (Un,ited States of America).
AI.TERNATE MEMBERS
Mr. Brian J. LYNCH (New Zealand);
Mr. Jean-Oaude RENAUD (France) ;
Mr. Shilendra K. SINGH (ilndia).

2150 (XXI). Report of the Ad Hoc Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the
United Nations and the Specialized Agencies

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2049 (XX) of 13 December
1965 establishing the Ad Hoc Committee of Experts to
Examine the Finances of the United Nations and the
Specialized Agencies,
N oting with appreciation the work done by the Ad
Hoc Committee with the co-operation of the United
N ations Secretariat, the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency and other United
Nations organs and related bodies,
N oting further that the Ad H oc Committee, in compliance with paragraph 6 ( b) of the above-mentioned
resolution, has submitted its recommendations to the
General Assembly in its report dated 19 July 1966,9
Be(J;ring in mind that certain subsequent actions must
be taken by Member States, the U nited N ations organs
and related bodies, and the specialized agencies and
the International Atomic Energy Agency, to ensure
the effective implementation of the recommendations
made by the Ad H oc Committee,
Recognizing that the full implementation of the
recommendations made by the Ad Hoc Committee
would also require the co-operation of the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
9 lbid.,

agenda item 80, document A/6343.

82

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

in the spirit of Article 58 of the Charter of the United
Nations and in the light of the agreernents between them
and the United Nations,
l. Apprmws the report of the Ad H oc Committee
of Experts to Examine the Finances of the Unitecl
Nations ancl the Specialized Agencies and the recommendations contained therein;
2. Urges that the recommendations and comments
contained in the report be given the most attentive
consideration hy Member States and by the United
Nations organs and related bodies with a view to the
earliest implementation oí the recommendations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer of the United Nations, to take the appropriate measures to give effect to those recornmendations
requiring his action, inclucling the submission of proposals to the competent United Nations organs and
related bodies ;
4. Rccommends to the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency that they give the
most attentive consideration to the recommcndations
contained in the report ancl that they take appropriate
measures, within their respective areas of competence,
with a view to the earliest possible implementation oí
those recommendations ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to encourage the adoption of the appropriate measures by
the specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, particularly those reguiring concerted
. action;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to transmit the present resolution and the report of the Ad
H oc Committee to the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session a report
on the implementation of the recommenclations of the
Ad Hoc Committee by the United Nations family of
organizations.
1458th plenary meeting.
4 November 1966.

•

•

•

At the 1501st plenary meeting, on 20 December 1966 the
President of the General Assembly announced that he' had
drawn up the list of countries mentioned in paragraph 67 of
the report of the Ad Hoc C ommittee o/ Experts to Examine
the Financcs of the United Nations and the Specialized Agencies,9 dealing with the establishment of an inspection unit.10
That list comprises the following M ember States: FRANCE,
INDIA, MEx1co, UN10N oF SovIET Soc1Ausr REPUBLrcs, UmrEo
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN !RELAND, UNITED
REPUBLIC 01'
YUGOSLAVIA.

TANZANIA,

UNITED

STATES

01'

AMERICA

and

2157 (XXI). Appointment to fill a vacancy in
the memhership of the Board of Auditors
The General Assembly
Appoints the Auditor-General oí Pakistan as a member of the Board oí Auditors for a three-year term beginning on 1 July 1967.
1478th plenary meeting,
25 November 1966.
10 See A/6635.

As a rcsult of thc aboz•e a¡,point111cnl, thr JJoard of Auditors
will be com/'oscd as fo/lows: the First Prcsi,lent nf thr Audit
Office of llELGlUM, the Auditor-General of CoLOMBIA and
thc Auditor-General nf l'AKISTAN.

2168 (XXI). Appointments to fill vacancies in
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal
The General Assembly
l. A ppoints the following persons as members of
the Unitecl N ations i\d111inistrative Tribunal:
l\fr. lléctor Gros Espicll,
Mr. Zenon Rossicles;
2. Declares Mr. Gros Espiell and Mr. Rossides to
be appointecl for a three-year term beginning on 1
Jannary 1967.
1485th plenary meeting,
6 Decembcr 1966.

As a result of the above appointments, the United Nations
Adminisfrative Tribunal wi/l /;e composcd as follows: Mrs.
Paul BASTID (France), the Right Honourablc Lord (ROOK
( Unitcd K ingdom of Great Britai,i and N orthern lreland)
1Ir. Héctor GROS EsPIELL (Uruguay), Mr. Louis !GNACJ~
PINTO (Dahomey), Mr. Francis T. P. PLJMPTON (United
Stal<'s of A111crica), Mr. Zcnon RossmEs (Cyprus) and Mr.
R VENKATARAMAN (India).

2176 (XXI). United Nations International School
Thc General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral11 ancl the report of the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations International School annexed
there~o! ancl_ the report of the Aclvisory Committee on
Acln11111strat1ve and Budgctary Questions thereon, 12
N oting tha~. the Secretary-General has accepted the
offer by the C1ty of N ew York of a permanent site for
t~c School, as authorizecl by General Assembly resolut1on 2123 (XX) of 21 Deccmber 1965 and has entered
into a ninety-ninc-year lease for this site,
N oting that contracts for the preparation of the site
clctailed specifications for the new buildinrr ancl certai~
other preliminary steps in the constructiin have been
m~cl_e possible by the genero11s contributions of $7.5
m1I11on from the For_d. Founclation to build and equip
the School ancl $1 milhon from the Rockefeller family
to prepare the site,
Recalling that a rnajor condition oí the Ford Fonndatioi:i, gra~t is the establishment oí a Development Fund
wh1ch w1ll ensure the financia! viability of the School
and prornote its eclncational excellence,
Expressing its appreciation to the forty-four Governments which have rnacle. pledges to the Development
Fund and to generous pnvate clonors, whose cornbined
contributions have now brought the total amount oí the
Fund to $1,014,613,
Cognizant of the fact that the Board of Trustees of
th~ School and the Secretary-General believe that a
mmimum of $3 million must be raised to accomplish
the majar purposes of the Fund,
11 pfficial Records of th~ Genera/ Assembly. Twenty-first
Session1 Annexes, agenda 1tem 83, document A/6507.
1 2 Jbzd., document A/6536.
