s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/25257
9 February 1993
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: FRENCH AND SPANISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3172nd meeting, held on 9 February 1993, in connection with
the Council's consideration of the item entitled "Central America: efforts
towards peace":
"The Security Council welcomes with satisfaction the important
progress made thus far towards the full implementation of the Peace
Agreements for El Salvador and the cooperation shown by the parties to
this end. The Security Council takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General dated 23 December 1992 (S/25006) in which he indicates
that the armed conflict between the Government of El Salvador and the
Frente Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) was brought
formally to an end on 15 December 1992. The Council emphasizes this
event, which puts an end to more than 10 years of armed conflict.
"However, the Security Council expresses concern at the observations
made by the Secretary-General in his letter dated 7 January 1993
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/25078), by which he
reported on the situation with regard to the implementation of the
recommendations of the Ad Hoe Commission concerning the purification of
the armed forces of El Salvador and, basically, at the fact that those
recommendations have yet to be fully complied with despite prior
assurances by the Government of El Salvador. The Security Council also
expresses concern at the indication in the letter dated 29 January 1993
from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/25200) that FMLN, despite prior assurances, did not complete
the destruction of its weapons by the agreed deadline and that it is
therefore not yet in full compliance with its undertakings under the
Peace Agreements.
"In this connection, the Security Council emphasizes the solemn
nature of the undertakings made by each of the parties when they signed
the Peace Agreements and reaffirms the obligation of the parties to
comply fully and in a timely fashion with those undertakings.
93-07897

3782h (E)

090293

I •••

S/25257
English
Page 2
"The Council welcomes with satisfaction the decision of the
Government of El Salvador to request the United Nations to verify the
forthcoming general elections and the intention of the Secretary-General,
communicated in his letter dated 26 January 1993 (S/25241) to the
President of the Security Council, to recommend to the Security Council
that it accede to this request.
"The Security Council strongly urges the parties to persist in their
determination to complete the process of bringing peace and national
reconciliation to El Salvador and to continue cooperating with the
Secretary-General in the efforts that he is making to ensure that the
Peace Agreements are implemented fully. To that end, the Council will
follow closely the progress and results of those efforts."
