222

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

----------------------'--------------------------should be continued through establishment of a separate
and identifiable entity in autonomous association with the
United Nations Development Programme,
Taking note of decision 85/33 of 29 June 1985 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme, as well as decision 85/7 of28 June 1985, 97 in
which the Governing Council requested the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme to
develop an internal implementation strategy to strengthen
the capacity of the Programme to deal with issues of
women in development which, calling on the experience of
the Fund, would establish verifiable objectives and a timeframe for implementation,
Recognizing the Fund's dual priorities, to serve as a catalyst with the goal of ensuring the appropriate involvement of women in mainstream development activities, as
often as possible at pre-investment stages, and to support
activities directly benefiting women in line with national
and regional priorities,
Considering the innovative and experimental activities
of the Fund directed towards strengthening both governmental and non-governmental institutional capacities to
ensure access for women to development co-operation
resources and their full participation at all levels in the
development process,
Stressing that general questions of development and
access of women to development resources have, as a
common objective, the creation of conditions which will
improve the quality of life for all,
Aware of the broad range of linkages of the Fund with
Governments, national women's groups, non-governmental organizations and women's research institutes,
besides its close co-operation with United Nations development agencies, including the regional commissions,
Reaffirming that the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, in adopting the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the
Advancement of Women, 51 underlined the necessity of
strengthening the role of women in national and international development programmes,
Taking note of the reports of the Consultative Committee on the Fund on its seventeenth and eighteenth sessions, 98
Taking note also of the report of the Secretary-General,99
l. Expresses its satisfaction that the establishment of
the United Nations Development Fund for Women, in
autonomous association with the United Nations Development Programme, was effected on the agreed target date
of I July 1985, in accordance with the arrangements set
out in General Assembly resolution 39/125;
2. Approves the name United Nations Development
Fund for Women, with the acronym UNIFEM, as the new
name for the Fund, as proposed by the Consultative Committee on the Fund at its seventeenth session, held from
25 to 29 March 1985, in accordance with paragraph 4 of
resolution 39/125 and as reflected in the annex to that resolution;
3. Notes with satisfaction the steps that are being
undertaken to implement resolution 39/125, as well as the
commitment expressed by the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme to ensure the
appropriate involvement of women in mainstream development activities;
97 See Official Records of the Econom,c and Soc,al Council. 1985. Supple
ment No. 11 (El 1985/32 and Corr. I), annex I

98 See A/40/727 and Corr. I, sect. VI.

4. Stresses the need for close and continuous working
relationships between the Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and those bodies, organs and
organizations of the United Nations system and other
agencies concerned with women's issues and development
co-operation;
5. Expresses its appreciation for the contributions to
the Fund made by Governments, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations and individuals, which
have a vital role to play in maintaining and increasing the
financial viability of the Fund and the effectiveness of its
work;
6. Urges Governments to continue and, where possible, to increase their contributions to the Fund, and calls
upon those Governments that have not yet done so to consider contributing to the Fund, in order to enable the Fund
to give greater support to deserving requests received for
technical assistance;
7. Requests the Consultative Committee on the Fund
to continue to monitor the process of implementing the
new arrangements for the management of the Fund, as set
out in the annex to resolution 39/125;
8. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to submit to the Governing
Council of the Programme an annual report on the operations, management and budget of the Fund, taking into
account the advice of the Consultative Committee on the
Fund;
9. Also requests the Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, through the Secretary-General, a report on the activities of the Fund, in
accordance with resolution 39/ 125.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/105. Incorporation of the interests of women in
the work programmes of the regional commissions
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/ l 27 of 14 December 1984, in
particular the reference to the incorporation of women's
concerns in the overall programme of work of each
regional commission and to the regularization of senior
women's programme officers posts,
Convinced that further efforts are needed to ensure adequate consideration of women's concerns within the
regional commissions,
Recognizing the important contribution the senior
women's programme officers can make to the integration
of women in development at the national and regional levels,
I. Takes due note of the report of the Secretary-General on measures taken by the regional commissions to
incorporate women's concerns at all levels in their overall
work programmes and to establish senior wom,,,.n'.-. pm
gramme officers posts; 100
2. Expresses deep concern at the inadequate response
of the regional commissions to the need to incorporate the
interests of women in their economic and social policies
and programmes;
3. Stresses that the integration of women in economic
development as well as in social development is essential
to the well-being of society;
99 A/401727 and Corr I

100 A/40/838

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Invites the executive secretaries of the five regional
commissions to propose to their governing bodies measures for reassessing all individual work programmes in
order to incorporate women's concerns at all levels in their
overall work programmes for the biennium l 988-1989,
taking into account the roles and responsibilities of the
regional commissions in developing and implementing the
system-wide, medium-term plan for women and development 1° 1 and the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for
the Advancement of Women; 51
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take into account
the important role of the regional commissions in promoting the advancement of women when formulating the
system-wide, medium-term plan for women and development and when implementing the Forward-looking Strategies;

6. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session:
(a) On the progress made in implementing paragraphs
5 and 6 of its resolution 39/127;
(b) On the measures proposed by the five regional
commissions to incorporate women's concerns at all levels
in their overall work programmes for the biennium 19881989, as outlined in paragraph 4 above.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/106. National experience relating to the improvement of the situation of women in rural
areas
The General Assembly,
Referring to the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for
the Advancement of Women, adopted by the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, 51
Recalling its resolutions 34/14 of9 November 1979, 37/
59 of 3 December 1982 and 39/ l 26 of 14 December l 984,
concerning the improvement of the situation of women in
rural areas,
Reaffirming the importance attached in the Programme
of Action for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women94 and in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women 75 to
the need to improve the status of women and ensure their
full participation, both as agents and as beneficiaries, in
the development process,
Recognizing the urgent need to take additional appropriate measures aimed at further improving the situation of
women in rural areas,
Convinced that the eradication of apartheid, all forms of
racial discrimination, colonialism, neo-colonialism,
aggression, foreign occupation and domination is essential
to the further improvement of the situation of rural
women,
Considering that the strengthening of international peace
and co-operation is one of the factors contributing to the
further improvement of the situation of rural women,
l. Takes note of the report of the Interregional Seminar on National Experience Relating to the Improvement
of the Situation of Women in Rural Areas, held at Vienna
from 17 to 28 September 1984, as well as the compilation
of observations and comments made by Member States; 102
2. Calls upon Governments to elaborate and implement, as a part of national development strategies, special
IOI See E/1985/45.

223

comprehensive programmes for improving the situation of
women in rural areas and to establish monitoring and
evaluating mechanisms, involving women themselves, for
these programmes;
3. Requests the organizations and funds concerned
within the United Nations system to pay greater attention
to the needs of rural women and to assist Member States,
especially the developing countries, in the implementation
of their national policies and programmes aimed at the
advancement of rural women;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, in consultation with the Member States, a comprehensive report
on the present status and perspectives for the improvement of the situation of rural women, paying special attention, inter alia, to:
(a) Participation of rural women in socio-economic
and political life;
(b) Questions of the exercise by rural women of their
rights;
(c) Role of agricultural co-operatives in the improvement of the situation of women;
(d) Agrarian reform, particularly in favour of rural
women, with a view to improving their situation;
(e) Elimination of illiteracy among rural women and
upgrading of their educational level;
(/) Assistance to rural women in the improvement of
their situation;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit the
report to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session
through the Economic and Social Council.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/107. Expression of appreciation to the Govern-

ment and people of Kenya on the occasion of

the World Conference to Review and
Appraise the Achievements of the United
Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the World Conference to Review and Appraise the
Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women:
Equality, Development and Peace, held at Nairobi from
15 to 26 July 1985,96
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government and
people of Kenya for acting as host to the World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace.
116th plenary meeting
13 December 1985

40/108. Implementation of the Nairobi Forwardlooking Strategies for the Advancement of
Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976 to
1985 the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Bearing in mind the Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 75 which was
102 See A/40/239 and Add. I
