UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

14 DECEMBER

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2405)

. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . , . . . . . . . , , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . I . . . . . I . . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United Nations operation in Cyprus
(S/l5502 and Add.]) . . . . . ., . , , . , , ,, ,. , . . . . . . . ,, . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . ,...

1

S/W .2405

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. , ,) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemrnrs
of the OSJicial Records oj’the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2405th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 14 December 1982, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr. Wlodzimierz

NATORF

(Poland).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2405)

1.

Adoption

9-.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l5502 and
Add. 1)

3. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them the report of the Secretary-General
on
the United Nations operation in Cyprus for the period
I June to 30 November 1982 [S//5502 end Add./].
Members of the Council also have before them the text
of a draft resolution which has been prepared in the
course of consultations [S//.552.?].
4. Unless I hear any objection,
resolution to the vote now.

I shall put the draft

of the agenda
The dsqft rcjsolution
[sc~.solrrtion 526 (I 082) 1.

IIWS udopted

rrnanimously

5. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the representative of Cyprus, upon whom I now call.

The situation in Cyprus:
Report by the Secretary-General
on the United
Nations operation in Cyprus (S/l5502 and Add.1)

6. Mr.
MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus):
Allow
me,
Sir, to congratulate you warmly on your assumption
of the high office of President of the Council, which
reflects a deserved honour to you and to your country,
and to express my appreciation of the skilful mannel
in which you have conducted the consultations on the
draft resolution just adopted renewing the mandate of
the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP)
for another period of six months.

I.
The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives
of Cyprus, Greece and Turkey, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

7. It is a source of satisfaction for my Government
and for myself that the presidency of this important
organ is in the talented and experienced hands of a
distinguished
representative
of a friendly country
with which we share excellent relations. I should like
also to extend our warm congratulations to Mr. Carlos
Ozores Typaldos of Panama, another country with
which Cyprus has the friendliest of relations, on the
efficient and impartial manner in which he carried out
his duties as President of the Council for the month
of November.

Adoption

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to recall that
in the course of consultations, members of the Council agreed that an invitation should be extended to
itir. Nail Atalay in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s
provisional
rules of procedure. If I heal
no objection, I shall take it that the Council decides
to invite Mr, Atalay in accordance with rule 39.

8. I thank the members of the Council for giving
me this opportunity to address them and to explain
once again the tragic situation prevailing in my country as a result of the 1974 Turkish invasion and occupation of a sizeable part of our territory by the Turkish
military forces. We are grateful to the members of the
Council for the renewal of the mandate of UNFICYP.
made necessary by the continuing violation of the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity
of the Republic of Cyprus.
9. I wish once again to reiterate our assurance of
full and constructive co-operation with the Secretary-

General, who since the assumption of his duties has
brilliantly
succeeded in displaying his enlightened
leadership, his exceptional qualities of statesmanship
and his untiring and unwavering dedication
to the
principles and purposes of the Organization.
The
Government
and people of Cyprus had the. opportunity to witness the exceptional skill with which he
carried out his difficult duties in Nicosia as the Special
Representative
of the former Secretary-General.
They rely upon his statesmanship,
objectivity
and
dedication
to principles for a just solution to OUI
problem in the interest of the people of Cyprus and of
peace and security in the volatile area of the Eastern
Mediterranean.

bly on 1 November
1974 and later unanimoudy
endorsed by the Security Council in its resolution 36.~
(1974), and thus rendered mandatory-remain
utterly
unimplemented.
As a result, the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Cyprus is still
being flagrantly violated. The Turkish occupation
troops have not been withdrawn, and not a single
refugee has been allowed to return to his home and
land.
14. Because of this continuing
aggression and
occupation, a beautiful, historic and peaceful island
situated in the strategic Mediterranean,
destined to
be a bridge of understanding between the three cantinents that surround it, Asia, Africa and Europe.
continues to be the centre of division and strife and a
potential source of wider conflict.

10. I should also like to commend the significant
contribution made by the Under-Secretary-General
for
Special Political
Affairs, Mr. Brian Urquhart,
and
his Secretariat colleagues, Mr. Sherry and Mr. Picco,
and to express our warm appreciation to the Special
Representative
of the Secretary-General
in Cyprus,
Mr. Hugo Gobbi, and his assistants for their efforts
to advance the cause of peace in my country.

15. A small and proud people that has lived in
harmony and peace throughout the centuries and can
do so again if left alone without any foreign interference has been uprooted from its ancestral homes and
lands and turned into refugees in its own country.
segregated against its will by an artificial and enforced
barrier.

11. My Government’s
appreciation goes also to the
Commander of UNFICYP,
Major-General
G. Greindl,
and to his officers and men for the efficient and dedicated manner in which they have performed the duties
entrusted to them by the Council. In referring to
UNFICYP
I should be remiss if I were not to express
also our warm feelings of gratitude and appreciation
to the friendly Governments which, through voluntary contributions
of personnel and funds, have made
it possible for UNFICYP
to continue rendering its
most valuable assistance in carrying out its important
mission in Cyprus.

16. The lofty principle of the non-use of force in
international
relations enshrined in Article 2, pnragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations is being
blatantly and contemptuously
violated.
The principle of the inviolability
of the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of States and that
of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
have been made a mockery by Turkey. The right to
life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness is no more in
that beautiful island; it is suppressed under the yoke
of the occupation troops.

12. The members of the Council are fully aware
that, seen in its true perspective, the Cyprus crisis is
not an intercommunal
difference, as the Turkish
propaganda machine so often proclaims, but an issue
of foreign invasion, continuing occupation and massive
violation by Turkey of the human rights and fundamental freedoms of the people of Cyprus as a whole.
It is a military
invasion and occupation
of nearly
40 per cent of the territory of the Republic, the inhuman
expulsion of 200,000 people-almost
one third of the
island’s total population-from
their ancestral homes
and lands. Hundreds of persons are missing, and as
many are enclaved. And all of this is coupled with the
abhorrent and discredited colonialist policy of changing
by the use of force the age-old demographic structure
of Cyprus and the massive implantation
of settlers
from the Turkish mainland in the occupied areas,
a policy so reminiscent of darker ages of mankind.

17. Segregation so reminiscent
of the deplorable
system of trpnrtheid has been imposed without shame
as the policy of the invader in its effort to dissect and
annex the occupied part of Cyprus. Division of the
territory and segregation of the people, at present
the official policy of Turkey, are carried out in Cyprus
before the eyes of a bewildered Europe and a world
community that has deciared repeatedly its condemnation of such policies. How is this made possible.
and why the need for another renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations peace-keeping force?
18. The answers are simple. Turkey has not COW
plied with General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, even those unanimously
adopted. The
tragedy of Cyprus therefore amply illustrates the
plight of the small, non-aligned and militarily
weak
States, and at the same time poses an agonising
dilemma and a challenge for the United Nations, testing
its ability to fulfil its mission and its very usefulness.
If the United Nations continues to allow its unanimously adopted resolutions and Security Council
decisions to be contemptuously
disregarded by the
invader, thus failing to uphold the principles of the

13. The renewing of the mandate of UNFICYP
is a
sad reminder that the problem of the invasion and
occupation of a small non-aligned country, a Member
of the United Nations, is still continuing.
United
resolutions-especially
Nations
resolution
3212
(XXIX), unanimously adopted by the General Assem2

Charter in Cyprus and, more particularly,
its paramount purpose of maintaining international peace and
security, 1 can say to the Council in all solemnity that
the Organization will sustain yet another serious setback and its prestige and very usefulness will be
further eroded. The credibility of the United Nations
depends on whether the world Organization lives up
to its decisions by undertaking effective action when
the situation so warrants.

called Turkish Federated State and that “their purpose was to stay forever in Cyprus”. What lofty aims
indeed-and
how fraudulent!
23. These actions have been deplored and condemned not only by a series of United Nations resolutions and Non-Aligned
Movement declarations but
also by the Turkish Cypriots themselves. The Turkish
Cypriot leader and former Vice-President of the Republic, Mr. Kiiciik, wrote in an article in his paper, Halkin
Sesi, on 24 May 1978 that these settlers “turned this
paradise island into hell”.

19. If the United Nations, its Members, especially
the permanent members of the Security Council, take
an effective stand to change this calamitous trend by
giving the Council the means for ensuring the implementation of its resolutions, the trend of being at the
mercy of bully States will no doubt change, and the
world will also do so with it.

24. The Council is aware that after the invasion of
Cyprus in July 1974 Turkey forcibly segregated our
people by an artificial barrier known as the Attila
Line and proceeded thereafter to set up in the occupied
area a bogus, fictitious and illega1 entity, the socalled Turkish Federated State of Cyprus, which in
reality is the puppet of the invader. It is not necessary to remind the Council of its resolution 367 (1975)
in response to the aforementioned illegality of Turkey
and its instrument in the occupied area. This socalled State-which
has no territory or jurisdictionis recognized by no one except its masters, since it
was set up in the occupied territories which are an
integral part of the Republic of Cyprus, as emphatically reaffirmed in General Assembly resolution 34/30
of 20 November 1979.

20.

The Secretary-General,
in his forthright report
7 September 1982 on the work of the Organization
to the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly,
underlined this urgent need for change by stating that:
of

LbI . .
resolutions, particularly
those unanimously
adopted by the Security Council, should serve as a
springboard for governmental
support and determination and should motivate their policies outside
the United Nations.“’
21. Regrettably,
this is not being done, and today
in my country 200,000 human beings, uprooted from
their ancestral homes and lands, wake up each morning
to see their towns and villages, the familiar sights of
mountains and valleys, beckoning them to come back.
They hear the mourning of those lands pleading not
to be forgotten. These unfortunate people are indeed
going through a unique tragedy. They are so close and
yet so far away from beloved lands. Their bitterness
grows even stronger as they witness the daily results of
continuing
illegal actions by Turkey to change the
demographic
character of the occupied area and to
destroy the cultural heritage of our people-actions
which constitute a crime against humanity recorded
in the timeless book of history.

25, The six months that have elapsed since the
last renewal of UNIFCYP’s
mandate have been
characterized by additional
illegal actions, vividly
demonstrating
Turkey’s
ruthless determination
to
consolidate its fruits of aggression and to deal what
it considers final blows at the unity of our people, so
much cherished by Greek and Turkish Cypriots, in an
effort to break the historical links which traditionally
bind them and which are forged by common country
and destiny.
26. Every day new steps are taken against the
independence,
sovereignty, territorial
integrity and
unity of Cyprus. After the visit last May of the Prime
Minister of Turkey, Mr. Biilent Ulusu, to the occupied
areas of Cyprus-an
act which itself constituted a
political invasion-Ankara
decided to establish a socalled Central Bank and a so-called Development
Bank. And a few weeks ago, after the visit to Ankara
of Mr. DenktaS’s associate Mr. Cagatay, Ankara
decided to abolish the Cyprus pound and to introduce
the Turkish lira as “legal tender” in all transactions
in the areas of the Republic occupied by the Turkish
forces.

22.

The occupied areas of Cyprus are colonized by
of settlers and colonists in the furtherance of Ankara’s plans to change the demographic
structure of Cyprus, These alien settlers are usurping
the homes and lands of the expelled indigenous Cyprus
population
and desecrating what was created by the
hard fabour of our people. The colonists from Turkey
even created a “political party”, and its leader-settler
and former Colonel of the Turkish Army, Mr. Ismail
Tezer, became a so-called minister in Mr. Denktas’s
regime. In a press conference on 22 December 1978,
he openly declared that the aims of his “party” are to
“achieve the partition of Cyprus and its annexation to
Turkey”.
On 17 August 1981, he admitted that the
settlers came to Cyprus with the approval of Turkey,
that they were presented as an “agricultural
force”,
that almost all of them became citizens of the sothe importation

27. Furthermore,
according to the Turkish press,
in a few weeks’ time the issuing of so-called “title
deeds” to the usurpers of the Greek Cypriot properties, especially to the settlers from Turkey, will
commence.
With these so-called certificates,
the
usurpers “will be able to rent this property, sell it,
mortgage it and distribute it to their children”, as the
3

Turkish Cypriot press revealed. Mr. Serakinci,
a
member of Mr. Denktag’s rCgime, stated, according
to Halkin Sesi of 1 November 1982, that “regulations
calling for property distribution to the Turkish Armed
Forces personnel, to the ‘TMT’ members, and to ‘the
refugees’ too, have been completed”.

solved by the withdrawal of the occupation troops,
allowing the people to work amicably as in the past
within the framework of a united and indivisible
Cyprus.
33. The strict observance by my Government of
the rules and norms of international law in its struggle
to restore its territorial integrity and ensure the withdrawal of the forces of occupation in accordance with
the resolutions of this body cannot in any circumstances be described as an economic embargo except
by the perpetrators of the crime of aggression against
my country.

28. By these actions the Turkish leadership, instead
of working for a solution of the Cyprus problem on
the basis of the United Nations resolutions and the
agreements of 12 February 1977 and 19 May 1979
[SlI2323, para. 5, and S/13369, pam. 511, is striving
for the speedy incorporation of the occupied area into
the State of Turkey. Instead of tending towards the
strengthening of existing common elements that link
the people of Cyprus, Turkey is striving to eliminate
them.

34. It is no wonder that Ankara’s
“economic
embargo” propaganda did not convince even the
Turkish Cypriots themselves. In the Turkish Cypriot
newspaper Kurtulus of 7 November 1980 it was stated
that “the arguments put forward by the DenktaS
rkgime” attributing this misery to the alleged “Greek
Cypriot embargo” were not true. The Turkish Cypriot
leader, Mr. Veziroglu, said, and this was pubtished
in the Turkish Cypriot newspaper Orzcu of IS119 May
1981: “Denktag’s
National Unity Party rCgime has
tried to load the blame for all their mistakes, exploitations and lack of success onto the Greeks.”

29. Turkish allegations that these separatist actions
and forced segregation are necessary because of the
mistreatment
of the Turkish Cypriot community
at
the hands of the Government
of the Republic are
baseless. They originally were aimed at paving the
way for the Turkish invasion and now are used to provide a pretext for the continuation
of the Turkish
occupation, contrary to the United Nations resolutions. Mr. Hasan Sarica, the leader of DEVIS, the
Turkish Cypriot trade union, refuted those allegations
effectively when he stated, as published in Birlik,
Mr. Denktas’s newspaper, on 30 August 1982:

35. A more recent article, which appeared in the
Turkish Cypriot newspaper Y~~niu’uzcn on 21 September last, reads: “To tell the truth, no one can
convince us that the embargo is the reason for economic bottlenecks in our area.”

“In the pre-1974 era” -namely,
before the Turkish
invasion-”
the Turkish Cypriots and the Greek
Cypriots worked together in a brotherly manner and
the economic position of the Turkish workers was
excellent. . . After 1974 the economic position of
the Turkish Cypriot workers substantially
deteriorated
. . , In pre-1974 Cyprus,
the Turkish
Cypriots and Greek Cypriots worked together and
shared the same economic profits. The conditions
of life of the Turkish Cypriots changed after 1974.”

36. The Turkish leadership considered it expedient
recently to embark on another newly invented allegation about the so-called piling up of arms and military
training in the free areas of Cyprus “to attack the
The constant repetition of that
Turkish Cypriots”.
allegation is undoubtedly evidence of its Iack of truth.
and is aimed at misleading world opinion concerning
the correlation of military power in the island. What
is of greater concern to the Council, however, is the
fact that that allegation aims at the creation of pretexts
to justify possible future unlawful adventures by
Turkey against the free areas of the Republic of
Cyprus. Turkey is trying in vain to divert world attention from the fact that there is at present in the occupied
area an occupation force of about 35,000 Turkish
troops, armed with the most modern weapons, that
Turkey is a country with one of the largest standing
armies i the world and that it is only 40 miles from
Cyprus. T ,,
:
37. The v&apons of the Cyprus National
Guard
are purely de%nsive and the intentions of my Go+
ernment are absolutely peaceful. The Cyprus Government believes in a solution of the Cyprus problem
by peaceful means and procedures. Indicative of this
is the fact that it encourages and strengthens by all
means every move that unites the two communities.
a policy fiercely opposed by Turkey.

30. The economic hardships experienced
by the
Turkish Cypriot community today are the direct result
of the military occupation and the separatist policy of
Ankara, and not the actions of the Government
of
Cyprus to protect through legal means the rights of its
citizens who are the legitimate
owners of property
usurped by the invaders and the settlers transported
from Turkey to the occupied areas.
31. The Government
of Cyprus, far from imposing
what Turkish propaganda calls “an economic embargo”, has an obligation to all its citizens, be they Greeks
or Ttirks, to protect what they created by their sweat
and their tears and what is rightfully theirs. It is not
an aggressive policy or economic attrition to refuse to
accept the usurpation of our lands, on which we lived
and prospered for centuries.
32. The acute economic problems at present faced
by the Turkish Cypriot community can be effectively
4

lRAR

38. This does not mean, however, that the Government of the Republic does not have the sovereign right
and also the duty to strengthen the defences of the
free areas and protect them against a new advance
by the Attila, since they are under continuous threat,
bearing in mind the expansionist aims of Turkey,
brazenly
expressed on 10 July 1980 by Mr. Turan
Gunes. who was the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Turkey at the time of the invasion, to the effect that
“Cyprus is valuable as a right arm for a country interested in its defence or for its expansionist aims”.
Mr. Gunes went a step further and admitted that:
“Many States to a certain extent, because it suits
their interests, want to see the Cyprus problem
merely as our desire to protect the Turkish community in the island, whereas the actual problem is
the security of the 45 million Turks in the motherland.”
39. It is no surprise, in the light of the foregoing,
that the intercommunal
talks failed to yield results in
their main and crucial aspects. As the SecretaryGeneral stated in his report last June, “the well-known
major substantive elements of the Cyprus problem”
have not been resolved [S//5/49, pars. 571. Furthermore, except for identifying the negotiating positions
of both sides, no progress of any nature was achieved
on substantive elements during the past six months.
Those substantive elements are clearly defined in the
resolutions
of the United Nations on Cyprus, which
were the agreed basis of the talks and which remain
unimplemented,
tlius increasing the responsibility
of the world community for the solution of this major
international
problem.
40. The continuing
presence of the occupation
forces over the past eight years, and Turkey’s separatist actions and divisive positions constitute the main
stumbling-block
and an insurmountable obstacle in the
free search for a just solution of the Cyprus problem
through
constructive
and meaningful negotiations,
as stipulated in United Nations resolutions and the
agreements of 12 February 1977 and 19 May 1979.
For our part, we shall continue to exert every
effort to achieve a successful outcome. But the
success or failure of the negotiations in reality depends
on the frame of mind and the aims and objectives of
the Turkish
Government, Mr. Denktas and his regime
are simply the obedient instruments of Turkey in the
occupied
areas. This has been eloquently revealed
by Mr. Denkta? himself, who was quoted is an article
in the Turkish Cypriot newspaper Ycnidrrzcn of 1 OCtober
1982 as having stated: “Whether I believe it or
not. whether I consider it right or not, I do whatevet
Turkey
says.” And the Turkish Government is not
willing to abandon its partitionist policy and work for
a just and lasting solution of the Cyprus problem and
a better future for the people of Cyprus as a whole.
41.

42. The same regrettable and negative attitude is
unfortunately
demonstrated by the Turkish side on the

purely humanitarian
question of missing persons,
where the right of the relatives who are in agony to
know the fate of their loved ones has not been recognized. This issue was discussed in the Third Committee a few days ago, and a draft resolution? was
adopted by an overwhelming majority of votes. The
Cyprus Government hopes that the Turkish side will
co-operate in the implementation
of this resolution,
which can lead to the speedy and effective tracing of
and accounting for the missing persons in Cyprus.

1llll

43. I wish to conclude by expressing the hope
that this body will follow developments in Cyprus
vigilantly and continue to recognize its special responsibility towards Cyprus and its people.
44. We are confident that the Council in its wisdom
will not fail to take appropriate action as warranted
to accelerate the prospects for a just solution in accordance with United Nations resolutions and, particularly,
in compliance with the unanimous Security Council
decisions on the subject.
45. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Greece, on whom I now call.
46. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): I should like at the
outset, Sir, to extend to you my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of December and to assure you
of the co-operation and assistance of my delegation
in the performance of your task. I should also like to
thank you and the other members of the Council fol
having acceded to my request to participate in the
debate.
47. On 15 June [2$78r11 ,n~cli/zg], I had the opportunity to express the views of my Government on the
problem of Cyprus on the occasion of the renewal of
the mandate of UNFICYP.
I regret that I have to
speak again on this long-pending problem. However,
the realities are so hard, the injustice so durable and
the dangers so present that I feel compelled to address
the Council again on this subject. I shall be brief, since
the representative of Cyprus has just dealt with the
matter extensively and convincingly.
I fully share
his views.
48. The facts with regard to Cyprus are well known
to the members of the Council, and I need not repeat
them in detail. Turkey continues to occupy militarily
more than 36 per cent of the territory of the Republic
of Cyprus. refusing to comply with the numerous
relevant United Nations resolutions and the widely
accepted norms of international
law. The talks between the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots
have not so far produced any results, although they
have been going on for many years. For all practical
purposes, the intercommunal
dialogue is not being
held between the island’s two communities,
but
actually between Nicosia and Ankara, which, as everybody knows, determine the policies of the Turkish

c

Cypriot community,
Thus the talks have only resulted
in the prolongation
of the occupation of part of the
Republic of Cyprus, thereby seriously endangering the
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the. Republic
and threatening the security of Greek Cypriots. In the
meantime,
some 200,000 Greek Cypriot
refugees
have been waiting in vain to return to their homes
because of the intransigence of the Turkish side.

54. Is Turkey ready to withdraw its army from the
Republic of Cyprus so that the intercommunal
dialogue
can be conducted without pressure? Is Turkey ready
to accept the total demilitarization
of the Republic?
Is Turkey ready to accept unconditionally
the implementation of the three basic freedoms of movement,
settlement and acquisition of property for all citizens
throughout the Republic?

49. In these conditions of insecurity and pressure,
the two interlocutors in Cyprus have for all practical
purposes been dealing mainly with minor or marginal
issues on which some progress could be possible
-a fact which creates a totally misleading impression
of progress. They are also addressing the territorial
problem,
but only in a superficial way, since the
Turkish side consistently avoids going into the substance of this matter. which is a crucial aspect of the
whole problem of Cyprus. As regards the Constitution. we bear witness to a systematic effort on the
Turkish side to create a State in which 18 per cent of
the population. namely, the Turkish Cypriots. will have
an equal share of power throughout the entire structure
of the State with 80 per cent of the population.
namely,
the Greek Cypriots.

55. Only an unequivocal answer to these questions
from the Turkish side will, in our view, enable us to get
a clear picture of the situation. But the way the Turkish Government has systematically avoided discussing
those issues clearly demonstrates, in our view, how
meaningless it is to continue the intercommunal
dialogue in its present form.
56. In view of the Turkish attitude, it is perhaps
high time to address certain international
authorities
and to ask them to exert their influence on Turkey in
order that it may finally abide by the resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. Among
those authorities, needless to say, the Council is a
body that should perhaps play a major role.
57. In concluding, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his personal commitment to the question of Cyprus and for his tireless and continuous
efforts towards finding a solution to this problem. It is
the earnest wish of my Government that the Secretary-General continue to offer his valuable personal
contribution, in the hope that he will finally be able
to find a way out of the present deadlock.

SO. We are not asking that this dialogue be interrupted. The Government of Greece is not the appropriate authority to ask for either the continuation
ot
the ending of the intercommunal
dialogue. This is the
responsibility
of the Government
of Cyprus. We
should like, however. to stress that it seems to us
indeed inconceivable that this dialogue could lead to a
*just and fair result, since it is being conducted under
duress. namely. the pressure of the Turkish military
occupation of part of the Republic of Cyprus.

58. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Nail
Atalay. to whom the Council has extended an invitation
in accordance with rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

51. Turkey. in order to -justify its military presence
in the island. has often invoked the need for security
of the Turkish Cypriots. To meet this concern, my
Government
has proposed an enlargement
of the
United Nations Force in Cyprus, which could guarantee the security of the Turkish Cypriot minority and
thereby enable the Turkish occupying forces to withdraw from the island. Only after their withdrawal from
the Republic of Cyprus would the conditions
exist
for a free. genuine and fair dialogue between the two
communities.
that is. a dialogue capable of producing
a viable and long-lasting
solution to the Cyprus
problem.

59. Mr. ATALAY:
Mr, President. allow me to
convey my appreciation and that of my Government
to you and to all the other members of the Council
for having invited me to participate in this debate.
60. I have requested to be allowed to participale
in the Council’s deliberations on the extension of the
mandate of UNFICYP for another six months in ordel
to express the views of the Turkish Cypriot cornmunity, which is exclusively represented by the Turkish
Federated State of Kibris.

52, In view of the complexity
of the situation. my
Government has additionally
proposed that the problem be I-e-examined on a new basis by a special committee of the United Nations or by an international
conference.
It would also welcome initiatives
by
leading international
personalities.

61. I wish also to express my Government’s
and
my own gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his
outstanding and devoted efforts towards a resolution
of the Cyprus conflict, which has been on the agenda
of the Council since the Greek Cypriot onslaught in
December 1963. We owe appreciation
also to the
Secretariat and the staff in the field, particularly
Mr. Urquhart, Mr. Gobbi, Major-Genera1
Greindl,
Mr. Sherry, Mr. Holger. Mr. Schittler-Silva
and
Mr. Picco, and especially the military and civilian

53, Turkey, unfortunately,
has taken a flatly negative stand with regard to all these proposals. We urge
Turkey to clarify its position.
6

personnel,
competent
important

for the unimpeachable,
impartial
and
manner in which they have discharged their
responsibilities.

and 1979 [S/12323, para. 5, WZ(~S/133@, pat-a. 511 and
intercommunity
agreements, as well as
on the basis of the Secretary-General’s
“evaluation”
paper. In paragraph 58 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral states:
the bilateral

62. I take this opportunity
to express our deep
gratitude to those countries that have contributed men
and funds for UNFICYP,
and in particular to Turkey
for its whole-hearted contribution to intercommunal
peace on the island and to the security and economic
development
of a Turkish community
still under
Greek Cypriot embargo.
63. The Council
(19821, extending
15 June 1983.

“The new phase of the mission of good offices
entrusted to me by the Security Council, which
was initiated at the intercommunal
talks in Nicosia
on 7 January 1982 with a systematic review of the
constitutional
aspect, continued at a steady pace
during the period covered by the present report.
The interlocutors continued to follow the ‘evaluation’ paper submitted by my Special Representative
on I8 November 1981 as a structured substantive
method of discussion.”

has now adopted resolution 526
the mandate of UNFICYP
until

64. Despite our irrefutable objections, in the third
paragraph of the resolution reference persists to the
so-called “Government
of Cyprus”. As the Council
well knows, this is a title that has been unjustifiably
appropriated
by the Greek Cypriot faction of the
bicommunal
Government
of Cyprus. Legally or
politically,
there has been no government legitimately
representative of Cyprus as a whole since the disruption of the bicommunal
partnership Government in
1963. We object to this terminology
as utterly misleading, since it reflects neither the legal nor the factual
reality of the island. The two national communities
of the island have been the constituent elements of
the Cyprus dispute since December 1963. This dispute arose from the Greek Cypriot armed attempt to
destroy
the bicommunal partnership and incorporate
Cyprus
into Greece. To refer to the Greek Cypriot
side of the bicommunal Government of Cyprus as
“the Government of Cyprus” runs counter to the Basic
Articles of the 1960 Constitution, It tends to give the
Greek Cypriot side, at the expense of the Turkish
Cypriot
people. what the Greek Cypriots have failed
since 1963 to acquire by force.

68. I am sure, therefore, that the Council will agree’
with me that the fifth paragraph and paragraph 2 of
the resolution do not accurately reflect the actual
basis on which the talks are continuing.
69. In any event, the mere continuation
of the
intercommunal
talks means that progress has begun,
as stated by the Secretary-General in paragraph 59 of
the same report:
“My Special Representative
reports that the
atmosphere of the talks has remained co-operative
and constructive.
The interlocutors
have now
completed the discussion of almost all the constitutional aspects and are about to embark on an
examination of the territorial aspect.”
70, The Council and the Secretary-General
can
rest assured that my Government will do everything
to keep open this window of intercommunal
talks,
which will not be closed by the Turkish Cypriot side.
The very fact that the two sides continue negotiating,
an active process that has continued without interruption since 1980, is a progressive achievement for which
the Secretary-General
and his staff are to be commended.

55, Nevertheless, I have been empowered to give
consent. on behalf of the Government of the Turkish
Cypriot community, to the extension of the mandate
of UNFICYP
until I5 June 1983. We shall, as we
have done in the past, continue to co-operate with the
Force and help in its success.
66.
As I have repeatedly
stressed in Council
meetings in the past, we continue to hope that the
mandate and modus operandi of UNFICYP
will be
revised according to the realities in Cyprus.

71, As we have witnessed once again today, the
issue of missing persons, which the Turkish Cypriots
regard as a humanitarian concern, is a political concern
for the Greek Cypriots. The issue is still unresolved,
at the expense of the afflicted families, simply because
the Greek Cypriot side has chosen to politicize it and
to exploit it for propaganda purposes.

67.
In paragraph 3 of resolution 526 (1982), the
Council “Rc~yrrc~sts the Secretary-General to continue
his mission of good offices . , .‘I. My Government
welcomes
and supports that request, We shall continue to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General
in his dedicated mission. As the Council well knows,
the intercommunal
talks continue on the basis of the
Secretary-General’s
opening statement of 9 August
1980, which is contained in the annex to document
S! 14100. referring to the high-level agreements of 1977

72. The only entity competent to discuss the issue
of missing persons on the island is the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus (CMP), an autonomous
intercommunal
body. It was not established, nor is
it governed by the United Nations, but stems solely
from the agreement between the Turkish Cypriot and
Greek Cypriot communities.
Its autonomous character was acknowledged by the Secretary-General
himself in a press release on IO November
1981.
Issued in Nicosia, it states that measures to facilitate
7

the work of the Committee “could be fmalized only by
the Committee,
which functions autonomously”.
All
the attempts by the Greek side to raise the question of
missing persons in forums other than the CMP violate its terms of reference and the agreement that
served to create it.

Turks brought from Turkey Iparn. 221. This allegation is false, and is being made by the Greek Cypriot
side purely for propaganda purposes and for the purpose of misleading world public opinion into believing
that Turkey is colonizing North Cyprus. Those who
are guilty of having attempted to colonize Cyprus fol
decades and of turning the island into a bloodbath in
the process can have no reason to blame others for this
crime except that of trying to confuse the innocent
with the guilty. It is obvious that such devious tactics
will deceive nobody and produce no constructive
results.

73. Therefore, any statement on the missing persons
issue anywhere but in the Committee
infringes the
CMP’s competence and is therefore totally unacceptable to the Turkish Cypriot community.
74. Available
evidence on the so-called missing
Greek Cypriots indicates that they in fact perished
during the coup staged in Cyprus by Greece on 15 July
1974. The Secretary General of the Greek Cypriot
Communist Party, Mr. Ezakias Papaiannou, revealed
at a public meeting on 28 November,
15 days ago,
that during the armed Greek anti-Makarios coup, many
Greek Cypriots had been killed by those responsible
for the coup. who had even buried some of them
alive. This statement appeared in the Greek Cypriot
newspaper Hnrrr~lsi on 29 November 1982.

81. It has also been alleged that we are giving title
deeds to the Turkish Cypriots in the North [pan. 271.
First of all, the aim in the preparation of this law on
immovable pi’operty is to find a solution to the social
and economic problems and difficulties experienced
by the Turkish Cypriots who came from the South
as refugees as a result of large-scale population movements. In other words, this law is the result of a
search for a solution to their humanitarian problems
and to improve their living conditions.

75. Evidently the Greek Cypriot side does not &ant
to solve the missing persons issue within the CMP.
They have boycotted its meetings and done everything
else to undermine and sabotage the CMP, Confidential CMP documents, including its terms of reference,
have been disclosed. The Greek Cypriots have taken
this humanitarian
issue to every forum except the
CMP itself,

82. Under these circumstances, and in order to meet
the investment and working capital needs for the
repair and maintenance of the immovable properties.
as well as to make them productive, persons who have
been allocated immovable
property according to
certain principles are now enabled by law to transfer
the possessor rights of such property to others. This
adjustment is not aimed at instituting any compulsory
confiscation of ownership rights and does not contradict international
law and the rules regarding the
transfer of ownership.

76. No solution is feasible for this humanitarian
problem as long as the Greek Cypriot side continues
to exploit it internationally
for political propaganda.
In my delegation’s
view. the adoption of the draft
resolution
before the General Assembly’
will only
encourage more intransigence on the Greek Cypriot
side and give it yet another pretext to abuse the issue
to the detriment of the Turkish Cypriot side.

83. To move now to another issue. the Greek and
Greek Cypriot representatives have again attempted
here today grossly to distort the efforts of my autliorities to establish limited banking institutions and the
use of the Turkish lira as a currency [Parr. 261. These
accusations received an adequate reply in my letter
of 22 November I982 to the Secretary-General. circulated in the General Assembly and the Security
Council on 24 November
as document A/37/643S/15500. But I should like briefly to refer to the
question.

77. The one-sided decisions taken by any organization due to the initiative of the Greek Cypriot leadership. without the equal participation
of the representatives of the Turkish Federated State of Kibris, are
considered null and void by the Turkish Cypriot side.
78. The Turkish Cypriot side reiterates its readiness
to work in good faith in accounting for the missing
persons in Cyprus. but only within the established
terms of reference of the CMP and without outside
intcrfcrencc.

84. The Turkish Federated State of Kibris, in
fulfilment of its obligation to develop the economy
and improve the people’s standard of living, has proposed the establishment of a development bank and a
central bank with limited functions-it
will not issue
currency-in
order to implement the State’s monetary
and credit policy. Therefore. the Greek Cypriot
efforts to construe this policy as a move towards a new
political status are an unfair attempt to distort the
facts.

79. There are no real difficulties.
procedural
01
otherwise. that prevent the CMP from functioning,
The only obstacle in this respect is the continuing
boycott of the CMP by the Greek Cypriot side fat
reasons of domestic politics and international
propaganda against the Turkish Cypriot side.

85. The Greek Cypriots in the South have a development bank from which its Turkish Cypriot partowners were ejected by force in 1963. It is inCOn-

80. It has been alleged here by the Greek Cypriot
representative
that North Cyprus is being settled by
8

ceivable for the Greek Cypriots to attempt to deny
the Turkish Cypriot community the benefit of similar
institutions.
The Greek Cypriot propaganda characterizes the use of the Turkish lira by the Turkish
Federated State of Kibris as a step towards a new
political status.

alive internationally.
It would take me days and days
to quote at length from statements made by Greek and
Greek Cypriot leaders on enosis, and I do not want
to take that much of the Council’s time. However,
a few brief quotations may remind this Council of the
gravity of the crzosis adventure.

86. The Turkish community used the Cyprus pound
as legal tender until it was deprived of its use by the
Central Bank of Cyprus, which confiscated the deposits in Turkish banks. The Cyprus pound is stilt legal
tender in the Turkish Federated State of Kibris, but
was made unavailable by the measures of the Greek
Cypriots. Thus, the Turkish Cypriot community
was
forced to introduce the Turkish lira in the North
pending a final solution.

92. As far back as 1957, a quarter of a century ago,
the Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Averof,
was assuring his critics in the Greek Parliament that
he had not abandoned ~~rzo.si.s,saying that
“The direction towards independence is not a
Greek manoeuvre . . . But I ask you: if in order
to reach enosis one were obliged to make the manoeuvre of temporary independence, would he who
had done this deserve criticism?”

87. The unwarranted protests of the Greek Cyprio.ts
are sheer interference in the Turkish Cypriot community’s
internal affairs. The Greek Cypriot community, with a prr c~pitrr income five times as great
as that of the Turkish Cypriot community,
protests
the Turkish
Cypriot efforts to bridge this vast economic disparity. We all know that a viable political
solution for Cyprus will depend, intar did, on a
meaningful
social and economic balance between the
two communities.

93. Meanwhile,
the Greek Cypriot leader, Archbishop Makarios,
continued
his pre-independence
otc,sis statements even in the post-Republic period,
exposing the true intentions of the Greek Cypriots.
During the period from 1960 to 1963 hardly a week
passed without a Makarios pro-cnosis statement. In
one such statement, on 15 August 1962, he said that:
“Greek Cypriots must continue to march forward
to complete the work begun by EOKA heroes , . ,
The struggle is continuing in a new form, and will
go on until we achieve our goal.”

88, The decision by the Turkish Cypriot community
to establish its own central bank, its development
bank, and to use the Turkish lira, is an internal affair
of the Turkish Federated State of Kibris resulting
from prevailing ecdnomic conditions. Greek Cypriot
allegations to the contrary are baseless.

Hence the Christmas 1963 attack against the Turkish
Cypriot co-founders of the Republic.
94. Back in Greece,
the leader, Mr. George
Papandreou, jubilantly
told university students $lt
Salonica on 27 October 1964 that:

89.
For the last 18 years,
between
the two communities

UNFICYP’s
presence
in the island has been
deemed essential. Yet today we see here my Greek
Cypriot counterpart and his collaborator, the representative of Greece, trying to pretend that the period
from I963 to 1974 never existed and that, in spite of
UNFICYP’s
l&year presence in Cyprus, the problem is only eight years old. The wisdom of these
demagogic
efforts is questionable.

“All Greek Cypriots are for c~rzl~si.s. Cyprus
must be made a springboard for the realization in
the East of the dreams of Alexander the Great,
Cyprus is a small island and cannot by itself materialize such dreams. But the people of Cyprus,
united with Greece, will have the opportunity of
performing their historic duty in the Near East.”

90. The truth is that the Council has been meeting
for the last 18 years to extend the mandate of its Force
in Cyprus. The Greek Cypriot attack against the
Turkish Cypriot co-founder in December 1963 started
a period of I1 years which was one of the darkest
in the modern history of Cyprus, The SecretaryGeneral’s reports submitted periodically to this Council bear witness to that I l-year holocaust: they tell of
the expulsion of Turkish Cypriots from 103 villages,
from all Government services and from State budgets,
and the planned Greek and Greek Cypriot objective
of exterminating
the Turkish Cypriots, the co-founders
of the Republic, in order to annex the island to Greece.

95. This is a summary way of describing the first
ten of the 1Xyears of UNFICYP’s
presence in Cyprus:
ten years of persecution, agony, inhuman treatment,
mass murder and abductions, committed by the Greek
Cypriot forces collaborating
with Greece against the
Turkish Cypriot partners in the founding of the Republic of Cyprus. The Council will recall the SecretaryGeneral’s periodic reports every time he recommended
the extension of UNFICYP’s
mandate during the
period between 1964 and 1974, reports that show
clearly what one of the partners in the Republic was
doing to the other.

91.

This intended annexation of Cyprus to Greece,
called enosis, lies behind the artificial creation of the
Cyprus problem, and is the reason why both the Greek
and the Greek Cypriot leadership try to keep the issue

96. As for the last eight years of the l&year period
of UNFICYP’s
mission, I would have been grateful
if my Greek Cypriot counterpart and the represen9

: tative of Greece had profited from the record and had
done their homework properly when they referred to
the post- 1974 period. Was it not Archbishop Makarios
who, on 19 July 1974, told the Council that the events
in Cyprus did not constitute an “internal
matter”
[/78Ot/l lnrclting, prrm. 321 because Cyprus was facing
an “invasion” by Greece? Indeed, the covert invasion
of Cyprus
which had been proceeding since Christmas
1963 became overt on IS July 1974. Archbishop
Makarios barely saved his life. and was able to tell
the Council on 19 July lY74 that:
“The <.o/tp did not come about under such circumstances as to bc considered an internal matter of
the Greek Cypriots. It is clearly an invasion from
outside. in flagrant violation of the independence
and sovereignty of the Republic of Cyprus.
. .. . .
. . . . I And the invasion is continuing
as there are Greek officers in Cyprus.

so long

.1. . .
. . . . . the events in Cyprus do not constitute
an internal matter of the Greeks of Cyprus. The
Turks of Cyprus are also affected. The rr~r,p
. . .
is an invasion, and from its consequences
the
whole of Cyprus suffers. both Greeks and Turks”.
[IlJiCl., p(ilY1.s.IX. 2.? trnd 22,I
97. The (‘o//p engineered by Greek officers in
Cyprus on 15 July 1974 constituted a flagrant invasion. The bloodshed was immense.
Death visited
.both Greek and Turkish Cypriots-and
this was a
description of the situation made by Archbishop
Makarios himself to the Council. Under the circumstances. Turkey was obliged to act under the Treaty
of Guarantee’ to stop the bloodshed and to bring peace
to the island. Peace has prevailed in the island since
the Turkish peace force was stationed there, Thanks
to the peace brought to Cyprus by Turkey, we do not
come across reports ofatrocitics, like those which used
to run to paragraphs and pages in the SccretaryGcnerai’s pre-1974 reports.
98. In the peace and security provided
by the
Turkish peace force. the two communities
have held
two summit meetings and numerous di;llopues. through
which many humanitarian problems have been swiftly
solved. In the presence of the Secretary-General.
they have come up with concrete agreements for the
solution of the Cyprus problem. The resumed intercommunal talks have been going on since then. My
people firmly believe that those talks are the best means
available for the solution of the problem, In this conviction. the Turkish Cypriot side will continue to work
in good faith. with all the means at its disposal. to
facilitate an agreed solution to the problem. There are
always difficulties. and they must be overcome by the
Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots as the two

parties directly involved and destined to coexist in
the island. Interference
by parties not directly
involved will only harden the position of one or the
other party either so that it may bargain better in any
so-called mediation effort or so that it may exploit such
a move as a lever for intransigence.
99. That, briefly, is the history of UNFICYP’s
18 years in Cyprus. I will not delve in depth into the
economic embargo and other inhuman measures
currently being applied by the Greek Cypriot side
against the Turkish Cypriot people on the island,
100. On 9 August 1980, in his opening statement at
the Cyprus intercommunal
talks, the Secretary-General said:
“Both parties have reaffirmed their support fot
a federal solution of the constitutional
aspect and a
hi-zonal solution of the territorial
aspect of the
Cyprus problem.” [SPLJ S/14100, arzn~.~]
That statement is significant in itself. and the two
national communities in the island must be encouraged
to come to a mutual agreement through intercomrnunal talks. This delicate balance has involved
strenuous efforts, and any attempt or move that upsets
it will be detrimental to both national communities
in the island. Recently, the frequent statements by
Mr. Papandreou, the Greek Prime Minister. that
Cyprus is an extension of Hellenism and not the homeland of the two national communities in it, have emphasized the vital need for the Council to support nothing
but the agreement reached by the two peoples of the
island. as specified by the Secretary-General himself.
101. In conclusion,
we must choose between
clasped hands and clenched fists. Indeed. benefiting
from the security afforded by the Turkish peace force.
the two communities have themselves d.emonstrated
that they can clasp hands. The two sumtnit meetings
between the leaders of the two communities have
laid the foundations of the future settlement of the
Cyprus problem.
102. The Council is cluty-bound to encourage negotiations in conditions of equality between the two
national communities in the island and to restrain all
interference that might be exploited by either side to
deviate from the course charted in the presence of the
Secretary-General.
In paragraph 58 of his report,
the Secretary-General stresses that the intercommunal
talks. in his opinion
“still represent the best available means of pursuing
a concrete and effective negotiating process with
the object of achieving an agreed, just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus question”.
103. My people cherish the hope that any measure
taken by the Council will be aimed at encouraging the
two national communities destined to live on the island

to resolve their differences through talks on the basis
of the principles and agreements they have concluded
between themselves.
104, In the past, the Greek Cypriots and their Greek
supporters have run from one international
forum to
another, using them as vehicles for irrelevant attacks
against the Turkish and the Turkish Cypriot side.
There is little logic in launching a verbal attack against
the Turkish Cypriots and Turkey during a discussion
on Namibia, or women’s rights, or any other issue,
while avoiding the issues at the intercommunal
talks
in Cyprus itself. I hope the standstill of last November
and the one that may come next February will be
overcome,
and that after the elections the Greek
Cypriots will be forthcoming at the intercommunal
talks table. Intercommunal
talks in Cyprus are the
proper and best way to seek a solution to the problem
of Cyprus.
105. The PRESIDENT:
representative
of Turkey,
106.

The next speaker is the
upon whom I now call.

Mr.

KIRCA
(Turkey) (inlcrprctcrtion
fiam
me at the outset, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of December. The Polish and Turkish
peoples have been bound by strong ties of friendship
and respect for many centuries. The concordant
moments of our respective histories have always been
cherished by the Turkish people as moments of glory
in our past. I wisti you every success in your task
and asswre you of the co-operation of my Government.
It is with profound appreciation that I shall remember
the extremely impartial manner in which you conducted the consultations
with the interested parties
before today’s meeting.
Frc~nc~kJ: Permit

107, It is clear from what I have heard thus far that
the Council is meeting once again in connection with
the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP,
not to
hold a ,constructive
debate but, unfortunately,
to
witness fruitless polemics. That is why, during the
talks, Turkey proposed that we should not engage in
a debate and let the Council proceed with the necessary formality,
without allowing this meeting to be
exploited
for purposes hardly compatibJe with the
development
of the intercommunal
talks at Nicosia
and without thereby adding to the impressive mass of
already existing acrimony. In fact, we consider it
essential
to safeguard those intercommunal
talks,
especially at a time when those talks, conducted under
the aegis of the Secretary-General,
are suffering a
setback. Doubtless the Council is not unaware that
those in certain circles are doing everything in their
power to demonstrate the futility of those talks by
claiming
in the most fallacious manner, and despite
assertions to the contrary by the Secretary-General
in his report, that they register no progress, and by
laying down conditions which would be tantamount
to their complete liquidation.

108. The Turkish
Government
takes this opportunity to declare yet again that the intercommunal
talks offer the best and only realistic way of resolving
the question of Cyprus on a just and lasting basis. Any
effort aimed at modifying, hampering or halting that
process must be resolutely rejected. The Turkish
and Greek communities
on the island must remain
bound to each other in that process of negotiation,
because they alone are competent to determine their
future and because there is no substitute for those
direct and continued talks.
109. The Secretary-General,
who continues with
perseverance and dedication to pursue his mission
of good offices and who remains personally in close
touch with the Cypriot problem, declares in paragraph 58 of his latest report:
“The intercommunal
talks, in my opinion, still
represent the best available means of pursuing a
concrete and effective negotiating process with the
object of achieving an agreed, just and lasting settlement of the Cyprus question.”
My Government,
which fully shares that view of the
Secretary-General,
is happy to note that it also remains
the opinion in all quarters interested in closely following the evolution of the problem.
1 IO. The Turkish
Government
unreservedly supports the good offices mission of the Secretary-General, which was entrusted to him by the Council.
My Government
is proud to undertake yet again to
say that it will spare no effort to facilitate the Secretary-General’s
task in that process. Both he and
his Special Representative
in Cyprus, Mr. Hugo
Gobbi. have devoted extremely laudable efforts to
helping the talks to progress towards a global solution
in Cyprus. Thanks to the introduction of the “evaluation” paper by the Secretary-General
in the process
of negotiation, the interlocutors were able to embark
on a systematic review of the various aspects of the
problem. There still remain, particularly in the constitutional field, certain questions not covered by the
talks. Turkey hopes that those questions also will
be dealt with as soon as possible. Once the two parties
have completed a first cycle encompassing all the
dimensions of the question of Cyprus, it will then be
possible to take stock of the talks in order to determine with precision what still remains to be done. The
talks could at that point move forward in the context
of the elements contained in the “evaluation”
paper,
which remains a reasonable basis for discussion,
Turkey has every confidence that the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative will spare no
effort to bring the various views more into line and
to ensure a successful outcome.
11 I. The Turkish Government continues to believe
firmly in the validity and effectiveness of the intercommunal talks as the means for arriving at a solution
with the aim of a Republic of Cyprus that is indepen-

dent, sovereign, bicommunal, bi-zonal, federative and
-should
it so decide itself-non-aligned.

117. The representative of Greece has just. reconfirmed the eternal view of his Government that the
Turkish community
in Cyprus cannot and should
not have the same powers as the Greek community.
I should like to stress that that thesis runs counter to
the high-level agreements concluded between the
leaders of the two communities [S/12.323, par’n: 5, artd
S//.3369, prrrcr. .5/l. That thesis is at the root of the
evils in Cyprus and should be amended as soon as
possible, if we want the parties to arrive at a global,
just and durable solution.

112. My Government will continue to give support
and encouragement
to the Turkish Federated State
of Cyprus to achieve that objective and will resist any
move likely to hinder the negotiations.
113. The question of Cyprus will be solved neither
by invoking partial or unrealistic recommendations
which have been definitively rejected by the Turkish
community
of Cyprus and Turkey nor by adding
others of the same kind to that series, which would
undoubtedly
suffer the same fate. The need is fat
time, patience. calm, serious-mindedness,
wisdom
and political will. That is why the Turkish Government supports the process of intercommunal
talks.
Wisdom should also make it clear to all that, contrary
to certain misrepresentations.
the question of Cyprus
is not II problem born of a military intervention.
In
point of fact, the history of the question of Cyprus
from the end of 1963 until August 1974 is the history
of broken promises, of a c’olrp d’r;trrt against the Constitulion. of violations of international treaties-all
of
it aimed at subjugating the Turkish community,
whose
members were deprived of all the rights conferred by
hicommunulity.
besieged in their viflages and neighbourhoods, even cut off from water, electricity and
food supplies. when they were not driven from thei!
ancestral homes and lands. The history of that painful
period was also that of the transformation
of the
Turkish Cypriot community into a national liberation
movement to protect its identity and its rights and to
rqject Greek domination
until its deliverance
by
Turkey. at ifs own request, from one last manoeuvre
whose sole purpose was to eliminate the problem
by attaching the island to Greece,

118. Let those who complain
now of Turkey’s
intervention cease to dream about what the future may
have in store for them. The Turkish Cypriot community will never submit again to Greek domination.
Cyprus will not be attached to Greece. That is finished
for good.
119. The Turkish community
on the island, confident of Turkey’s support, is ready, in accordance
with the Treaty of Guarantee, to negotiate with the
Greek community
an honest association on a Footing
of equality which will ensure their happiness and
prosperity as respective extensions of two great nations
in that very vblatile region of the world, in a Republic
of Cyprus renewed on the basis of a federal system.
If only the Greek and Greek Cypriot side can seize
this opportunity-that
is the essence of the problem.
In doing so it would promote the cause of peace and
co-operation on the basis of a balance of mutual, wellfounded interests. But, I repeat, whether the Greek
and Greek Cypriot side seizes this opportunity in a
rational and realistic manner or chooses to remain
blinded by a sentimental dream, wedded to its mistaken course, in any event the Turkish community
on Cyprus will not fall once again under the Greek
yoke, nor will Cyprus become a Greek province.
That must be understood and accepted as final.

1 14. It was thus that the practices of ~rpnr~h~iu
c;Imc to an end in Cyprus, precisely thanks to the
intcrvcntion
of Turkey. Attila. who has been spoken
of hrrc very often. did not. at least. have the reputation of being a cheater: nor did he have the reputation
uf failing to react to whatever blows he received.

120. I should also like to rqject vigorously as completely unfounded the allegations that Turkey is seeking
to change the demographic character of the island.

115. The Turkish community in Cyprus and Turkey
huvc made use of their right of self-defence in accordance with the Treaty of Guarantee.’ not to destroy
the Republic of Cyprus but, as stipulated in that Treaty.
to recrcatc the state of affairs provided for in the
Basic Articles of the Cypriot Constitution,
always on
a bicommunnl
basis. but this time in ;I truly sound
rind durable manner which cannot be other than as a
federation.

121. I should like now to offer some comments on
certain passages in the Secretary-General’s
report.
It is regrettable to see that the principle of equality of
the communities,
a constitutional
element of the
Republic of Cyprus, was not respected in the titles
employed to designate the official entities of the two
communities.
Moreover.
the administration
of the
Greek Cypriot community is designated there as the
“Cyprus Government”-a
description
which that
administration
is not legitimately
or legally entitled
to claim.

116. In this connection, I should like to recall that
cxperirncc unfortunately teaches us that international
forces have never been able to ensure the full security
of populations.
which is why. at the request of the
Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus, the Turkish
armed forces will remain on the territory of the Federated State until the conclusion of a final agreement
hctween ull the parties concerned,

122. Thus my first remark on the text of the resolution which was just adopted by the Council relates
to the reference in the third paragraph to the so-called
“Government
of Cyprus”. For the reasons that I have
just explained. the leaders of the Greek Cypriot cornmunity are no more than usurpers of the title “GovernI2

merit of Cyprus”. The Republic of Cyprus was established by virtue of an international
treaty. Faithful
to its international
commitments,
Turkey refuses to
recognize their right to that title, which, incidentally,
does not correspond to the present situation, in which
two distinct communities govern, each in its respective
zone, as was recognized in the Geneva Declaration
of 30 July I974 [see S/11398]. In this connection,
I should like once again to emphasize what I stated
in my letter reproduced in document S/14445 of
15 April I98 1. That is why the third paragraph of that
resolution remains unacceptable to Turkey.

drawn up in 1964, should be reviewed so as to bring
it more into line with the prevailing conditions in
Cyprus. The Turkish Government fully supports that
request.
128. Lastly, I cannot faiI to express once again the
gratitude of my Government
to those States which
contribute to UNFICYP
in Cyprus and to its Commander and the brave officers, non-commissioned
officers and men of that Force, as well as the civilian
personnel attached to it.
129. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of
Cyprus wishes to speak in exercise of the right of
reply, and I call on him.

123. I should like also to inform the Council that
the various reservations made and positions adopted by
Turkey concerning the text mentioned in the same
resolution and in the report of the Secretary-Genera1
have in no way changed, but remain valid for the resolution adopted today and for the report of the Secretary-General
before us.

Tutkey
130. Mr.
MOUSHOUTAS
(Cyprus):
addressed the Council today and spoke with two
voices. The two voices heard by the Council were
those of Mr. Atalay and of the representative of
Turkey.
Mr. Atalay was accorded the right to
speak as an individual under rule 39 of the rules 0%
procedure,
It is indeed regrettable that he took
advantage again of the permission given to him and
made statements on behalf of the Turkish Cypriot
community,
which he does not represent here, since
he appears as an individual.
What is even more
unacceptable is the fact that he spoke also on behalf
of a so-called Turkish Federated State of Cyprus,
a fictitious entity set up in the occupied areas by
Turkey as its puppet. This bogus entity is recognized
by no one except by those that set it up, namely,
Turkey.

124. You will no doubt recall, Mr. President, that
in the course of the consultations you were good
enough to conduct on the subject, my Government
supported the view of the Turkish Federated State of
Cyprus to the effect that the important event that
occurred following the concluding of the 1979 highlevel agreements [S//3369, prrro. 5/] must be reflected
in the text of the resolution.
125. On one hand, the reopening of the intercommunal talks was made possible as a result of the opening
statement of the Secretary-General, of 9 August 1980
[set S S/14100, annex]. That statement contains additional elements of paramount importance, which in
fact now constitute one of the bases for those talks.
The Turkish Government does not understand why
reference to that statement is avoided. However, my
Government
reiterates its view that the statement also
constitutes one of the bases for these talks.

131. Mr, Atalay is my fellow countryman. a member of the Turkish Cypriot community, whose members constitute an inseparable and valued part of OUI
citizenry, sharing a common destiny in a common
country and, sadly, suffering from the same invasion
and occupation.
The statements madc by him and
the views he expressed in the Council should be
placed in their proper perspective and valued accordis at
ingly, since the Turkish Cypriot community
present as much under occupation as other communities in Cyprus.

126. On the other hand, the presentation
of the
evaluation paper of the Secretary-General constitutes
in itself an event of paramount importance
which
should have been taken into account in the resolution.
It is even more disconcerting to find that the resolution
just adopted does not contain any encouragement to the
two communities
along the lines of the report of the
Secretary-General.

132. Therefore it is my hope that Mr. Atalny will
understand my directing my replies only to the representative of Turkey, since this is the country responsible for the invasion and occupation of our country
and on whose behalf, sadly, he really spoke.

127. By that resolution, the Council extends the
period of the stationing of UNFICYP
for a furthel
six months. Since Mr. Nail Atalay, the representative of the Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. has
just informed the Council of the consent of his authorities, the Turkish Government. for its part, gives its
agreement to that extension. However, I should like
to draw the attention of the Council to the request
made by the representative of the Turkish Federated
State of Cyprus, similar to those he has made on several
similar occasions in the past in the Council, to the
effect that the mandate of UNFICYP.
which wx

133. The fact that I am seated in the Council as the
representative
of the Republic of Cyprus and that
you. Mr, President, twice called on me in my capacity as representative of lhe Government of Cyprus.
is an immediate and silencing reply to the statcmcnt
of the representative
of Turkey that the State and
Government of the Republic of Cyprus do not exist.
134. As I said at the last meeting of the Council on
the occasion of a renewal of the mandilte. this i\ probably the only k~~cc in the history of the United Nations
13

ership’s self-isolation policy, imposed by force on
the rank and file” [S/6426 of 10 June 196.5,pam. 1061.

where the aggressor, having dealt an inhuman military
blow to the victim, a small non-aligned State, comes
before the Council and brags that the victim is dead
[237&h meeting,

prim.

1221.

141. But the problem of Cyprus is not what happened 15 or 25 years ago, It is what is happening
now with the invasion and the continuing occupation
of Cyprus, contrary to United Nations resolutions
-some
of them adopted unanimously-demanding
the withdrawal of the Turkish occupation forces and
the return of all the refugees to their ancestral homes
and lands. I submit that, as far as the Council is concerned, the problem is one of non-compliance with its
mandatory resolutions and of what steps should be
taken to make Turkey comply.

135, It is futile for Turkey to dispute the legality
of the Government
of Cyprus, which is exclusively
recognized by the United Nations, the non-aligned
countries, all international organizations and all international forums as the sole representative
of the
Republic of Cyprus. It is no wonder, therefore, that
the United Nations has over the years given this
preposterous
Turkish allegation the answer it deserves. It has disregarded it and continues to do SO.
136. The representative of Turkey spoke about the
onslaught on the Turkish Cypriot community.
The
allegation
of oppression and extermination
of this
valued community
by the Government of Cyprus is
pure political propaganda, used by Turkey in the past
in order to pave the way for the invasion and occupation of Cyprus and now used to try to justify the continuation of its military presence in the territory of
Cyprus, contrary to the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

142. The Turkish representative spoke about a coup
staged against the Turkish Cypriot community. With
regard to this allegation, I wish to state the following,
It was the Turkish Cypriot Vice-President, the three
Turkish Cypriot Ministers and Members of Parliament
who, acting upon instructions from Turkey, withdrew
from the Government. They were not expelled. As
a matter of fact, for many months after their withdrawal, the agenda of the Council of Ministers was
continuously sent to the Vice-President and the three
Turkish Cypriot Ministers. Why did they withdraw?
The answer is obvious: to destroy the Republic of
Cyprus and its Constitution.
The Vice-President,
Mr. Kiichiik, answered this question very clearly. He
declared: “The Constitution of Cyprus is dead.” That
appeared in The New York Times and The New York
Herald Tribune of 31 December 1963. He went on to
say: “It is out of the question to collaborate any Iongel
with this Government.”

137. What are the facts? For centuries all Cypriots,
whether Greeks, Turks, Armenians or Maronites,
lived and worked side by side in peace and harmony
in mixed villages, proof of their peaceful coexistence
and the historical links which were forged between
them.
138. It was Ankara’s policies of segregation and
partition implemented
by the extremist elements of
the Turkish Cypriot leadership that brought about the
artificial
barrier between the Greek and Turkish
communities.

143. Where is the coup? Where is the expulsion?
I submit: nowhere. But here is evidence of the purpose
for their withdrawal. I shall quote from the Turkish
Cypriot Bulletin of 5 January 1964. First, there is
this statement made by a former Vice-President of
Turkey, Mr. Kemal Satir: “Cyprus will be divided
into two sections, one of which will join Turkey.”
Secondly, there is the following statement made in
June 1964 by Mr. F. C. Erkin, the then Foreign
Minister of Turkey: “The radical solution would be
to cede one part of Cyprus to Greece and the other,
closest to the Turkish Asiatic coast, to Turkey.”

139. Ample evidence of this is provided by the
regular six-monthly
reports of Secretary-General
U Thant, which demolish the allegation and irrefutably
show the falsehood of mistreatment
of the Turkish
Cypriot community
by the Government of Cyprus.
140. Suffice it to list the following excerpts from
reports of the Secretary-General,
the highest independent authority:

144. The problem of Cyprus is not a dispute between the Gi-eek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots,
nor is it a constitutional or a religious difference. It is
an international problem of great dimensions-one
of
invasion and occupation. If it were an intercommunal
difference, as the representative
of Turkey alleges,
the item would not have been inscribed on the agenda
of the two main organs of the United Nations. If it
were not an international
problem, the Council, the
General Assembly, the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Commonwealth
Heads of Government would not have considered it repeatedly and
adopted resolutions and declarations on the subject.

r. . . . the lack of movement of Turkish Cypriots
outside of their areas is also believed to be dictated
by a political purpose, namely, to reinforce the claim
that the two main communities
of Cyprus cannot
live peacefully together in the island without some
sort of geographical separation” [S/5764 of 15 June
1964, para.

1131,

and
L&
C$riot

the hardships suffered by the Turkish
population are the direct result of the lead14

145. It is an international
problem and, in the view
of a previous Secretary-General,
one of the three
major international problems in the world.
f46. The Turkish representative tried to hide the
presence in Cyprus of alien settlers. Originally, the
Turkish position was that these people had indeed
arrived in Cyprus, having been brought there as
seasonal workers in an occupied area where the Turkish Cypriot community was mainly forced to settle and
where unemployment figures were staggering, going at
times as high as 25 per cent. Indeed, the importation
of foreign labour would be a very strange way to fight
unemployment.
147. The revelations of Colonel Ismail Tezer of the
Turkish Army, to which I referred in my main statement today, speak louder than the attempts of the
Turkish representative to conceal the truth.
148, Tn November
1979 Mr. Gzker Gzkur had
this to say to Mr. Gurler, a member of the Denktq
regime, when the latter tried to hide the fact that
settlers had been brought to Cyprus:
“Do you think we come from the moon? Do you try
to deceive us too by saying things you say to the
foreigners? Be a little bit serious when you are
talking.”
I address those last words to the representative
Turkey,

of

149. The actions taken by Turkey to establish a
central bank and to introduce the Turkish lira to
replace the Cyprus pound are in line with the separatist, divisive policy of Ankara aimed at partitioning
the occupied areas and incorporating
them in the
mainland of Turkey.
150. These illegal economic actions are added to the
many political, geographical and social separations
which Turkey tries to impose by force on our people
--all our people.

153. The allegation that the Cyprus pound is not
available in the occupied area cannot be substantiated.
The three 3ritish banks operating in the occupied
area are, as I stated before, permitted to carry on all
banking business in the areas, including, of course,
supplying Cyprus currency. Indeed. the two Turkish
Cypriot banks or any individual may be supplied with
Cyprus currency in the ordinary course of business
either from the British banks operating in the occupied
area or from the Central Bank of Cyprus.
154. The representative of Turkey spoke of the
Treaty of Guarantee,.’ and he alleged that under the
Treaty Turkey had the right to intervene. As we have
heard before, Turkey intends to stay in Cyprus, in
spite of unanimously adopted United Nations resoluiions
and particularly the mandatory resolutions of the
Council. Article IV of the Treaty of Guarantee provides that:
“In the event of a breach of the provisions of
the present Treaty, [the guarantor Powers] undertake to consult together with respect to the representations or measures necessary to ensure observance of those provisions.
“In so far as common or concerted action may
not prove possible, each of the three guaranteeing
Powers reserves the right to take action with the sole
aim of re-establishing the state of affairs created by
the present Treaty,”
15.5. Turkey never complied with that provision
because Turkey invaded Cyprus on 20 July, three days
before an agreed meeting of the three guarantor Powers
-Greece, Turkey and the United Kingdom-was
to
take place in London. Turkey, as t.he facts show, did
not invade with the sole aim of reestablishing
the
constitutional order in the island, but rather with the
sole aim of destroying the constitutional
order of
Cyprus itself. It is interesting that to this day Turkey
does not accept the 1960 Constitution.

151, There is a central bank in each country
-whether
the system is unitary or federal. The
creation of a second central bank is therefore divisive
and partitionist.
The argument put forth by the
Turkish side that this central bank created by Turkey
in the occupied areas of Cyprus does not have the
main function of issuing money is, to say the least,
deceiving and outright fraudulent, because the Turkish
lira has simultaneously been introduced in the OCCUpied areas. There is therefore no need whatever to
issue currency.

156. More important., however, Turkey. by militarily invading the island, acted contrary to Article 2,
paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
which prohibits the use of armed force in the settlement
of international
disputes. Nor did Turkey have a
right to come to the assistance of the Turkish Cypriot
community, as it alleges, because the Treaty of Guarantee did not give Turkey the specific duty of protecting a certain community. It was not. for instance.
the duty of the Greek Government to protect the
Greek Cypriot community;
nor was it the duty of
Turkey to protect the Turkish Cypriot community.

152. Since the invasion of 1974. three banks
-namely,
Grindley’s,
Barclays and Charter-have
been allowed by the Government of Cyprus t.o operate
in the occupied parts of Cyprus and to serve our
People. These banks operate with the approval and
under the direction of the Central Bank of Cyp~s.
-

157. Reference was made to Turkey’s good wishes
for the talks. Good wishes, however. are not enough.
Deeds are needed, The intercommunal
talks that
commenced after the Turkish invasion of Cyprus and
were reactivated in August 1980 have to date made no
substantive progress whatever. The reason for this

by Turkish representatives for their own base purposes
can succeed only in bringing forth more vividly the
greatness that was Makarios. These attacks prove the
wisdom of a Cypriot saying: only fruit-bearing trees
become the targets of stones thrown by passers-by.

lack of progress is the Turkish intransigence
in
promoting
separatist
solutions.
The continued
presence of 30,000 to 40,000 occupation troops constitutes, as I slated in my speech, an insurmountable
obstacle and a stumbling-block
to a final, just solution
in accordance with United Nations resolutions.

161. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of Greece. who wishes to speak in exercise of his right
of reply.

158. Turkey uses the talks to achieve the legitimization of the results of its invasion, namely, the occupation and division of the island and the annexation of
the occupied part of the island to the Turkish mainland. Needless to say, we shalI not accept the dc
.filc.to situation created by the invasion. We shall,
however. continue the talks, and to this end we shall
exhaust all options in the search for an agreement with
the Turkish Cypriot community on the internal aspect
of our problem, as provided for in United Nations
resolutions.

162. Mr. DOUNTAS
(Greece): The representative of the Republic of Cyprus, in his thorough and
well-substantiated
statement, refuted-in
our view,
convincingly-the
allegations made by the representative of Turkey and by Mr. Atalay. I shall limit
myself, therefore, to one or two remarks. A reference
was made to a statement by the Greek Prime Minister,
Mr. Papandreou, which, in our view, amounts to a
truism. What Mr. Papandreou said was that Cyprus
is an expansion of Hellenism. I think that everybody
who has graduated from a high school and has been
diligent in his history lessons is well aware that culturally-and
I emphasize and repeat, “culturally”Cyprus is closely connected with Hellenism. That is
a historical fact that cannot be denied. It is not a fact
to be exploited for political purposes.

159. During the discussion of the issue of missing
persons, the Turkish side took the position that there
are no missing persons in Cyprus, that they were
all killed during the c~~lrp. There is no doubt that
some people not included in the list lost their lives
during the c’olrl-‘. We would, however, put to Turkey,
without any animosity,
this question: among those
missing there are prisoners of war who were photographed by Turkish journalists in the hands of Turkish
troops long after the coup. Where are they today?
There are cases of people whose names were on the
official Turkish lists of prisoners of war, but who
have never been released and whose existence has
since been denied. There are cases in which the
names of people held in concentration camps in occupied Cyprus have appeared on the lists of the International Red Cross, but who have never been released. There are people whose names, after they
had been captured, appeared on Turkish Cypriot
radio three weeks after the cease-fire, but who are
stili missing. These are human questions that a large
anguished group of our people are putting to the
Turkish Government.

163. There was another statement by the reprcsentative of Turkey, namely, that Cyprus will never
become Greek. I am afraid that the problem in OUI
time is not that Cyprus may become Greek, but that
Cyprus must not become Turkish-a
process that has,
unfortunately, already started in the form of the OCCUpation and in the form of the organization
of the
occupied territories in Cyprus according to the rules
of Turkish law.
164. I shall spare the Council a prolonged debate,
since its members are fully aware of al! the aspects
of the Cyprus problem, Notwithstanding
the arguments and the eloquence of the representative of
Turkey, the fact remains that 30,000 troops and
300 tanks-Turkish
troops and Turkish tanks-are Still
occupying part of the Republic of Cyprus, and this
fact can neither be denied, nor justified, nor explained
legally or morally.

160. Before concluding, I feel I must comment on
the reference made today, at the last Council meeting
on this subject [2378rh tneetin,g], and on references
made a few days ago during a debate in the Third
Committee of the General Assembly on a humanitarian
issue, to our late President, Archbishop
Makarios.
The greatness and world renown of Makarios will live
on undiminished
and unweakened, notwithstanding
any attempts to ensure the contrary. Makarios is
a symbol, and was seen as such by his people and by
the peoples of the world struggling against colonialism
for independence,
freedom and justice. False and
malicious statements attributed to him by his enemies
and regurgitated
in the halls of the United Nations

NOTES
’ Officio/ Records of /hc Ge,wrc~/ ,4.~.sonh/y. Thirfy-.~~,~[‘~~f~~
Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/37/1).
? A/C.3/37/L.58 and Rev.], adopted by the Generib] Assembly
on 17 December 1982 as resolution 37/181.
j United Nations. Tiw~~y Series. vol. 382. No. 5475. p. 3.

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATlONS

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
dcs Nations
Unies
monde cntier. Informez-vous
aup&
dcs ventes,
New York ou Cicn&e.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United.Nelions.

NW

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

sent en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las pnblicacioncs
de Ix Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
or wrix
to: United Nations.
Sales Section,
New

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
esttin en vcnta en lib&as
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

00400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Its agences
1 : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies. Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccih
de Ventas,

8%60989-October

198Y-2,050
