S/PRST/2006/58

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 December 2006
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5606th meeting of the Security Council, held on 21 December 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Côte d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the International
Working Group (IWG), recalls its role as guarantor and impartial arbiter of the
peace process, and endorses its final communiqué of 1 December 2006. It also
encourages the IWG to promote enhanced dialogue with all Ivorian parties. It
insists that all Ivorian parties apply, under the direction of the Prime Minister,
the implementation timeline for the road map drawn up by the IWG.
“The Security Council shares the grave concern expressed by the IWG at
delays in the implementation of resolution 1721 (2006), and urges all Ivorian
parties to cooperate fully with the Prime Minister in order to implement all the
provisions of the road map drawn up by the IWG and referred to in resolution
1721 (2006), including the identification of population and the registration of
voters, and the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
programme, which are central to the peace process in Côte d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council, bearing in mind provisions of resolution 1572
(2004), recalls that the neutrality and impartiality of the public media are
essential to the peace process, and supports the IWG, which considered that it
is indispensable to reinstate the dismissed officials of the Radio Télévision
Ivoirienne (RTI) and Fraternité Matin. It recalls also that obstacles to the
freedom of movement of the impartial forces, in particular those put up by the
Republican Guard, are unacceptable.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the Prime Minister,
Mr. Charles Konan Banny. It strongly encourages him to continue his
endeavours, in consultation with President Laurent Gbagbo, including his
efforts to fight impunity and promote good governance, and to utilize all the
powers referred to in resolution 1721 (2006) to prepare for elections, which
must be held by 31 October 2007 at the latest. The Council welcomes in this
regard the announcement by the Prime Minister of immediate measures to
relaunch the identification process, and expects more concrete measures in
place to implement the DDR programme. The Security Council reaffirms that
the Prime Minister must exercise his powers without hindrance, including his

06-67798 (E) 211206

*0667798*

S/PRST/2006/58

authority over the Defence and Security Forces referred to in resolution 1721
(2006), and calls upon all Ivorian parties to support his efforts.
“The Security Council invites the African Union Mediator to visit Côte
d’Ivoire to relaunch the peace process as soon as possible, if necessary in
cooperation with all other African leaders.
“The Security Council requests the IWG, in preparation for its next
meeting on 12 January 2007, to provide a detailed update on the timeline for
the implementation of the peace process, and all the recommendations needed
for the consideration of the situation by ECOWAS and the African Union by
1 February 2007 at the latest.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Pierre Schori, for the High
Representative for the elections, Mr. Gérard Stoudmann, and for the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), as well as for the French forces
which support it.”

2

06-67798
