A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/183
6 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/183. Right to development

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Right to Development, 1/ which it proclaimed at its forty-first
session,
Recalling its resolutions 45/97 of 14 December 1990, 46/123 of 17 December 1991, 47/123 of
18 December 1992 and 48/130 of 20 December 1993, and those of the Commission on Human Rights relating to
the right to development, and taking note of Commission resolution 1994/21 of 1 March
1994, 2/
Recalling also the report on the Global Consultation on the Realization of the Right to Development as
a Human Right, 3/

1/

Resolution 41/128, annex.

2/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum
(E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
3/
95-77077

E/CN.4/1990/9/Rev.1.
/...

A/RES/49/183
Page 2

Recalling further the principles proclaimed in the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development of
14 June 1992, 4/
Mindful that the Commission on Human Rights continues to consider this matter, which is directed
towards the implementation and further enhancement of the right to development,
Recognizing the need to provide adequate resources to the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat to
support the work of the Working Group on the Right to Development,
Noting the need for coordination and cooperation throughout the United Nations system for the more
effective promotion of the right to development,
Recognizing that the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Centre for Human
Rights have important roles to play in the promotion and protection of the right to development,
Reaffirming the need for action at the national and international levels by all Member States to realize
all human rights, and the need for relevant evaluation mechanisms to ensure the promotion, encouragement and
reinforcement of the principles contained in the Declaration on the Right to Development,
Welcoming the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference on
Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 5/ which reaffirms the right to development as a universal and inalienable
right and an integral part of fundamental human rights and reaffirms that the human person is the central subject
of development,
Recalling that the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action examined the relationship between
democracy, development and human rights, and recognizing the importance of creating a favourable environment
in which everyone may enjoy their human rights as set out in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action,
Recalling also that, in order to promote development, equal attention and urgent consideration should be
given to the implementation, promotion and protection of civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights, and
recognizing that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated and that the
universality, objectivity, impartiality and non-selectivity of the consideration of human rights issues must be
ensured,
Noting that aspects of the Programme of Actionof the International Conference on Population and
Development, held at Cairo from 5 to 13 September 1994, 6/ are relevant to the universal realization of the
right to development,

4/ See Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14
June 1992 (A/CONF.151/26/Rev.1 (Vol. I and Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III and Vol. III/Corr.1) (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the Conference,
resolution 1, annex I.
5/

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.

6/

A/CONF.171/13, chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
/...

A/RES/49/183
Page 3

Welcoming the convening of the World Summit for Social Development and the Fourth World
Conference on Women: Action for Equality, Development and Peace in 1995 and the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in 1996, and affirming that those conferences constitute important
international steps towards the realization of the right to development, within the context of promoting and
protecting all human rights,
Taking note with appreciation of the continuing work of the Working Group on the Right to
Development during its three sessions, held at Geneva, from 8 to 19 November 1993, from 2 to 13 May 1994
and from 3 to 14 October 1994, 7/
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 8/ prepared pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 48/130,
1.
Reaffirms the importance of the right to development for every human person and all peoples
in all countries, in particular the developing countries;
2.

Takes note of the comprehensive report of the Secretary-General; 8/

3.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-first
session a report on the implementation of Commission resolution 1994/21;
4.
Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to consider carefully the reports of the Working
Group on the Right to Development 7/ and to request the Working Group, in fulfilling its mandate, to continue
to examine and sustain attention to all the various aspects of the right to development, with a view to making
recommendations for enhancing the universal realization of the right to development through, inter alia, the
implementation of the provisions of the Declaration on the Right to Development, reaffirmed by the Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action;
5.
Requests the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat to continue to be forthcoming in
providing adequate services and logistical support to the Working Group on the Right to Development to ensure
the smooth functioning of its meetings;
6.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue coordination of the various activities with regard to
the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development;
7.
Also requests the Secretary-General to ask the Centre for Human Rights to provide a
programmatic follow-up on the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development, as part of the
efforts to implement the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action;
8.
Requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, within his mandate, to
continue to take steps for the promotion and protection of the right to development by, inter alia, working in
conjunction with the Centre for Human Rights and drawing on the expertise of the funds, programmes and
specialized agencies of the United Nations system related to the field of development;

7/

See E/CN.4/1994/21 and Corr.1, E/CN.4/1995/11 and E/CN.4/1995/27.

8/

A/49/653.
/...

A/RES/49/183
Page 4

9.
Supports the current initiatives of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
within his mandate, to consult with all relevant bodies, funds, programmes and specialized agencies of the United
Nations system on how they may promote the right to development;
10.
Invites the regional commissions and regional intergovernmental organizations to consider how
they may contribute to the realization of the right to development, including through convening meetings of
governmental experts and representative non-governmental and grass-roots organizations for the purpose of
seeking arrangements or agreements for the implementation of the Declaration on the Right to Development
through international cooperation;
11.
Requests the Secretary-General to inform the Commission on Human Rights at its fifty-first
session and the General Assembly at its fiftieth session of the activities of the organizations, funds, programmes
and specialized agencies of the United Nations system relating to the implementation of the Declaration on the
Right to Development;
12.
Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to continue to make proposals to the General
Assembly, through the Economic and Social Council, on the future course of action on the question, in particular
on practical measures for the implementation and enhancement of the Declaration on the Right to Development,
taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the Global Consultation on the Realization of the
Right to Development as a Human Right and the reports of the Working Group on the Right to Development;
13.
Reiterates its commitment to implementing the results of the World Conference on Human
Rights, at which it was reaffirmed that all human rights are universal, indivisible, interdependent and interrelated
and that democracy, development and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing;
14.
Calls upon States Members of the United Nations to address, within the declarations and
programmes of action to be adopted by the World Summit for Social Development, the Fourth World Conference
on Women and the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), the elements for the
promotion and protection of the principles of the right to development, as set out in the Declaration on the Right
to Development;
15.
Decides to consider this question at its fiftieth session under the sub-item entitled "Human
rights questions, including alternative approaches for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and
fundamental freedoms".

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
