71

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Noting also the reference made in the report to
the need to open up the Organization to young people
and to ensure their participation in the planning, implementation and evaluation of United Nations policies
and programmes,45
Noting further the reference made in the report
to the fact that only 4.6 per cent of the United Nations professional staff is under 30 years of age, 46
1. Endnrses the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that the guidelines for the recruitment of young
staff members to the United Nations Secretariat contained in General Assembly resolution 2736 (XXV)
should be fully implemented;47
2. Requests the Secretary-General to broaden effectively by all available means the base of employment for qualified youth, with equitable geographical
distribution and taking into account the need to secure
the highest standards of efficiency, competence and
integrity;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly, not later than at its thirtieth
session, a progress report on the extent of increased
employment and mobility of young people in the
United Nations, particularly by the opening of specific opportunities whereby communication would best be
realized through participation.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3025 (XXVII). Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, 48
Recalling the recommendation addressed to Member States in its resolution 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971, in particular its belief that the corning
into force of the International Covenants on Human
Rights and the Optional Protocol will greatly enhance
the ability of the United Nations to promote and
encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, and will contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Expresses the hope that Member States will find it
possible to take appropriate action with a view to
accelerating the steps that would enable them to deposit
their instrument of ratification or accession if possible
by 10 December 1973.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
4 5 fbid., para. 31.

46 A/8743, annex, para. St.
47 A/8743, para. 39 (d).
48 A/8788.

3026 (XXVII). Human rights and scientific and
technological developments
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that mankind has reached a point where
the acceleration of scientific and technological progress may, depending on its use, either be conducive
to the enhancement and dissemination of artistic and
cultural values, constituting part of the heritage of
mankind, or add to the risk of debasing them,
Conscious of the irreplaceable character of the
cultural environment, which will acquire increasing
importance with the progress of economic and social
development,
Fearing that the world may be impoverished by
succumbing to uniformity and monotony in modes of
life,
Considering that now is the time, before the trend
becomes irreversible, for mankind to save the wealth
and diversity of its cultures and to secure the best
possible conditions for their further development,
1. Invites Governments to make provision as far
as possible, in their national development pl~ns and
programmes for the preservation and development of
cultural values;
2. Requests the Director-General of the United
~ations Educati<?nal, Scientific and Cultural Organization to commumcate to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-eighth session, his views on the problem of the
preservation and further development of cultural
values, on the measures already taken by the international community and on further measures that should
be taken;
3. Requests the Economic and Social Council and
the Commission on Human Rights to attach to the
above problem the importance it requires.
2114 th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2450 (XXIII) of 19 December 1968 and 2721 (XXV) of 15 December 1970
on human rights and scientific and technological developments,
Recalling Commission on Human Rights resolution
10 (XXVII) of 18 March 1971;19
Ex_pressi_ng_ its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his prehmmary reports on this matter, 50
Noting with appreciation the report of the Seminar
on Human Rights and Scientific and Technological
D~velopments 51 organized by the Government of Austna and held at Vienna in 1'.Inc 1972 which con!ributed considerably to the exploration' of this subJect,
Reaffirming the importance of this matter and the
need to respond urgently to the demand of world public opinion,
49 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fiftieth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/4949), chap. XIX.
'
r;o E/CN.4/1028 and Add.l and 2, Add.3 and Corr.I,
Add.4-6; E/CN.4/1084.
51 ST/TAO/HR/45.
