UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/36
11 July 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3798th meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 July 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Sierra Leone", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of 27 May 1997
(S/PRST/1997/29) following the military coup d’état in Sierra Leone on
25 May 1997. It remains deeply concerned about the continuing crisis in Sierra
Leone and its negative humanitarian consequences on the civilian population
including refugees and internally displaced persons and in particular, the
atrocities committed against Sierra Leone’s citizens, foreign nationals and
personnel of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) monitoring
group. It reiterates its view that the attempt to overthrow the democratically
elected Government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah is unacceptable and calls
again for the immediate and unconditional restoration of constitutional order in
the country.
The Security Council is concerned about the grave crisis in Sierra Leone
which endangers the peace, security and stability of the whole region and, in
particular, about its possible negative impact on the ongoing peace process in
neighbouring Liberia.
The Security Council strongly supports the decision of the Thirty-third
Summit of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) held in Harare, Zimbabwe, from
2 to 4 June 1997 which appealed to the ECOWAS leaders and the international
community to help the people of Sierra Leone to restore the constitutional order
in that country and which underlined the imperative need to implement the
Abidjan Agreement which continues to serve as a viable framework for peace,
stability and reconciliation in Sierra Leone.
The Security Council welcomes the participation of the Foreign Ministers of
ECOWAS members of the Committee of Four in its 3797th meeting of 11 July 1997.
The Security Council welcomes the mediation efforts initiated by ECOWAS and
expresses its full support for the objectives of these efforts as set out in the
final communiqué (S/1997/499), issued at the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of
ECOWAS, held in Conakry, Guinea, on 26 June 1997.
97-19246 (E)

110797

/...

S/PRST/1997/36
English
Page 2

The Security Council calls upon those who have seized power to cooperate
fully with these efforts so that the constitutional order in Sierra Leone will
be restored immediately.
The Security Council will continue to follow closely the progress of
efforts aimed at the peaceful resolution of the crisis and stands ready to
consider appropriate measures if constitutional order in Sierra Leone is not
restored without delay.
The Security Council will remain actively seized of this matter.

-----
