UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1797’”

MEETING: 21 OCTGRER 1974

bi
N

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (SIAgenda11797).1*.~.....1.,.11,.,.*.,.....,.*..,,,.

1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Shadhel Taqa, Minister for Foreign.Affairs of
Iraq ,,,,1,,...,........................,...1.11.1...,,,,,,,,,,,,.,

1

Adoption of the agenda ..I.................l,...I....,.,,.,,,.,,,,.,,.,

1

Relationship between the United Nations and South Africa:
(a) Letter-dated 30 September 1974from the President of the General Assembly
to the President of the Security Council (S/11525);.
(b) Letter dated 9 October 1974from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11532).1.1.1.1.....1..........11..,.1,.......,.....,,,.,,,,,,,,,

1

SIPV.1797

2
re
01

Prer

(Unit
NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures, Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
-.,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisiorrs of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1%5, became fully operative
on that date.

Present: The 1
Australia, Aus
Republic, Chin
Iraq, Kenya, 1
Socialist Repu
Britain and Nc
Cameroomn*do 1
--Provial

1.- Adoption of
2. Relationship
South Africi
(a) Letter (
Presider
Presider
- (6) Letter
Permanc
United
of the Sl

1. The PRESI
Before turning t
it is my-sad -dul
that the distingr:
Iraq, Mr. @adI
opportunity to I
on behalf of tl
on the loss that
the representati,
our condolences
of the deceased.
2. Mr. AL-S1
I should like to.
for the kind exl
sad occasion of
the Foreign Min
gone to atten
conference.
3. I had know
dear friend and

MI
iz

M,

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND NINETY$BEVENTH MEETING

:
an

for

Held in New York on Monday, 21 October 1974, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. Michel NJIN$
(United Republic of Cameroon).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
Republic, China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia,
Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Petu, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon and United States of America.

=~ProvisionaI agenda (S/Agenda/l797)
1: -.~-~
AW?!uu$the
wws!!@ .~.
2, Relationship between the United Nations and
South Africa:
(u) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the
-President of the General Assembly to the
President of the Security Council (S/J 1525);
” (b) Letter dated 9 October 1974 from the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/l 1532)
The meeting was cajled (0 q$er at 4 p.m.

Tritpte to the memory of Mr. Shadhel Taqa,
Minister for%oreign Affairs of Iraq
1, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Before turning to the agenda for the present meeting,
it is my sad duty to inform members of the Council
that the distinguished Minister for Foreign Atrars of
Iraq, Mr. Shadhel Taqa, .died yesterday. I take this
opportunity to address to the representative of Iraq
on behalf of the Council our sincere condolences
on the loss that Iraq has just sustained and I request
the representative of Iraq to be so kind as to convey
our condolences to his Government and to the family
of the deceased.
2. Mr. AL-SHAIKHLY
(Iraq): Mr. President,
1 should like tq.thank you on behalf of my delegation
for the kind expression of sympathy offered on the
sad occasion of the sudden death of Shadhel Taqa,
the Foreign Minister of Iraq, in Rabat, where he had
gone to attend the forthcoming Asab summit
conference.
3. I had known Shadhel Taqa for many yea:s as a
dear friend and close colleague. Shadhel Taqa was

appointed to his first diplomatic post as the Iraqi
Ambassador to Moscow in 1969 while I was serving
as Foreign Minister. Upon his return to Baghdad
he. served with me as the Permanent Under-Secretary
at the Ministry, a post he held with distinction until
he himself was appointed Minister for Foreign Affairs
last July,
4. Shadhel Taqa was with us in New York to address
the General Assembly and it was only last Thursday
that we bade him farewell at Kennedy Airport.
During the b 10 weeks he spent here he worked with
the same selfless dedication that had characterized
his services for his country and for the Arab cause.
His untimely death is a great loss for Iraq. He will be
deeply missed by his many friends and all his
countrymen.

k”
cc
w

GL

the
Yl
be
pe:
Prc

in

us1
g;

5. I shall convey the kind words that have been said
at this Council meeting TommyGovernment and to the
bereaved family.
Adopt@ of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

:

Relationship between the United Natlans and South
Africa:
(a) Letter dated 30 September 1974 from the President
of the &n&al Assembly addressed tp the IW@ent
__
of the Security Council (S/11525);
(6) Letter dated 9 October 1974 km the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nagions
addressed to the President of the Security CottllcU
(S/11532)
6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council
at its 17%th meeting I invite the representatives of
Algeria, Cuba, Dahomey, Egypt, Guinea, Mali,
Mauritius, Morocco, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia,
the United Republic of Tanzania and Zaire to
participate, without the right to vote, under Article 31
of the Charter and in accordance with the pertinent
provisions of the provisional rules of procedure,
in the Council’s discussion.

9.
my

of :
ii*
tbi:

10,
to :
on
of
COI
resi

tha
wit.
bon

Afr

and
its i
and

11.
ado

Martin
Clss& (Guinea),
Mr.
Traorb (Mali),
Mr, Ramphul (Mauritius), Mr. Slaoui (Morocco),
Mr, Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Luke (Sierra Leone), Mr. Ghalib (Somalia),
Mr. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Driss
(Tunisia), Mr. Sal/m (United Republic of Tanzania)
and Mr. Mutuale (Zaire) took the places reserved
for them at the sideof the Council chamber,

3207 (XXIX), calling upon the Security Council to
review the relationship between the United Nations
and South Africa in the light of the constant violation
by South Africa of the principles of the Charter and
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
12. We are here now to discussthe positionof South
Africa vis-8-vis the Organization and also to decide
upon ,the action which should be taken in order to
defend the United Nations against tl~e~pe_rpetual
dolation of its Charter and principles.

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
Jurthermore, I have to inform the members of the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bangladesh, the Congo, Ghana,
Guyana, Madagascar, Qatar, South Africa, Uganda,
the United Arab Emirates, Upper Volta and
Yugoslavia asking that their delegations too should
be invited, under Article 31 of the Charter and the
pertinent provisions of the provisional rules of
procedure, to participate, without the right to vote,
in the Council’s discussion, In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate,
@~~&tha~$&
to vote, in the Council’s discussion.

13. Apartheid, racism, racial discrimination and
racial segregation are all different versions of only
one claim, that is to say, the superiority of one
race over another. Such biological superiority was
raised in the past by the Nazis and now by the South
African rhgime. The natural result of Hitler’s racial
policies was the disappearance of international law in
a twofold sense: there would be no equal right of
nations and there would be no equal rights for
minorities or human beings irrespective of race.
14. In the light of such anarchism in international
relations, the outbreak of the Second World War
was an anticipated Inaction. That war cost humanity
dear: over 20 million victims of the fanatic expansionist
myth of racial superiority. Moreover, the fall of the
League of Nations was another manifestation of the
chaotk_character of -international relations at that
time.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Karim
(Bangladesh), Mr.. Mondio (Congo), Mr. Boaten
(Ghana), Mr. Jackson (Guyana), Mr. Rabetqflka
(Madagascar), Mr. Jamal (Qatar) Mr. Botha (South
AjIica), Mr. Kinene (Uganda), Mr. Humaidan
(United Arab Emirates),Mr. Yaguibou (Upser Volta)
and Mr. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for jhem at,the side Of the Council chamber.

15. The paradox par excellence is that almost
30 years after the end of the Second World War
drama we are meeting in this Chamber now to
deliberate on the repulsiveness and atrocity of a
replica of naei racial superiority, represented by the
apgrtheid policies of the South African regime.

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The first speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
.
his statement,
9. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt): Before I begin
my statement, I should like to offer to the delegation
of Iraq our sincere condolences on the sudden death
of the Foreign Minister of Iraq. I would ask the
delegation of Iraq to convey our deepest sympathy to
the, family sf the deceased.

16. South African apartheid policies are a historically
cumulative and purposeful system of racial containment. That system’s operational components, each
with its own experiential profile and time-frame, fall
into four distinct yet converging categories: one,
racial prejudice and discrimination; two, racial
segregation -and separation; three, -economic
exploitation of natural and human resources; and,
four, legal, administrative and police terror. Associated
with each is a set of functions and instruments.

IO, Mr. President, at the outset allow me to address
to you the warmest congratulations of my delegation
on the accession of youi country, the United Republic
of Cameroon, to the presidency of the Security
Council. With your prominent skills-and since you
come from a country whose tradition of justice and
respect for human rights is well known-1 am confident
that you will dischargethe dulies of your high office
with great competenceand wisdom. It is a great
honour and source of pride that one of the sonsof
Africa is presidingover this body during this month,
and this confirms Africa’s determinationto shoulder
its responsibilitiesfor maintaininginternational peace
and security basedon justice and humanequity.
11. On 30 September 1974 the General Assembly
adopted an important resolution, resolution
2

-

al:
in
th
hE
lei
‘2

Someare viewedasessentialmainly to the attainment
of apartheid; others are the basic ingredients of
apartheid. For example, its proponents would have
the world believe that genuine upurtheid is racial
separation, terror being simply a meansto perfect
the end. In reality, the terror, whatever the intentions
of its white perpetrators, is also the true apartheid
and perhaps its most indestructible component on
which it is dependentfor its continuation.
17. Through the upurtheid
doctrine, the South
African rCgimehas been consolidatingpower in -its
own hands and disposingof any opposition. It has

18
be
of
ac
Al
an
it
ral
be
in
fir
ah
so
Fiil
li:
wi
thl
El
el!

iii
an
le4

it
dis
th
so
an
WI

ra’
hil

ec
th
th
an
IlZl
re
WI

also been fragmenting the people of South Africa
into racial and ethnic groups and effectively segregating
these groups from one another. The Government
has established four major “racial groups” by
legislative measures and subdivided these into further
“ethnic” categories. All in all, there are 20 such
categories, which are divided as follows: one,
whites, 3,960,000-English-speaking,
40 per cent;
Afrikaans-speaking, 60 per cent; two, Coloured people,
2,144,000-these are people of mixed African and
white ~descent and- they are further subdivided into
seven categories, the last of which is “other
Coloured”; three, Indians, 668,000-these are people
of Asian descent; lastly, African people, 16,217,OOO.
The Government has divided the African people into
a number of so-called nations, which are Xhosa,
Zulu, Tswana, Venda, Sotho, Pedi, Swazi, Ndebele,
Shangaqn and others.
18. The mi\ior legislative distinctions are drawn
between whites and non-whites. Almost every aspect
of life conforms COthis division. Sex and marriage
across this line are prohibited by the Immorality
Act. All social amenities-like buses, trains, cinemas
and other places of public entertainment, beaches,
restaurants and all residential areas-are segregated on
this basis. Education is divided into the four major
racial categories and mother-tongue instruction has
been introduced. South Africans have Co be educated
in the language of their parents, at least for their
first years of schooling, and education is given in
almost a dozen languages at this level. Separate
so-called governmental institutions
have been
eStablished for each of the major black groups, and
their participation in “white politics” is not allowed.

all other South Africans. As the appearance of
parliamentarydemocracyhas beenmaintainedby the
Government and its supporters,so hasthe myth that
economic development in South Africa has meant
progress for all. The facts. demonstrate t@t this
assertionis not true.
20. It must be stressedthat, blacks make up ‘the
mqjority of the labour force, Official figures show
ratios ranging from 8.56 to 1 in mining, 2.45 to 1 in
manufacturing,3.38 Co1 in construction, 1.12to 1 in
electricity, 1.25to 1 in the railways, and 3.8 Co1 in
the post office. It has been shown, however, that
the 16 million Africans who make up 70 per cent of
the population receive only 18.5 per cent of the
nation’spersonalcashincome.Whites, who constitute
17.5per cent of the population, receive 73.3 per cent
of its income. The averageincome in 1%9’for whites
works out at 95 rand, that is Cosay, $133per month;
and for Africans at 7 rand, $9.80 per month. This
means-that on average the per capita income of
Africans is 6 per cent of Chatof whites. Whites and
Africans representthe top and bottom of the racial
hierarchy. Thus, the gap between black and white
incomeshas grown in proportion to the decline in
black trade union activities; and Afraer -~~--~~;incomehas
grown at the greatestrate of all.
,’
i ‘.
21. A further indication of the racial hierarchy is
governmentspending.For example, in 1%9, the State
and provinces spent238million rand on educationfor
whites and 39.5 million rand on .African education.
Expenditure per headon African educationis lessthan
one eighth of that on white, education, and the gap

has grown for 13 years.

19. This body of racial legislation can divide and
hasdivided families-mother from son, husbandfrom
wife-and where clear racial lines cannot be found,
they are arbitrated by Racial ClassificationBoards,
Every South African is identified by race. If nothing
else, the 200 racial laws testify to the artificial
nature of the order which has been imposed,as do
the often severepenaltieswhich reinforce thoselaws
and the many breacheswhich occur. Further, this
!egislation has effectively broken the lines of
communication, co-operation and understanding
betweenthe different groups.By means of the classic
divide-and-rulepolicy the Government hasreinforced
the centralization of power. But the policy has also
sown the seedsof inter-group tension and conflict,
and seriously threatened relations not just between
white and black but between black and black. The
racial segmentsinto which the peopleof South Africa
have been divided now form a hierarchy of which
economli:statusprovidesthe clearestillustration. Over
the 23 yearsit hasgoverned, the rCgimehaspromoted
the economicinterestsof the Afrikaners, who founded
and support it, over those of every other group. It
has also ensured the ever greater allocation of
resourcesand rmterial wealth to membersof the
white group as a whole al the direct expense of
3

I

22. The dlaimsof the rhgime to maintain so-called
“law and order” -and so-called“stable government”
may have impresseda number of critics, but-‘they
are clearly maintainedat the cost of civil and human
rights. The dimensionsof the problemof enforcement
illustqte this further and point to serious and growing

social disorder. Official figures show that a total of
nearly 3 million alleged contraventions of legislation
took place in 1%9. Of these, more than 2 million
peoplewere sentfor trial and a further 170,000fiople
Were sent for trial for ‘crimes of -iioience~ (muid&,

infanticide, assault and culpable homicide). Of more
than 6,000allegedmurders, 153involved white people
and 6,000 black people.Of the total numberof people
sent for trial, 932,000,or nearly 40 per cent, were
accusedof the so-called “technical” offences, primarily involving raciallegislationsuchasthepasslaws.
This representsa figure of almost 2,500 people pel
day. The averagedaily prison population was 90,55S
in 1969-1970.
23. With regard to African political movkments,
nation-wide political parties of Africans, except in
the so-called “homeland”, are proscribed in South
Africa. None is, in any case, permitted to contest
elections for seats in the Parliament or provincial

I
;
t
c

i
c
a
C
C
I

a

fb
Ii

legislatures. The right of political assembly outside
the “homeland” and African townships is refused
to Africans. Wherever political gatherings do occur,
they are subject to close police scrutiny. Violence
is expected to escalate, since the mdority of South
Africans will co@nue to pppose apartheid.
24, Hence, the basic result of the apartheid policies
of South Africa can be seen in its victims. The
casualty list includes the inhabitants, the institutions
and the future of South Africa. Chief Albert Luthuli
and Nelson Mandela, the victims of the Sharpeville
and those of the more recent Carletonville massacre
are among the victims best known to. the outside
world. Africans have suffered every conceivable
type of disaster, from homicide to humiliation, from
the expropriation of land to grinding poverty, from
brutal imprisonment
to relentless persecution.
With their family life shattered, careers wrecked,
education disrupted, and in constant danger of bodily
harm, the vast mdority are permanently maimed in
one fashion or another.
25. %he’ Africans are joined by the Coloured DeoDle.
who encounter disabilities and indignities ai eiery
turn insthe road. -As an excuse for segregation, they
are deprived of their historic political rights and their
heritage. They are a people divested of hope.
26. In a word, racial containment means control
over conditions of compulsion, apartheid reflecting
the aspirations and the determination of the 4 million
“white” minority to rule over 16 million Africans
and 2 million Asians~and Coloured people.

30. The occupation by the South African rigime of
Namibia, in disregard of all United Nations resolutions
and of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, I confirms that racialism and
colonialism arc two faces of one coin,
31, Moreover, the collabqration between the racist
rcSgimes in South Africa and Israel represents a
serious threat to the war of liberation and to
international peace and security, The report dated
29 April 1974 of the Sub-Committee on ~the
Implementation of United Nations Resolutions and
Collaboration with South Africa, 2 A Sub-Committee
of the Special Committee on Apcrr~hcid, casts light
on that fact. It states that st the outbreak of the
liberation war of October 1973 the Prime Minister
of South Africa, Mr. Vorster, had said that if israel
lost the war its defeat would have important consequences for the Republic of South Africa. The report
went on to state that Mr. Vorster had said that the
Middle East conflict wasgreatly affecting South A?ica
and that it wasimportant for South Africa to study the
Middle East situation closely, It further stated that the
South African Defence Minister, Mr. Botha, had
drawn a parallel bqtween Israel and South Africa as
bulwarks of the We& and declared that South Africa
would find ways of showing its deepest sympathies
for Israel in a practical manner, short of sending
weapons or soldiers.
32. Press reports of October 1973 also alleged that
South African military personnel had participated
in the war on the Israeli side for training purposes.
Earlier reports had stated that Israel had supplied
military equipment and training facilities to South
African counter-insurgency forces. The abovementioned report of the Sub-Committee refers to
certain incidents which could be complementary to
the press reports I have mentioned. That report
states that at the outbreak of the October war the
South African Zionist Federation had launched an
emergency appear for contributions by -uividuals
and companies to help meet the so-called “humanitarian needs” of Israel, and although the total
amount collected was not disclosed, it was believed
that millions of dollars had been sent to Israel
as’ a result of Gmd-raising a&ivities by the Israeli
United Appeal , a voluntary organization which
operates under the South African Zionist Federation,
and by several community groups, over 340,000 rand
having been raised in two days. in December 1973,
hundreds of young South African volunteers flew to
Israel in response to an appeal by the South African
Zionist Federation to replace kibbutzim worker-s
who were engaged in the war, the report stated.

The aparrheid
policy is nor limited to South
African ~territory; it is extended outside to the south
and to the north, where acts of intimidation and
aggression ‘and threats to international peace and
security are repeatedly perpetuated by the South
A&&n r&time and its allies.

27.

28.- In that context my delegation would like to refer
to cetin flagrant examples. The readiness of the
aovemment of South Africa to resort to force gives
caqse for alarm; hence the freedom fighters fighting
ofi the borders of Rhodesia, in the territories under
Portuguese ~administration and in Namibia, That
conflict is escalating, and both tlie freedom fighters
and the South African rtgime have given warning
of unremitting hostilities. With the drastic escalation
of South African defence expenditure and the commitment of most of Africa to the side of the freedom
fighters, the potential for this situation to expand into
an international conflict gives grave cause for concern.

33. The collaboration between the racist rigimes in
South Africa and Israel is not confined to military

29. ‘l’+is dilemma is crystal clear in the example of
the military presence of the South African rigime in
Southern Rhodesia in order to back the illegal racist
rkgime of Ian Smith, as well as to threaten any
African country which lends its support to the
liberation struggle.
4

collaboration in order to suppress

the liberation
struggle but is extended into the political and economic
fields. In that connexion, the report of the SubCommittee to which I have referred states that the
Government of Israel, for its part had also shown
support for the South African upcrrthcid regime at
the twenty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
when its delegationhad abstainedin the voting on

resolutions 3151 D and E (XXVIII) and voted against
resolution 3151 G (XXVIII), and been absent during
the voting on other resolutions on crpurrheid.
34, The report goes on to say that economic
relations between South Africa and Israel have been
rapidly increasing, an Israeli-South Africa Chamber
of Commercehaving been opened in Tel Aviv in
January of this year. Speaking at the inauguration
ceremony-the report goeson-the Chairmanof the

new organization declared that Israeli exports to
South Africa had increased from approximately
$9 million in 1972 to $12 million in 1973 and that
Israeli imports from South Africa had increased from
$11.6 million to $30 million in the same period; and
the South African Consul-General in Tel Aviv had
declared that trade between the two countries was
expected to increase again considerably this year.
35. In March 1974, the report of the Sub-Committee
concludes, a correspondent of the Johannesburg
Swrdc4y Times who spent two weeks in Israel reported
that South African firms were actively seeking investment opportunities in Israel in order :o gain easy
accessto the European Common Market after Israel’s
application for associate membership of the Market
hadbeen formally approved later in 1974.

the resolution adopted at Magadiscio by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and resolution 3207 (XXIX), which the General Assembly just
adopted, by which the credentials of the South
African regime have been rejected.
38. Such a decision is based on certain specific
judgements, mainly the following: the South African
regime is perpetually violating the founding principles of the Charter; the South African regime
disregards all United Nations resolutions that condemn
and reject the apartheid policies; by applying racial
policies, the South African regime has isolated and
separated itself from the majority component of its
society and therefore, in constitutional terms, that
regime does not legitime’ ‘!y represent the South
African people; the South African regime is intensifying
its colonial and racist policies in Namibia; and,
finally, the South African regime, through its practices
and its collaboration with the other racial regimes,
represents a serious threat to international peace and
security,
39. There are some who contend that we should not
expel South Africa on the grounds that the principle
of expulsion would constitute a serious precedent
vis-a-vis the permanence of United Nations
membership. They also argue that we must maintain
the membership of South Africa while putting
pressure on it from within m order to force it to
abandon its inhuman policies.

40. With regard to the first argument, one could
inquire which is more vital to the Organization-to
have the precedent of expulsion of an obstinate
member or, to establish the serious precedent of a
36. The Organization and the Charter are now facing perpetual breach of the Charter. Furthermore, the
a big challenge-that of apartheid policies, policies state of membership is valid as long as there is
which not only deliberatelyviolate the basicprinciples adherence to the aims and principles of the Charter.
of human rights but also threaten the stability of Once those principles have been violated purposely
international peace and security through the notorious and repeatedly, it goes without saying that such
collaboration between the different racist regimes and membership would be non-existent and should be
their supporters. Tnerefore, the members of the null and void.
Security Council are now facing two specific 41. Turning now to the other argument-that is,
alternatives-either to insist on sovereignty and the putting pressure upon South Africa from within the
maintenance of our Charter against any persistent Organization-my
delegation opposes that idea also,
violations, or to consider the Charter merely a since over a period of years the United Nations has
theoretical piece of work with no real application, exhausted all possible remedial pressures and means
by closing our eyes to violations while reciting its against South Africa. But South Africa disregards
principlesandconceptson different occasionswithout
seriousintent or sincerity. In other words, we must
decide either to maintain the United Nations as an
effective body for the maintenanceof interdependent
relations,justice, peaceand security, or to sow the
seedsofits decay, and see it follow the fate of its
predecessor,the Leagueof Nations.

and ignoresall the United Nations efforts. Therefore.
what are we waiting for? If we are waiting for a
miracle that could changethe South African attitude,
1would say this is not the time for miracles.

42. Yet expulsionof South Africa doesnot contradict
the universality of the Organization, sinceuniversahtv
in essencemeans that all Members abide by the
37. Our, sincere adherence to the Charter now same Charter principles which imply brotherhood
imposesupon us the adoption of certain measures and interdependence.
against South Africa. Among such measures is
expulsion of the South African regime from the 43. Foreign investment in South Africa bears a
membershipof the Organization in conformity with heavy responsibility for ccptrrtheid. Although thev

L

are by no means the exclusive underwriters of
foreign investors are none the less to be
counted among the bankers and providers of knowhow for the present version of upartheid, Their roles
are to be identified directly with a mr\jor cornerstone of racial containment-namely,
economic
exploitation as reflected in the high rate of earnings,
profits being repatriated regularly or ploughed back
into plant expansion or new enterprises, as has
occurred repeatedly now that the investment base is
sufftciently broad and diversified,

vote of 125 to l-to take necessary action under the
Charter in the face of persistent and flagrant violation
of the principles of the Charter and the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights by the South African
r&me,

apartheid,

51. The facts of the situation are very clear and
have long been acknowledged by the Security Council
and the General Assembly. The relevant provisions
of the Charter are equally clear. Article 6 states that
a Member of the United Nations which has persistently
violated the principles contained in the Charter may
be expelled from the Organization by the Assembly
upon the recommendation of the Council. It is time
that the Council took the action that is incumbent
upon it.

44. Consequently, the decisive and fair action of
expelling the South African rbgime from the United
Nations should be implemented and observed by all
the Members, since the main aim of such expulsion
is the complete isolation of that rkgitne. Such isolation
implies that every Member State should refrain from
any kind of dealings with the South African rdgime.
That action should go hand in hand with full and
unconditional support for the people of South Africa
and Namibia ,in their legitimate struggle for national
liberation.

52. The Organization has been seized of the problem
of racism in South Africa ever sinr - the first session
of the General Assembly in 19-t6. In scores of
resolutions, the Assembly has appealed to, demanded
and warned the South African rbgime to abandon
its racial policies, but to no avail. The Security
Council itself has considered the situation since the
Sharpeville massacre in l%O and adopted seven
resolutions calling u’pon the South African rigime to
desist from its policies, which are not only contrary
to the Charter and to the norms of the civilized
world, but are a menace to international peace. Indeed,
the Cotincil determined, as long ago as 1963, that
the policies and actions of the South African rkgime
seriously disturbed international peace and security
in southern Africa.

4s. The situation in South Africa is mounting to a
crisis that will either be followed by further repression
or explode into active conflict, the dimensions and
impact of which may extend far beyond South Africa
itself. Thus let us all shoulder our responsibility
towards the Organization and also towards peace,
justiceand humansdignity.
46. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Nigeria;
I now invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make a statement.
47. Mr. OGBU (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
wishes to extend to the Iraqi delegation its sincerest
condolences on the sad death of the Foreign Minister
Of IraS.
48. Mr. President, it is a matter of great satisfaction
to my delegation to see you presiding over the affairs
of the Security Council for this month when it is
seized of this matter of great concern to the world and
particularly to the continent of Africa. As you come
from the friendly neighbouring country of the
Cameroon, we are aware of the total commitment
of your Government, your people and yourself to
the cause of the total eradication of upurtheid
from the face of the world. We congratulateyou.
49. Today, the United Nations, especially its
principal organ, stands on the threshold of a
momentousdecision:a decisionwhich may strengthen
the faith of nationsand peoplesin the United Nations
or start a gradual processof eroding its credibility
and moral authority.
50. The Security Council hasbeen requestedby the
General Assembly-by an ocerhwelming majority
6

53. The transgressions of the crprrrtheid rdgime in
South Africa have been fully documented. I would
like to draw your attention in particular !o the
report of the Special Committee on Apartheid, of which
1 have the honour to be the current Chairman, on
“violations of the Charter of the United Nations and
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council by the South African rkgime”. 3 This report
has been transmitted to the Security Council [S/11537].
The Special Committee has recalled that the two
principal organs of the United Nations have already
determined that the South African rigime has
persistently violated the prin’ciples of the Charter.
I would draw your attention to paragraphs 16 to 26 of
the report, where it is pointed out that the General
Assembly determinedthus in no lessthan II resolutions between 1953and 1972.
54. As long agoas 1962-in resolution1761(XVII)the General Assembly requested the Security Council
to consider action under Article 6 of the Charter.
In 1973,in its resolution3068(XXVIII), the General
Assemblydeclaredthat rcpcwthrid wasa crime against
humanityand adoptedan International Convention on
the Suppressionand Punishmentof the Crime of
Apcrrthcitl.
__~

55. The Security Council itself recognized, in
resolution 134 (l%O), that the grave situation in
South Africa had arisen because of the disregard by
the South African rbgime of the General Assembly
resolutions calling upon it to bring its policies into
conformity with its obligations and responsibilities
under the Charter. In resolution 182 (1%3), it
determined that the discriminatory and repressive
measures imposed by the South African r6gime
were contrary to the principles and p.urposes of the
Charter and were in violation of its obligations as
a Member of the United Nations and of the provisions
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In
resolution 191 (1964), the Council again determined
that the policies of upurthrid were contrary to the
principles and purposes of the Charter and inconsistent
with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, as well as South Africa’s obligations
under the Charter. In resolution 311 (19721, the
Council condemned the South African rkgime for
continuing its policies of apartheid in violation of
its obligations under the Charter.

,

59. The paramount consideration must be the record
of the South African rt5gime in the light of the clear
provisions of Articles 4, S and 6 of the Charter. Any
other considerations, especially the diplomatic,
economic and other relations, which some members
of the Council have regrettably continued to maintain
with the South African rkgime in contravention of the
appeals of the General Assembly, cannot be and must
not be allowed to influence the decision of the Council.
60. My delegation hopes that the Security council
will act in such a way as to preserve the integrity
of the Charter and the confidence reposed by
Governments and peoples in the Organization,
61. We are aware of the doubts expressed by some
delegations as to the desirability or wisdom of
expelling the South African r6gime from ‘the
Organization. We believe that there is little basis
for any hesitation at this time, after all the warnings
given by the United Nations for over a decade and
the record of the South African r&gime, which has,
during this period, merely reinforced the structure of
apartheid and threatened peace all over southern
Africa.

56. Thus, both the General Assembly and the
Security Councii have determined, over a period of
many years, that the South African rdgime has violated
the principles of the Charter. That rbgime, which has
elevated racial discrimination and segregation to a
national creed, has shown no willingness to revise
its course and abide by the principles of,the Charter.

62. Some people have suggested, for instance, that
the principle of universality of the Organization will
be violated if the South African regime is expelled.
This argument c(rmes rather strangely from those who
have obstructed the universality of the Organlzation
by hindering the processes of decolonization, not to
mention their record with respect to the representation
of the People’s Republic of China. Universality can
be pursued only in accordance with the principles
of the Charter, and not as a means to condone and
defend gross violations of the Charter, Otherwise,
Articles 5 and 6 of the Charter would become
inoperative and it would become impossible for the
Organization to take. any step to bring ap q&g Member state in@ Wc
_ ..~-. _..

57.’ The Security Council has, therefore, an
inescapable obligation under the Charter to take action
to secure compliance with the provisions of the
Charter and to avert the threat to international peace
and security created by the policies and actions of
the South African regime. One of the first steps
to exclude the South African regime from participation
in the Organization is action under Articles 5 and 6
of the Charter. That r6gime does not represent a
peacedloving State. It is neither able nor willing
!o carry out its obligations under the Charter.
Preventive action was taken against it by the Security
Council when it instituted an arms embargo in
I%3. It has persistently violated the principles
contained in the Charter. It has refused to accept and
carry out the decisions of the Security Council
on the problem of upwthid
and with regard to
Southern Rhodesia and the Territory of Namibia, for
which the Organization has a sacred duty and
responsibility.

63. Let us imagine for the moment the ab.purdity
of the proposition that the community would be
deprived of the presence of a convicted criminal if
he were sent to jail. If this could be successfully
pleaded, criminals would roam the streets of every
country free to continue in their illegality. The same
morality which justifies a national authority’s depriving
an offending citizen of his or her rights compels
a body like this to enforce the rules and regulations
of the Organization.

58. 1 shpuld like to remind the members of the
Council that Article 24 of the Charter, under which
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security has been conferred
upon the Council, provides that in discharging its
duties, the Council acts on behalf of all the Members
of the Organization and shall act in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United
Nations.

64: In an equally important respect, it is the principle
of universality itself which is call,ed into question by
the policy of upcrrIhc~id, which deprives 80 per cent
of the population of South Africa of the most
elementary rights, including the right to be represented
in the Parliament or the Government. Universality
is secured, not by accep!ing the mhiority rbgime,
but by effective action to eradicate uportheid so
that all the people of South Africa can enjoy equal
7

rights on the basis of universal suffrage, irrespective
of race, colour or creed. The expulsion of the South
African rigime is an essential step towards this goal,
65. Some people say that we should allow the
Pretoria regime to occupy the South African seat in
these halls, though it does not represent the South
African people and though it continues flagrantly
to violate and to defy the principles of the Olganization,
because it can be influenced by the abhorrence
expressed by all the other Members of the
Organization. This argument, I submit, can hardly
carry any conviction after all these years of appeals,
demands +nd condemnations sf upurtheid.
66, The Pretoria ldgime has only intensified racial
discrimination and resorted to in&easing brutality
against opponents of racism during this period
because of its confide:nce that some Member States
would prevent effective action under the Charter.
It has, moreover, committed aggiession in Southern
Rhodesia and challenged the Organization with respect
to @rnibi+
_
67. Any delay in action against this rkgime will only
serve to encourag.: it in its defiance of the United
Nations. On the other hand, prompt action to deprive
it of the rights and privileges of membership will
oblige its supporters to rethink their course and will
also serve as a deterrent to any other rkgime
which -seeks to pursue racial cfisdrimination. The
South African rhgime has been alixious to remain
in this Organization because it derives benefit from
its participation. On the other hand, the continued
presence of the South African rhgime is of no benefit
to the Organization. As the Council knows, the South
African rkgime has refused, until nc at least, to
participates in the debates on apartheld in the General
Assembly dr the Security Council. It has refused to
co-operate with any of the bodies established to
deal with aparrheid, and it has shown utter contempt
for t&e decisions of the Council on southern Africa.
68. The presence of the South African rdgime in the
Organization is an anomaly which cannot be tolerated
indefinitely. Nor can we ignore the enormity of its
crimes. Despite the warnings of the Security Council,
it Ias cgntinued in its disastrous course of imposing
racist oppression on the great mqjoriry of the people
of that country, at the risk of a violent race conflict.
ft has forcibly moved, or is moving, millions of people

Mandela announcing that this rbgime, which has
sentenced Nelson Mandela to life imprisonment in
defiance of the United Nations, has also imprisoned
his wife, Winnie. Nelson and Winnie Mandela arc
now in jail, for no offence other than opposition to
racial discrimination and the upholding of the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations.
69. In calling for action by the Security Council,
we are not moved by anger, We take no pleasure
in proposing the exputsiou of the South African
regime from the Organjzation. We believe that this

I invite
and to me
76. Mr.
joins the
extendinl
Iraq, a I
-its diatini

Organization and to advance its efforts to secure the
eradication of ccpctrthu’d and to assist all the people
of South Africa to attain their inalienable rights.

The
United h
~that Go!
Organizal
aspects
gravity 0
is buildin;

70. Action by the Security Council will enable the
United Nations and the specialized agencies to isolate
the South African rkgime and deprive it of the
benefits of international co-operation and recognition.
It will serve as a warning to the white minority
in South Africa that they must re-think their course

78. Firs
in defianf
lnternatic
of the Set
Territory,
responsib

action is essential to” restore confidence in the

andseektheir destiny in accordancewith the principles

of the Charter. It will serve as an encouragement
to all those in South Africa who have been struggling
to defend the principles of the Charter and the
Universal Declarationof HumanRights.

71. We have no doubt that the South African People
will eradicateuparrheid and achieve freedom and equal
rights. The question is whether this Organization has
played its role, in accordance with its commhmeuts
under the Charter, in promoting a solution and averting
bloodshed and suffering in the inevitable process of
liberation.
72. Let it not be said by future historiansthat, when

the people of South Africa were striving against all
odds in defence of the principles of the United
Nations, the Organization gave comfort to the minority
racist rdgime and even accepted it as the spokesman
of that country, because of the short-sightedness or
the selfish interests of a few Member States.
73. The Security Council declared in its resolution 191
(1964) that “all the people of South Africa should
be brought into consultation and should thus be enabled
to decide the future of their country at the national
level”. It is only by rejecting the credentials of the
raciststo speakfor South Africa and by listening.to

the voice of the authentic representativesof the South
from their homesto imposesegregationand dispossess African people that the Organization will promote
the African people of their rights. A million Africans this goal, to which all Member Statesare committed.
a year are put !n jail under racist laws. The leaders
of the black people are subjected to vengeful 74. While calling for the expulsion of the racist
persecutionunder laws and regulationswhich have rkgime, we look forward to the day when the South
no parallel in any country. Even a few days ago, African people will be properly and effective11
(aftermeetingsin observanceof the tenth anniversary representedin the Organisation and will play their
of PRELIMO, [Frcwe dr Lilwrlaqiro de Mo~cunbiqrre 1, rightful role in the international community.
it imprisonednumerousleadersof the black people
a!! over the country. Early this month, I received a 75. The PRESIDENT (itttuprefntiotl
Jiorn Frcvwlr):
telegram from the children of Nelson and Winnie The next speakeris the representativeof Mauritius.

77.

79. ~secc
observe I
Council h
on the ill
the only
resolution
fact that
internatio;
major vie
threat to t
Thirc
we have
by a whit
previous
correctedand econo
controls tt
the non-w
of aparthe
refused tr
refusal thu
relationshi
Africa,
80.

81.

I she

reasonsfo
is so destl
in the thrr
we need g
excellent j
African tt
0111by the
on Apcwi/t
4 Speciul
Irnplenienlali
dence lo Colt

1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
and-to make his statement.

Namibia and its distinguished Commissioner,
Mr. Sean MacBride. There is little question as to
what the major problems are as regards the South
African rdgime’s intervention in these areas of United
Nations~concern and responsibility.

76. Mr, RAMPHUL (Mauritius): My delegation
joins the Security Council and previous speakers in
-extending heartfelt condolences to the delegation of
-Iraq, a member of the Council, on the demise of
its distinguished-Foreign Minister.

82. In Namibia the occupation regime has, since the
inception of the Mandate, used the Territory and its
people for the purposes of the South African minotity,
without regard for the rights and aspirations of the
Namibian people. The mineral and agricultural wealth
of Namibia has been stolen from the people for
the exclusive use of white settlers and foreign
corporate interests.

77. The question of South Africa’s position in the
-United Nations involves three major areas in which
-that Government is defying the authority of the
Organization, I think we should keep these three
aspects firmly in mind when considering the
gravity of the confrontation to which South Africa
is building up.
-78. First, there is the illegal occupation of Namibia,
m defiance of international law as defined by the
International Court of Justice, as well as the resolutions
of the Security Council and General Assembly on this
Territory, for which. the United Nations has direct
responsibility.
=7Y. -Secondly, there is South Africa’s refusal to
observe the mandatory resolutions of the Security
~~Council imposing economic and diplomatic sanctions
on the illegal rbgime in Southern Rhodesia. This is
the only case of the Council adopting mandatory
-resolutions under Chapter VII of the Charter, and the
fact that South Africa is the &or channel for
international violations, as well as b&ng itself the
mdor violator, must be considered as a serious
threat p the ~credibility of the Council’s decisions.
80. Thirdly, and at the root of the other two issues,
we have the fact that South Africa is controlled
by a white minority of less than 17 per cent-the
previous speaker said 17.5 per cent and I stand
corrected-whioh maintains a monopoly of political
and economic power by means of a police State that
controls the movement, employment and social life of
the non-white mdority. This is in shot: the policy
of crpnrtheid which the Government in Pretpria has
refused to discontinue, and it is because of that
refusal that the Council is called upon to review the
relationshb &!ween the United Nations and- South
@$&all _
81. I should like to summarize very briefly the

reasons for which the South African rigime’s policy
is so destructive of United Nations policy decisions
in the three areas just outlined. 1 do not thiuk that
we need go into the details of the three issues: In
cxcellcnt job of monitoring and debating the South
African t<gime’s role in them has been carried
out by thr: Commiltce of 74.4 the Special Committee
on Ap~~rl/r~Gl and Ihc United Nations Council for
_--

87. Ov
interven
resolutic
of the C
of- Unite
is, as v
betweer
private
trade ar
in Soutl
for Smil
to evadl
South P
rbgime
Rhodesi

84. Within the last year alone, the leaders of
SWAP0 operating legally inside Namibia were
arbitrarily arrested, detained for many months
without trial and without access to lawyers or to tbe
outside world and, apparently, suffered torture. At
the same time, ‘many hundreds of people were
detained and tortured under the so-called emergency
regulations applied in the north. SWAP0 and other
legal Rarties ,have been prevented from holding
meetings or conducting normal political activities.
A wave of barbarism has been set in m&n by the
local nominees of the occupation tigime, in the form
of brutal floggings of men and women accused of
supporting SWAPO; severe i&tries have resulted, as
well as excruciating pain. Many hundreds of people
have fled their country in fear of their lives and
liberty as a result of this wave of terror.

88. It
irIations
the COI
and the
particip
Howevc
Council
to speal
no pro1
miracle
have rf
announc
ti”“f-’
so. ---Le
$gime.
white rr
white n

into Namibia, abandoningall pretence of observing
their commitment to demilitarize the Territory.
Cpntinualreinforcementsof personneland equipment
are being brought in, including missilesreportedly
boughtfrom FranceandJord:tn. The air baseat Katima
Mulilo, a few miles from the Zambian border, with
its bombers, fighter jets and missiles,representsa
most seriolrr,ihreat to Zambia and to the whole of
independent Africa. This threat is intolerable to
Africa, asit r:Iuct be to all true friends of Africa.

with
rc
.I lo the
Granting
of In&pen-

9

--L

83. Together with this theft of Namibia’s assets, the
occupation rbgime has forced its people into virtual
slavery, forcing them to work for the white usurpers
and rigidly co#rolling them by a ruthless apparatus
of pass laws, identity documents and Draconian
laws which compel the people to work on terms
decided unilaterally by the whites. In response to
the courageous resistance of the Namibians in the
form of local uprisings, strikes, boycotts of spurious
elections, and the armed struggle itself-much ,of
this under the banner of SWAP0 [South West Africa
People’s Organizatiott I, both within and outside
Namibia-tha
occupation rhgime has imposed a
crippling. burden of repressive legislation on the
Territory, including martial law throughout the
.no+hern region.

85. The South African armed forces have moved

-_-__.

4 Ypecid
&mm&cc
OH the Situalioo
Implcnienlalion
of the Declwation
on the
dence 10 Colonial
Cwnrrics
and PropIes.

86. Th
outrages
to pres’
of Secu
threat tl
calls the
to us; I
suppres;
indepen
which I
is the
violence
southen
Nations
Kingdol

whites
the bes
and Lac
life depi
black 11
the use
its basil
through
being c
are not
forcibly
“Bantu

86. The question of Southern Rhodesia is equally
outrageous. South African forces are actually fighting
to preserve the illegal Smith rigime, in defiance
of Security Council decisions that the situation is a
threat to peace. Whether the South African r6gime
calls them police or armed forces is of no concern
to us; they are forces deployed by that regime to
suppress the movement for self-determination and
independence in Zimbabwe. Their presence there,
which is now indispensable to the Smith rigime,
is the most blatant case of South Africa’s using
violence to achieve its aim of white supremacy in
southern Africa in an open challenge to the United
Nations and to the country responsible, the United
Kingdom.

most part of which cannot possibly offer even
subsistence living to those already there, Ict alone
to those in the camps proliferating in and around
these areas, who are without land, without work
and, what is worse, without hope of escape. There
is no element of choice in the deportations to these
notorious dumping grounds. The population removals
are determined by the white regime and cnforccd by
the police forces.
90. Now the irony of the situation is that the
South African ,rkgimcr, is trying to project these
bantustan areas as a great achievement and CVCI~ ;I
vindication of the theories of white supremacy and
tr/~t~:f/taitl. It has a multimillion-dollar public relations
campaign to persuade international opinion that,
although access to the bantustans is rigidly contr:)lled
to prevent the facts from coming out, they are some
kind of paradise of African self-determination and,
ultimately, independence. It is manipulating the
procedures of the United Nations for this outrageous
propaganda, even bringing one of its bantustan
stooges to the General Assembly to promote the
illusion of African self-determination-a
mockery
of that concept as it is understood by the United
Nations. It has tried to deceive the Security Council
and induce it to believe that this form of so-called
“self-determination”
is a solution for its illegal
occupation of Namibia--lrnd we should recall that the
imposition of the bantustan plan on Namibia has been
explicitly rejected by members of the Council,
including France, the United Kingdom and the United
States. The attempt to deceive the international
community as to the true nature of the African
deportations and the construction of these pathetic
camps is outrageous.

87. Over the matter of sanctiohs, South African
intervention is in open opposition to the mandatory
resolutions of the Securitv Council under Chaater VII
of the Charter. The extrimely disappointing progress
of-United Nations economic sanctions until recentlv
is, as we all know, due to the open collaboratioh
between the South African rkgime and South African
private interests, which not only provided the major
trade and investment facilities directly to the whites
in Southern Rhodesia but also furnished the means
for Smith’s supporters in innumerable other countries
to evade sanctions virtually with impunity. In effect,
South Africa acted as the agent of the illegal Smith
rbgime for its own profit, fully justifying their
Rhodesian nickname of “our friends plus 10 per cent”.
88. It is intolerable, and destructive of the United
Nations itself, that a rt!gime which openly opposes
the collective decisions of the Security Council
and the General Assembly be allowed to continue
participating -in our decision-making
process.
However, ,I note with interest the decision of this
Council earlier to allow the representative of Vorster
19 speak here in this debate. My delegation formulates
no protest at this stage. Who knows, a pleasant
miracle may be about to be performed. Vorster may
have regained his sanity. His representative may
announce the end of apartheid and the illegal occupaL$Nfu”ibia. So wycshall wait and listen.
t@
89. -‘:=Let us look very briefly at the nature of this
@gime. It is one founded on white privilege and a
white monopoly of all the country’s assets. Only the
white minority votes for the rkgime, and only the
whites are eligible to live in the best areas, using
the best farmland, with access to the major ports
and Facilities of all kinds. Although their way of
life depends on the human resources provided by the
black majority, every means-including force and
the use of police terror-is used to deny that majority
its basic human rights. Increasingly, Africans living
throughout both urban and rural South Africa are
being classified as “surplus appendages” if they
are not actually working for whites and are being
forcibly removed to the c.omic-opera, so-called
“Bantu homelands”, small and scattered areas, the

91. There is an argument which is popular among
the friends of South Africa, namely that the regime
should keep some representatives around at the United
Nations so that it can listen to the expressions of
“abhorrence” which the United Kingdom, France
and the United States repeat in ritualistic fashion
when they are required to say something on this
issue. Such an argument appears somewhat weak in
the light of the very extensive bilateral relations
which these countries maintain with the South African
regime on the political, social, economic and cultural
Icvels; these extensive contacts should bc capable.
one would have thought, of communicati~~g the
attitudes of the Governments maintwining ~hcm LO the
South African rkgime. Furthermore, access LO the
public meetings of the Security c’ouncil iuld (ic~wd
Assembly and its organs is freely available IO any
interested observer; news agencies and the South
African press cover these meetings without an)
restrictions whatsoever, and any South African my
sit in the public gallery IO hear what is llcinp said.
The question is one, IWI of’ colllrnutlic;l(iotl hut 01’
South Africa’s right IO participale in llnitcd N:ttions
deliberations while thai rCgirtle i\ doing CV(~I\t!,ling
IO

possible
African i

92. Am
defender
invoke t
Let it b
strongly
universa
should k
the begi]
Assembl
Republic
indepenc
efforts 0
its aspir
soon in
are no II
admissia
States 01
understa
people (
mdority
racist r6
the rele’
r&ime ,1
has firn
in effec
people c
Let us,
univcrsa
indepenc
and SOI
realizatic
and unre
the rnd
suspensi
the pro1
to in thr
at this I
military
they wo
the unh
for in SC
of the m
expelled
of the U
and the
internati
as it wi
contribu
region, j

93. 1H
being us
of the 5
of the L
the pet
in partit
matter II
Assemb
composi

possible to sabotage our decisions on southern
African issues.

’

92. Another red herring frequently raised by
defenders of the South African racist rbgime is to
invoke the principle of universality of membership.
Let it be clearly understood that we Africans are
strongly in favour of applying the principle of
universality so that all the nations of the ‘world
should have representation in our deliberations, At
the beginning of the present session of the General
Assembly we welcomed, as a new Member, the
Republic of Guinea-Bissau, which has finally achieved
independence and sovereign status in spite of all the
efforts of the previous Portuguese rdgime to suppress
its aspirations, That is what we hope to see very
soon in the case of Mozambique and Angola. We
are no less determined to see in the near future the
admission of a delegation from the legally independent
States of Namibia and Zimbabwe. It should be clearly
understood that the obstacle to participation by the
people of Namibia and Zimbabwe, as well as the
majority of the people in South Africa, is the minority
racist rkgime in South Africa. By refusing to invoke
the relevant provisions of the Charter against this
rigime, the credentials of which the General Assembly
has firmly rejected, the Security Council would,
in effect, be blocking the representation of the
people of southern Africa in this great Organization.
Let us, therefore, appreciate the principle of
universality as demanding the self-determination and
independence of the people of Namibia, Zimbabwe
and South Africa itself, and as requiring for its
realization a determined move to reject the repressive
and unrepresentative rkgime in South Africa, which is
the major obstacle to universality. Expulsion or
suspension of the offending rbgime is the least of
the provisions of the Charter which can be resorted
to in the struggle for self-determination. We are not
at this stage asking for economic sanctions or for
military operations by the United Nations, although
they would be the most likely measures ?o achieve
the universality of membership which we all look
for in southern Africa. We are seeking the expulsion
of the minority rbgime in South Africa-just as it was
expelled from the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, the World Health Organization
and the International Labour Organisation and other
international organizations and conferences, and just
as it was forced out of the Commonwealth-as a
contribution towards liberating the people in that
region, just as Guinea-Bissau has been liberated.

the S
devel
they
resoh
soutt
a SUI
south
north
India1
NAT(
Britis
the F
know
of the
with
defenl
with
States
causir
certail
Africe
deep]!
from
it wol

is, the negative votes of permanent members--on
colonial issues is also such, that legitimate doubts
may be raised about its ability to debate seriously
any colonial or ~pnrtheid issue. The question may
be asked whether the Security Council operates as a
preserve of .the former colonial Powers to impede
progress on all such issuet which may be brought
before it, Where the South African racist rbgime is
openly and consistently undermining the Security
Council’s own mJor resolutions on Namibia and
Southern Rhodesia, will the Council be prepared to
take appropriate action under Chapter II of the
Charter? Or is there a built-in bias in favour of South
Africa, no matter what that racist regime does and no
matter what contempt it has for the principles of
human rights and self-determination which lie at the
very heart of the United Nations and its Charter?
It should be remembered that this may not be a final
decision; the question of South African participation
in the General Assembly and its organs can be decided
by the Assembly, which is master of its own
procedure, The determination has been made by the
Assembly’s Credentials Committee, backed by a large
mdority of the Assembly itself, that the credentials
of the present purported representatives of South
Africa are unacceptable. The Assembly can therefore
decide on its own account to withdraw from these
purported representatives access to the rostrum and
the voting procedures
of the Assembly
-1~ -~
.-- and its organs.
94. -In this we should recall that a lead has already
been given by a large number of international
organizationo in the United Nations family-as
I mentioned earlier-which have expelled South
Africa. Most recently, South Africa has tieen removed
from the dscision-making executive bodies of the
Intern@tional Monetary Fund and the International
Bank for Reconstruction anti Development. This
resulted largely from the initiative of the Government
of Australia, and we owe that Government our grateful
thanks. for its determination to stand up for its
principles and its integrity, in sharp contrast to other
Governments, in following up its claims of opposition to opnrtheld with a move to translate a moral
position into actual policy. Unfortunately, Australia
and the Nordic countries seem so far to be the
exception among Western countries in their approach
towards the South African racist rbgime. It is well
known that three cauntries here with the power to
protect South Africa with their veto also have some

98. :k
hope I
interes
to the

interests in the rpwtheid
of Namibia.

cannot
shall a

rdgime and its occupation

the m
lip-ser

96. 1
the WI
to ask
have
have
of SOL

97. I
which
from 1
to the
of the
It is in
be allc
to w-v
Artich
the Cl

accord

peilcefi

93. 1 wish now to refer to the procedures which are
being used in this case to challenge the participation
of the Sbuth African r6gime in the decision-making
of the United Nations. It is important, 1 believe, fol
the permanent members of the Security Council
in particular to realize that in referring this serious
matter to the Council for ifs consideration, the General
Assembly has. in fact, put the Council itself on trial. Its
composition is such, and the record of’ votes--that

--

95. Everybody knows to which three countriesI am

referring. I need not name them noi speak iti detail
about their relationshipwith South Africa. However,
1shouldlike to dwell very briefly on one point. It has
become common knowledge that apparently secret
negotiations disguised under the euphemistic title
of “contingency planning” have been taking place
betweensomeof the WesternPowersthat aremembers
of NATO [NM/I Atlotrric lieaty Orgat~izntiot~] and

provide

the South African naval and military forces, These
developments are frightening. On the one hand,
they indicate defiance of the United Nations
resolutions concerning military collaboration with
South Africa while, on the other hand, they indicate
a sudden leap by the NATO alliance onto the
southern African scene, a jump by NATO from the
north Atlantic into the southern Atlantic and the
Indian Ocean, It is not without significance that
NATO manceuvres are taking place between the
British and the South African navies and- between
the French and the South African navies. It is also
known that Admiral Boermann, Commander-in-Chief
of the South African forces, has been in close contact
with the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the United States
defence forces. These facts, taken in conjunction
with the recent public disclosure in the United
States press of some hitherto secret documents, are
causing grave concern to the African States, and
certainly to Mauritius, a neighbouring State of South
Africa in the Indian Ocean, Africans are therefore
deeply preoccupied by the growing number of reports
from reliable sources that the United States-and
it would seem other Western .Powers as well-have
been secretly increasing assistance and support for
the minority racist or illegal rCgimes while paying
lip-service to the idea of eliminating apartheid.

associate myself with the condolences you expressed
on behalf of the Security Council to the delegation
of Iraq on the untimely death of the Minister fat
Foreign Affairs of that country,
101. I should like first of all to express my gratitude
to you and to the members of the Council for having
allowed the delegation of Zaire to participate,
without the right to vote, in this important debate.
May I also say how very happy I am to see you
presiding over the Council in regard to a situation
which is so close to o,ur hearts and which is taking
place on the African’continent, our continent of
origin. In this context, your presidency naturally
acquires a symbolic value. It is a symbol of good
augury for the outcome of the debate, certainly. But
it is also a symbol of the role of your highly esteemed
country in particular and of independent Africa in
general, in a common effort undertaken by Member
States to ensure the peace and dignity of mankind.
Your personality, combining a high sense of
responsibility and modesty rendered pleasant by
a good temper, and aided by suvoir fuire and
diplomatic tact, will, I am sure, be very useful in
the negotiations which will follow this debate.
102. Several distinguished speakers have preceded
me in this debate.Among them, two were outstanding,
namely, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia
and President of the Council of Ministers of OAU,
Mr. Omer Arteh Ghalib, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Sierra Leone, Mr. Desmond
Luke. We thank the Council for having invited them
to speak. We are pleased to see in this attitude on
the part of the Council not simply a gesture of
politeness and courtesy, but also proof of its attention
to and consideration for their important statements
and for the resolutions Andydecisions of Q-&l on
the problem under debate.

%. After a review of these links between some of
the Western Powers and South Africa, one is prompted
to ask whether it is ethical for powerful States which
have such financial and military entanglements to
have the right to veto thp vuspension or expulsion
of South Africa.
97. If this were a court of law, the countries to
which I have referred would be required to withdraw
from the jury on the grounds of prior comfiitment
to the defepdant in the context of its serious breaches
of the Charter of the United Nations and its principles.
It is intolerable that three permanent members should
be allowed to veto any constructive draft resolution
to apply the provisions of the Charter, particularly
Articles 5 and 6, when they are all in violation of
the Charter and the maJor resolutions adopted in
accordance with it.
98. -Mr. President, beloved African brothers, let us
hope that these three ‘members can set aside their
interest in South Africa and vote with us according
to the issues. If they fail, we shall at least know who
cannot be counted as a friend of Africa. And we

103. And what exactly is that problem? The essential
question which is this time placed before the Council
and on which it is called upon to exercise its wisdom
does not consist so much in recognizlng once
again the guilty and criminal nature of apartheid but,
rather, to consider its persistent character--in other
words, its continuance despite repeated and severe
warnings-and,
from the observation of this
persistence, to apply the sanctions prescribed by
the Charter.

‘99, The I~HMIDL!N’I
(itrr~vpr~~turion Jbtt FrmAJ:
‘I’he ncxl hpcakeris the representativeof Zaire, whom
I now invite to take a place at the Council table
and to makea statement.

104. There has in fact been unanimity for years
in the Security Council and in the Organization,
and alsooutsideit, regardingthe guilt and criminality
of the racist rdgimewhich wasestablishedyears ago
on our continent. It is rare in the history of the
socio-politicalrdgimeodevisedby manto find one so
inhuman and so cruel. Heart and mind meet to
reject it.

100. Mr. MUTUALE (Zaire) (infrrprrtahtn
Jkm
Frc>rlcll): Mr. President, allow me first of all to

105. In the General Assembly smce 1946, that is
for 28 years, and in the Council already in 1900and

shall also know that they ‘are not interested in the
peaceful settlement of this dispute by the means
provided in the Charter.

12

,

subse
arousl
to to1
which
conce
COIISC

106.
one h
on tb
the CI
heir o
since
the hi
pureI)
It ari!
and t
univel
evil d

What
for thl
Chart

Hll-plZ
107.
of eql
also q

I

the fu
and F
arrogi
self-dc
with i
of the
108.
theatr

uproo
tom a
and s
recoul
wondc
god, i
the dl
degree
paraU(
really
probk
at the
Wespi
practil
Pretor
the 111
have

B

to gi\
indica
Its gu
IIVW c
of its
willi t

subsequently, the consideration of this question has
aroused deep feelings of indignation and given rise
to torrents of eloquence against c~~n~l/ici~, a rbgime
which no philosophical, ethical, sociological or legal
~conception has been able to justify to the deep
conscience of our being and of our human nature,
106, We therefore came forward to this table on the
one hand convinced that our move is legitimate and,
on the other, with that feeling of confidence which
~-the Council can inspire, which is at the same time the
heir of the accumulated experience of the Organization
since its inception and the guardian of the flame of
the highest human aspirations. Our move is not due
purely and simply to a reaction of racial solidarity.
It arises out of something loftier which goes above
und beyond this solidarity, and out of something
universal, which is exactly what is at stake in the
evil doings and criminality of the apartheid rbgime.
What is at stake is the ideals and principles proclaimed
for the benefit of all the inhabitants of the earth by the
Charter as well as, 6y the Un/versal Declaration of
Human Rights.
~ 107. -mApctrtheidis not only a violation of the principle
of equality among peoples, nations and races. It is
also quite simply the most total denial of respect for
the fundamental human rights of any man, whoever
and wherever he may be. Furthermore, it is an
arrogant and shocking repudiation of the principle of
self-determination. And worst of all it is pregnant
with a real risk of racial confrontation ;n the south
of-the African continent.
108. This part of our planet is continually the
theatre of racial tragedies: tragedies of families
uprooted in their own homeland, of human beings
torn apart body and soul, of people thrown into prison
and subjected ‘to exploitation and plunder without
recourse, without even the hope of recourse-we
wonder in the name of what, in the name of which
god, in the name of what vision of the world or of
the destiny of -the white race on this earth. The
degree of criminality attained by upurthrid is without
~~$I~’ smong [h$ practices of_racial~discrim!n_ation.
:
iO9. We reach the point here where we see the
really traumatic dimensions of the aspect of the
problem which the Council has to deal with and,

at the sametime, the final significanceof our action.
Despitethe innumerablecondemnationsof its criminal
practice and the lengths to which it has gone,
Pretoria remainsimperturbableand true to itself. ‘To
the multiple appealsand requeststhat for 28 years
hi~vealternatcdwith warnings,Pretoriahasnot deigned
to give the slightest sign, to make the slightest
iudication,which would at least allow us to assume
its good faith or its good intentions. whether fol
now or for the future, as regardsthe abandr)nment
of its policy of q~trr~lrcid, and its will to comply
will1the provisionsof the Charter.

110. On the contrary, as the years have gone by,
with the United Nations constantly extending a hand
to the racist Governments, upurtheid has developed,
hardened and branched out and, as though to give
obvious proof of its bad faith, its obstinacy and its
guilty conduct, both to its allies and to the undecided,
Pretoria has devoted itself to improving and
institutionalizing apartheid so that today it provides
a spectacle of the most abject human subjection,
the increasingly pitiless, systematic degradation of the
black man on his own soil and great tyrannical
brutality. Through colonialist measures and slave
laws, the black man finds himself from day to day
deprived not only of his soil but also of- his most
elementary rights and freedqms,
:
111, As regards this institutionalization, I hope the
Council will allow me to recall the statement made
on 4 October 1973 in the General Assembly by the
President of the.Republic of Zaire, Citizen Mobutu
:
Sese Seko:
-.:“[South Africa] is the only country in the world
where the whites have raised segregation to the level
~of an institution. The term upartheid would not
exist in human language had the whites not been
in South Africa.“s .,
112. Could the Council have better proof of the
persistence of the South African Government of the
conduct of that Government-d&&
-is a :cond@
which is.not of today alone.
113. While, on the one hand, the Organization
condemns apartheid and recognizes that it is criminal,
on the other hand, the Government concerned openly
continues its guilty policy and even strengthens it,
and does so despite repeated wan:Jngs over a period
of 28 years-throughout the entire lifetime of the
Organization. There is’ not the shadow of a doubt
that the main conditions laid down ‘in ‘Article 6 of
the Charter for a recommendation of.expulsion have
been_met..~. _.._ --_ _. -.-_- .--.. .---- .- .--... ,.:-.
114. Africa raises its voice to call upon the Council
collectively and upon each member individually to
arouse the Organisation from the comfofiable position
of immobility which becomes complicity and which
has lasted for 28 years. We. want the Organization
to move away from futile and fruitlesscondemnations,
which, becausethey are ineffective, underminethe
authority, the prestigeand the credibility that should
surroundand ennobleit.
IlS. We do not share the view that this forum is
a debating society where cynicism, duPlic.ity and
hypocrisy have a place.The Council isthe incarilation
of the great hopesof the Organization, and the voice
of relentless selfishness and of the thirst for

the
thos
and
of t1
sacr
116.
whit
the
disc]
of SI
itsell
imm
is kl
28 )
musl
by tl
hum,
evoh
nece

OPPC
those
the

trim
assu
our
coin
its b
will
of <)
cons
118.
The
Arat:
the (
119.
ore&

Mini

120.
you 1

for 1
coun
-Af
print
respe
of thl
121.
kind

predominance must be silenced, at least here in this
chamber where the few represent the many, The
principles of the Charter are at the service of all
mankind, of all nations, of all races. One cannot
continually tolerate, without becoming an accomplice,
the persistent and obvious trampling underfoot of
those principles by the adventurers on the black
continent. That is why the Dar-es-Salaam, Lusaka
and Kinshasa trio is determined to prevent the growth
of that virus and is committed-to-agreeing to any
sacrifice to fight it to the end,

feels itself very much involved in the struggle against
racism and colonialism because it has itself had to
suffer those evils and it is a member of the Special
Committee on Apnrtheid and the Committee of 24,
122. The recent occurrences in Africa reflect a
deliberate and definite change in the development of
events. The struggle that has been waged by the
Organization for many years is finally yielding its
fruits. Colonialism, racism, apartheid and injustice
.:re falling back. Soon those words will simply be
something reminiscent oPthe past. Events are gradually
running their course. There remain only a few
bastions, and they are becoming increasingly isolated
and broken down. I am referring in particular to
the regime in South Africa, the racist and segregationist
rt5gime whose philosophy has been elevated into a
doctrine by a foreign minority, a minority that has
the audacity to claim to represent among us the
maority of the legitimate inhabitants of a land whose
rights it flouts.

116. The voice Africa raises in this forum is an echo
which comes from the depths of its soul. We are
the repositories of a rare experience of racial
discrimination which has emerged from the ideologies
of supremacy. The Organization must totally sever
itself from Pretoria. It must not fix itself in an
immobility of artifices and mcasures, the fate of which
is known in advance through a long experience of
28 years. The complacency imposed by alliances
must yield to strictness and to justice, as is required
by the functions vested in the Council.

123. The representatives of the white colonialist
minority in fact claim to represent 80 per cent of a
people which has no representative in the South
African Parliament because even the very limited
suffrage that used to be enjoyed by some Africans
was abolished in 1946. Can the delegates of South
Africa, which represent 3 million foreign colonialists,
affirm that they represent here the aspirations and
desires of 16 million Africans who are under their
yoke?

117. History, past and recent, has proved that the
principles and ideals of dignity and respect for the
human being contain in themselves the forces of
evolution which, sooner or later, will bring about the
necessary changes, The Council has the historic
opportunity to demonstrate its solidarity either with
those principles and ideals which are at the basis of
the evolution of the human species. or with the
criminality and bad faith of Pretoria. The latter
assumption, however, has nothing in common with
our genuine wishes. Rather do we pray that the
Council will recover the wisdom and inspiration of
its best days and that its decision on the problem
will contribute to restoring vigour and hope to those
of our fellow-men whose human nature is being
consistently and systematically denied.

124. What organization do the representatives of the
racist rkgime of South Africa claim to belong to?
They have the audacity to wish to belong to an
Organization whose fundamental principles and whose
decisions they violate outrageously. Any State that
wishes to belong to the United Nations does so by
choice and not by force. Thus it freely commits itself
to accept and respect the principles of the Charter by
signing and ratifying it. South Africa has never
made any positive gesture along those lines.

French):
118. The PRESIDENT (interprem’onfrom
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic; I now invite him to take a place at
the-Council table and to make a statement.

125. South Africa is not the only rbgime that scorns
the principles of the Charter and the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council.
It finds its best support among similar racist authorities

119. Mr. KELANI

(Syrian Arab Republic) (inferprerationfrorn French): ,May I first express the sincere
condolences of my delegation to the delegation of our
sister country, Iraq, on the tragic death of the Iraqi

such as the Zionist authorities of Israel. It is not
surprising to see those two r8gimes maintaining close
diplomatic, economic and trade relations, because
they are like brothers in their contempt for mankind,
for fundamental human rights, international law, the
right of peoples to self-determination and the
decisions of the United Nations.

Minister for Foreign Affairs.
120. Mr. President, I should like to congratulate
you on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for this month. Through you and through your
country, this is an honour to the whole of Africa
-Africa, which has always valiantly struggled for the
principles of the Charter and human rights to be
respected and serve as the foundation for the progress
of the world.

126. What does the Organization represent? II is an
association of peoples which in the first place have
adhered to the Charter and then have adopted a
number of resolutions whose intention is to eliminate
the evils that beset the world, evils among which
(qmth&t is the most anachronistic.

121. I should like to thank you for having been
kind enough to call upon me today. Indeed, Syria
14
-- A

’

/,

127. Lack of respect for the Charter is only a drop
in the ocean of acts of contempt on the part of
the authorities in South Africa. The numerous
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council during the 29 years of existence of
the Organization have continually been flouted and
scorn_edby the South African regime.
128. Let us start with the Charter. It is quite obvious
that South Africa has never implemented its principles.
Article 1, paragraph 3, expresses clearly the following
purpose:
“To achieve international co-operation . . . in
promoting and encouraging respect for human rights
and for fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion.”
It is thus the very essence of the Organization that
is flouted.
129. The provisions of the Charter on nondiscrimination have been violated -in their entirety
in view of the fact that the South African Constitution and laws are based on discrimination, and,
instead of attempting to remove that discrimination,
the successive Governments of South Africa have
ceaselessly taken steps to reinforce that philosophy.
130. Article 13 of the Charter stipulates that
“The General Assembly shall initiate studies and
make recommendations for the purpose of .,.
assisting in the realization of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion.”
Article 55 emphasizes that
“the United Nations shall promote ,.. universal
respect for, and observance of, human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion.”
Finally, Article 25 makes it quite clear that every
Member State must “agree to accept and carry out
the decisions of the Security Council in accordance
with the present Charter”.
131. The General Assembly and the Security Council
have frequently had occasion to address warnings to
the white minority Government of South Africa in
connexion with its policy, which is incompatible
with the obligations of a Member State. The South
African Government has remained deaf to those
warnings. lrs only response has been to go on to
promulgate new discriminatory laws. It has even been
bold enough to state openly that its decisions were
not incompatible with the obligations and responsibilities incumbent upon it under the Charter.
132. Iiach year the General Assembly has adopted
new resolutions, all making unheeded appeals to the

Government of South Africa, asking it to put an end
to the practices which endanger the peace of the
world. In particular, on 15 November 1972, in its
resolution 2923 E (&XVII), the General Assembly
condemned
“the racist Government of South Africa for
continuing and intensifying the implementation
of its inhuman policy of apartheid, and subjecting
the opponents of apartheid to ruthless repression,
in violation of its obligations under the Charter of
the United NatiorlS, thereby creating a grave threat
to the peace”,
133, South Africa has also imperilled world peace
by frequently threatening the territorial integrity of
independent African States under the pretext that they
had given assistance to the opponents of apartheid,
whereas, in acting in this way, those States were
simply responding to the appeals which had been
addressed to them by bodies of the United Nations.
Furthermore, it continues its illegal occupation of
Namibia, although the General Assembly terminated
its Mandate in 1%.

1
i:
C

il
\

134. South Africa does not stop short at threatening
the territorial integrity of independent neighbouring
States and illegally occupying a territory. It goes even
further, by initiating military operations in Southern
Rhodesia, thus violating United Nations. sanctions
against Rhodesia.

;i

135. The United Nations must immediately take up
the challenge which has been thrown down to it
by the racist authorities of South Africa, for the
very existence of this rbgime, its philosophy and its
fundamentcil principles, are based each and every
one of them on racism and colonialism. These are
not the authentic representatives of the people of
South Africa which we have among us, but rather
the representatives of apartheid and of colonialism.
These, representatives of apartheid and colonialism
represent a danger to the United Nations. Their very
presence here as a Member is a serious anomaly
and is a mockery in the eyes of the entire world.
The United Nations should no longer tolerate being
thus flouted, Theroforo, because of the South African
rkgime’s violations of the Charter, of the resolutions
of the Security Council, of the resolutions of the
General Assembly, and of human rights, and also
because of the threat which this rigime represents
for the peace of the world, immediate action should
be taken by the Council.

:

136. The urgency of the situation was stressed a
few days ago by the General Assembly when it
adopted resolution 3207 (XXIX)> which recalls that
South Africa has paid no heed to its previous
decisions and has continued to practise its policy
of c~p~u*r/wid
and racial discrimination and which

notesthe persistentrefusalof South Africa to abandon
its policy of rrpcrtdwicl and racial tliscriminirtion

i
d
E

il
C

1

1
c
1
e
11
0
I1
II
I1

in compliance
Asssembly ,

with relevant resolutions of the

African whites to accelerate the liberation of the pecplc
under their yoke so that we may have peace, by
persuasion and no1 by war. But our words have
fallen on deaf ears.

137. It is now the bounden duty of the Security
Council to take radical steps against the Government
of South Africa and the last resort-since this Government is acting as if the United Nations did not
exist-is to remove it from the United Nations
and to expel it in accordance with Article 6 of the
Charter, so that this can serve as a lesson to all
those who may wish to violate the principles of the
Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the resolutions of the United Nations.

144. What is the altcrnativc? Did the Americans who
fought the war of liberation from the British use
peaceful means’? No, they were Americans, they
could use force for their liberation. Did the French,
who liberated themselves from the Nazis, do so by
peaceful means? Of course, the Government was
subdued, but the sons of France, known as the
tnuquis, fought valiant&., They had a right to do so.
But when the ‘sons of Africa try to overthrow
tyranny, people say, “Please, we are in the era of the
United Nations, be peaceful, use peaceful means.”
Nothing will happen with peaceful means. 1 for one
am for peaceful means. Every one of you here is for
peaceful means. But what is the alternative?

138. The PRESIDENT (kterpretation frottt Frerrclt):
The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia, whom I invite to take a seat at the Council
table andjo make a statement.
139. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
it seems only yesteryear since Cameroon was a
colony, ‘and it heartens all of us to see one of its
illustrious sons preside over the Security Council.
We are indeed elated that you are guiding the
deliberations of the Council, which is now focusing
its attention on how to liberate the indigenous
people of South Africa .from the foreign’yoke, the
blacks that have a mdority of 10 to 1 in Namibia-I
do not have the statistics with regard to the so-called
Republic of South Africa. I venture to predict that
it will not be many years from now when the South
Africans living in South Africa, Namibia and Southern
Rhodesia will gain statehood and, like Cameroon and
other African countries, will be ‘admitted to the
United Nations.

145, This is the preface to what I want to say.
Let us engage in some analysis and go to the roo&
of the matter. As I mentioned quite recently, I believe,
on the question of Southern Rhodesia, we have to
study the question from three aspects before we go
into finding solutions, peaceful or otherwise. I would
say that we should handle this question with what
I would call three approaches. First, we should engage
in diagnosis; secondly, in prognosis; and thirdly, in
choices, options, alternatives.
146. We now come to the diagnosis. Why is the
South African white rkgime, in the face of world-wide
opinion, acting in such a manner7 I believe that herr
there are three aspects to its behaviour: the social,
the economic and the political. And those are factors
in the South African problem. It is not such an
imbroglio as many would want us to believe. Those
three aspects or factors are interdependent and
interconnected.
147. Let us take first the social aspect of the problem.
We find the white people of South Africa and
Southern Rhodesia really frightened. They are not
stupid. They are frightened. They are obsessedwith the
fear that they will lose their white identity. They are
a small island in an ocean of black people, remnants
of the white colonialists, anti the intelligent ones
among them know they will be assimilated or absorbed
by osmosis. And that frightens them. “How can we
keep our identity?“, they say. That is a reitl feal
and we have to take it into account. Our black
brothers might ask them, “Who told you to come
here?” And after all, they could reply: “We did not
come, our ancestors came.” “Well”, the blacks
will retort, “L.et us find a solution and try to hc
represented in the Government.” “No”,
the whites

140. The writing is on the wall and the writing is
clear; but it seems the rbgimes of South Afhca and
Southern Rhodesia have eyes and do not wish to
see, and have ears which they have blocked in order
not to hear the clamouring voice of reason.
141, Freedom can be suppressed for a time but never
stifled. Sooner or later it will erupt like a volcano,
@dtie lava will bum the oppressor to ashes.
-.
142, The r6gimes of South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia have become an anachronism, a vestige of
colonial rule, and it will not be long before the
surge of freedom will burst out and liberate those
sons of Africa, those sons who are still dominated
by people who hail from abroad.
143. In the United Nations the Africans have been
called emotional. They are emotional about South
Africa; all of us are emotional-it
is 3 healthy
emotion, better than the hypocrisy based on rationalization. They tell us that the eventual liberation
of South Africa should be achieved by peaceful
means. Peaceful means, of course; I for one have
been addressing the Council for many years, and we
have all said that we wish to persuade the South

“we

are

doing

this

b
C

ti
i
P
it
il

b
a
s

for

your good.”
‘I’hc thck\
=Y*
are treated like schoolboy+. They
arc told: bchavc:.
and we will give you some candy if you do not make

any trouble. The white rBgime forgets that the sons of
Africa have been liberated from colonial rule. ‘l’hc
blacks are not schoolchildren
to be give11 candy.

I
n
e

16

,I

,

148. Time and again since 1964, 1 have been told,
by none other than the Foreign Minister of South
Africa, Mr. Muller: “We are doing things.” With the
permission of my colleague from the United Kingdom,
it reminded me of the time when his country had its
Empire, and said that the constitutional processes
must be observed before certain countries could be
liberated. And then Gandhi-he was a lawyer-could
not find any meaning for that constitutional process.
1 salute the United Kingdom for having finished with
its colonies, or their colonies for having finished with
them, whichever way you want to put it. Now it is the
time of the South African rdgime, and they say:
“We are doing all we can to improve the condition
of the South Africans: to educate them, to prepare
them for statehood.” It is quite a long time since
they have done anything to accelerate the process-if
they really are taking any steps in that direction.
Hence we have an explanation for upwtheid and
racialdiscrimination-the
social aspect.
149. We come to the economic aspect. Now open
your ears wide. Who are the best customers of the
South African rhgime? They themselves know who
they are. Once, in the presence of a chief of State,
1 said: “Some Ministers do not deserve to be garbage
collectors.” And one of the Ministers said: “Can
you name them?” 1 said, “Why should 1 name them,
they know it themselves.” So 1 am not going to
embarrass those States, because we are here to try
and find a way out, rather than to embarrass one
another.
150. Did you know that chrome, for instance, was
purchased a few years ago by countries which were
supposed to observe the sanctions7 It was bought
from Southern Rhodesia and mingled with Russian
chrome ore-the Russians did not know about it-so
that the brokers could make a price in Europe.
This is done in business. There is no patriotism
in business, unfortunately. Do you know that many
ships went to South Africa, ships of countries that
had agreed to-the sanctions, and carried.goods, such
as core, that went into South Africa, and carried
exports from South Africa? 1 will leave aside Southern
Rhodesia: that is another story and we are not talking
ibout Southern Rhodesia. Well, you cannot close
economic loopholes, 1 submit. 1 mentioned only a
couple of days ago how in the First World War the
tiny State of Luxembourg sold steel both to the central
Powers and to the so-called Allies which opposed
them: it sold both to Germany and to France.
And the politicians seem to have done nothing about
it. These are the facts of life. Trade and ccononiics
are not imbued with patriotism. Therefore, try yout
best to itliensify your efforts to set that the sanctions
are applied, yet somehow you will find that these
sanctions ,are not foolproof.
ISI. The political aspect 01 this should not br
neglected. South Africa and Southern Rhodesia ;II’C
enc~.~ves
in the African continent which car) bc trsed

for strategic purposes. Therefore, although 1 would
not say that South Africa and Southern Rhodesia are
wooed, the eyes of certain Powers are closed when it
comes to the political aspect of the situation, They
would not do anything to interfere with any arrangement between themselves and South Africa or
Southern Rhodesia. and Jlere in the Council thev
rationalize their p&icy. They say we should go
slowly, we should persuade South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia to do something that will lead eventually to
the liberation of the blacks in those enclaves. If we
follow such a policy and pursue such a course it wilt
be years and years, decades, before the blacks there
will gain statehood. But we are living in different times:
there is an awareness, everywhere in the world, of
one’s rights. You cannot delay the eruption of the
volcano unless a new policy is adopted and pursued,
152. Having disposed of the social, economic and
political aspects, we come to the choices. What are
we going to do? Are we going to let things drag on,
our African brothers, and we Asians and others who
are with the blacks on the basis of their worth and
dignity as human persons-leaving
aside racial
discrimination and the question of being dominated by
someone from abroad7 What can we do? Just talk,
without action, adopt resolutions that will not be
implemented? And who can implement these
resolutions, who has the means? There are again here
three waysof attacking the problem and of surmounting
pur difficulties.
153. Let me say forthwith that a few years ago-and
here 1 mention names because 1 am embarrassing no
one-when Mr. Fedorenko was the reprksentative of
the Soviet Union in this very Council and we were
discussing the same subject, either Southern Rhodesia
or South Africa, and 1 could see no way out of the
impasse, 1 thought that as long as the Soviet Union
supported the liberation movement, it could perhaps,
as a mejor Power, do something about it. So 1 went
to Mr.,Fedorenko and spoke very frankly with him.
He said, “Our representative on the Fourth Committee
is Mr. Mendelevich, Go and talk to him. He is the
specialist on this question.” I spent an hour talking to
Mr. Mendelevich, a very fine man, and that was during
the sodcalled cold war era. Mr. Mendelevich was very
frank, very honest. He said, “If we were to use force,
we would have a confrontation with the other major
Powers. Do you want war?” I said we did not,
we were committed to the United Nations. In other
words, the Soviet Union knew at that time that it
might precipitate a conflict were it to help the South
Africans and the Southern Rhodesians opcniy. You
cannot blame it. 1 am not saying this to blame
anybody.
154.

However,

1 ~ILISI

salute

the

IJnitcd

‘Slr\teb

Government for having at flnc time siths~.~ihrd IO thr
sanctions, but what con they do \\+!I !hc:r~ C’lml?,rec;s
and
Senate. which sonictimes force the hand of the
Government so that it does somcthlnp which IS

unwise’? Some automobile manufacturers say they
need chrome at a certain price and can get it cheaper
there, or they have special i. rests there, and the
Congress decides to overrule tne executive branch of
the Government, I remember that poor Mr. Bush-he
is in China now, I think-was embarrassed when
I spoke to him about this*.
155. So what can we do? There is the fear of
confrontation on the one hand and the pressure of a
legislative body serving special interests on the
other. That is the situation. African brothers. Do not
let anybody fool you.~-Yo; are emotional, but i am
more emotional than you because of these facts, It is
a healthy emotion. What shall we do? There are 20,
30, 40 speakers on the long list. They will engage in
platitudinous statements, the same, rubrics, the same
stereotyped speeches-with all due respect to their
eloquence and diction. What will happen? Someone
will submit a draft resolution and; although I never
gamble, 1 bet there will be a veto. Nobody has to
pronounce the veto. Somebody will raise his hand
against. That is a veto. And then they can afford
to have the thing discussed again at the thirtieth
session of the Genera1 Assembly, and the Credentials
Committee will look into it, and some of us will
say it has no legal power, only the Security Council
can decide on the suspension or expulsion of a State,
which is true. I hope I am wrong-if there is no
veto I will ask those 20 speakers not to speak-but
the Council will veto any draft resolution which is
inimical to the interests of the white rkgime of South
Africa or Southern Rhodesia.
156. So what shall we do? The number three seems
to be felicitous today: there are three ways open:
war+civil disobedience and persuasion.
157. War is the least satisfactory, whether or not it is
by freedoni-fighters; it would mean shedding the blood
of the innocent. Whether white or black, they are
human beings; they have mothers, fathers, sisters,
brothers and husbands. It would be deplorable in the
era of the United Nations that such a question should
be resolved by war-whether the classical type of
war, which is not very wise in these days, for after
all the South Africans and the Rhodesians are armed
to the teeth; or by the ,new type of so-called guerrilla
warfare, which is as deplorable as any kind of
violence.
158. Civil disobedience is one
who

work

there

have

to eat.

way,
but the
I once asked why

blacks
should

not the United Nations create a fund at the time when
the United Kingdom wanted to contribute
f5 million,
in the event
that
Mr.
Ian Smith
and the African
nationalists
in Southern
Rhodesia
came to terms,
so
as to accelerate
the education
and
the political
readiness
of the African
people
to assume
responsibility in the future in Southern
Rhodesia,
and I was told
by the United
Kingdom
representative
recently
that
neither
the white r0gime
nor the nationalists
accepted

.

that fS million to accelerate the march towards freedom
of the black population. There was an impasse,
159. But what about still creating such a fund, and
using it to help those who strike, who refuse to go to
work in the mines and factories of the white Idgime?
Nothing talks more eloquently than stringency. When
they of the white r8gime find themselves in a condition
deleterious to their economic welfare, maybe they will
come to terms. But we are not sure. At least civil
disobedience accelerated the liberation of India,
although the Second World War was, of course, the
climax of the liberatiqn. Why not use civil disobedience’? It was not Gandhi who used it, but Emperor
Ashoka, who at one time was one of the biggest
conquerors on the subcontinent and, finally, he felt
so sad that so much blood was shed that he said:
“Do not resist even the invader.” And he won all
hearts on the subcontinent. Go to your history books;
there it is. Why not use civil disobedience in South
Africa and Southern Rhodesia?

f
!
:
-8
‘

160. Are those who v’ote for sanctions prepared to
create a fund to give relief to those who go on strike
in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia? Are we
prepared? We should thank the British for being willing
three or four years ago to contribute fS million to a
fund-true, for a different purpose, but it can be
used for the purpose of bringing pre?sure to bear on the
white rdgime.
161. The last means is persuasion, provided reason
prevails. And we-at least I will not-are not going
to ask the South Africans to change overnight,
assuming that there will be a veto. If there is no
veto there is no problem. The problem remains in so
far as the blacks are concerned, but there will be
PO problem for us here in the United Nations.
162. The persuasive process goes back to a draft
resolution that I submitted in the General Assembly
in 1%7 during a special session held on South West
Africa. A colleague of mine, none other than
Mr. Goldberg, said “Why listen to Baroody? 1 have
something for you.” What was it? “We will establish
a Council for Namibia.” And my African brothers
got drunk with the idea: Cotincil for Namibia-not
Committee for Namibia-Council!
And I remembered
from my younger days what Clemenceau said at
Versailles:
“If you want to shelve any problem,
create
a committee
for it; pass it to the committee
and it will
remain
on the Shelf for a long, long time.”
163.
Theo
three
or four
years
after
my African
brothers
turned
their hack on my project-and
I shall
forthwith
tell you what it was-they
said, “Why
did
we not listen
to Baroody?”
I said:
“Go
and bang
your
heads
against
the wall;
it is too late now.”
They have their Council
for Namibia
and there is the
Cotnmissioncr
for Namibia
and there
arc Namibian
representatives:
hut the white
r&me
has the people
under its thumb.
Whom
are you fooling
here? Council

----~-

I

___-_

1t
Ce

th
;i
th
th
to
th
ad
ca
aI:
+i
WI
ar’

for Namibia, without fighting. It is like fighting a war
with binoculars or with telescopes.

processes h&e to be observed, The only step that
we can take at this stage is the transfer of power
within a period of two years so that Namibia might
emerge as an independent State,

-164. Now, in order for the blacks not to resort to
both open and covert warfare against South Africa
and Southern ,Rhodesia, we could persuade the
“frtendi”-in
quotes, because in political and
economic matters there is no such word as “friend”.
I am reminded of Palmerston who, during the
-Victorian era, said: “Let it be known that this
country has no eternal enemy or perpetual ally.
Only her interests are eternal and perpetual.” These
are the facts of life. In Arabic: we say: “Interest is
-served”, ~-~

167. Then, how can we solve the problem of the
blacks of South Africa? It can be solved. If the whites
are afraid of their identity there, let them segregate
themselves from the blats. I think that the blacks
would be proud that the whites are segregating
themselves from the blacks. I think that the blacks
call it the white enclave. The rest would be under
the direct government of the maority of the people.
If the whites would like to confederate in the
future with the black maority, then it is their choice.
If they want to live in a fortress surrounded by blacks
then that is their choice. But sooner or later the whites
there will have to be assimilated whether they like
it 0rAot.

165. Personal friendship is all right but when it comes
to national interests there is no friendship even between
a man and his own brother. It is up to the “friends”
or the supporters of South Africa and Southern
Rhodesia to propose the following-I
am not a
member of the Council but I am giving them a
suggestion if they want to demonstratetheir goQdwil1:
let South Africa, within a period of two years,
transfer authority over Namibia to the Trusteeship
Council so that after two years Namibia will become
an independent State to which many blacks in South
Africa could immigrate if the worth and dignity of the
human person mean anything to them because they
will be the mdority and they will have their own
rulers. After all, South West Africa, known now as
Namibia, wasa Mandate and you know what a Mandate
was-it was, of course, colonialism ifi ‘disguise. All
the mandates have been liquidated and I salute
Australia and New Zealand to whom were entrusted
the preparation of the people of Papua and New
Guinea. They were headhunters and I was elated
when I shook hands with one of their representatives
standing next to our beloved colleague, Sir Laurence
McIntyre, there in the West Lounge. Are the blacks
of Namibia\ and South Africa “backward” or
“more backward” than the Papuans and New
Guineans? That is why we should salute Australia
and New Zealand for having done a marvellous job
against odds and for acceleratiug the liberation of
thescTelritories.

168. How do I know? I know from our area, the
Middle East. Before Egypt wasSemitized the Pharaohs
invaded a good part of the Fertile Crescent. They
could not go to Arabia as it was too much of a
desert in those days but the Fertile Crescent was
there. Then came -the Hit&es. They were a no&
Semitic people. After the Hittites came Alexander the
Great. After Alexander the Great came the Seleucids
and then the Byzantines, then the Mongolians from
the northern tier of Asia, After the Mongolians came
our brothers the Saluqs and then the Ottomans and
the Turks. Then, as if that were not enough, came
the British and the French as Mandatdry Pow&s.
Now, still in a small enclave, we have the Zionists
there. Do you know that place called Palestine? But
where are they all? From the time of the Pharaohs
until now they have come and gone and we have
assimilated them. Oh, I forgot the Crusades over
200 years. There are some tribes now in Arabia
which are remnants of the Crusades with blue eyes
and golden hair. Have you ever heard of an Arab.in
the desert with golden hair and blue eyes? But the
are as Arab as anybody else. The whites of the Soux
African rbgime are afraid of intermarriage. What is
wrong with c& au lait, or chocolate drink with milk:
if -you want it bitter keep to your area, segregate
yourself, until the new generation gets wiser and
intermingles by intermarriage and so on. Look at the

166. ~What can iybody say to this? If the Papuans
can be made to feel that they are independent, cannot

the South Africans prepare the blacks? No, they
cannot prepare them because they are obsessed with
fear. They have in.terests there. It is high time,
therefore, that they should be persuaded to transfer
the authority over South West Africa, or Namibia,
to the ‘rrusteeship Council with the proviso that in
the process ‘of the transfer there will be two coadministratbrs to make sure that the transfer is
carried out properly. Those co-administrators will be
appointed by the Security Council and/or the General
Assembly with the help of the Secretary-General.
That is the test of the goodwill of the South African
white rkgime. Otherwise they are fooling us. They
are resorting to clichds that are puss&. Constitutional

anctent civilizations. Look at this country, the host
country. Its greatness is due to the diversity of people
of different national origins. Look at us, the Arab
world. We have no racial discrimination. Some of the
best Arabs among us are the Sudanese, and many of
them are pitch black. We do not say that their
colour is black and therefore they cannot be Arabs.
Lo6k at the Chinese. They have all kinds of strains.
Look at them. Do not look at your watch, -look
at them. The Mongols came and invaded them and they

absorbed them. Their leader was Kublai Khan. Look
at the British and Harold. In 1066 the Normans came
and poor Harold was slain on the battlefield. But
they survived. Once in a while we hear of secession

19

by the Scats and the Welsh, Common interests bind
them. Why should those white Africans be different
from the others7 You cannot live by yourself.
169. Therefore, in mercy to those who still want to
have a late cocktail this evening, I would say: try, you
friends of the white rCgimes, to see to it that within
two years-1 repeat, within two years-Namibia
becomes a Member State, Then we shall try to find a
solution for racial discrimination. There are other
organs, The Cieneral Assembly is seized year in and
year out of upartheid and racial discrimination, and
we shall have our say there. at fuller length.
170. Thank you, Mr. President, for being generous
with me, and I also thank my colleagues for being
patient and lenient. J hope that something will
emerge from the Council this year, under your
presidency, because it is high time that we extricated
ourselves from the web of platitudinous statements
and vetoes, and dven consensus, when there is no
implementation. We have had enough words. What we
need is action.
171. The PRESIDENT (intrqretation from Fwwh;.
1 should now like to inform members of the Council
that I have just received a letter dated 21 October

from the representative of the German Democratic
Republic asking to be invited, under Article 31 of the
Charter, to participate, without the right to vote, in
the discussion. If I hear no objection I propose, in
accordance with the Council’s practice and with rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite the
representative of the German Democratic Republic to
participate,without theright to_vote, in the discussion,
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Florin
(German Democratic Republic) took the place reserved
for him at-the side oj’the Council chamber.

172. The RRESID$NT (interpretution from French):
I should also like to inform members of the Council
that a letter dated 21 October has been addressed to
the President of the Security Council by the
representatives of Kenya and Mauritania [S/l/540].
In that letter a request is made that the Council extend
an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Duma Nokwe, Director of Political
Affairs, member of the African National Congress.
If there is no objection, I shall take it that the Council
tgtgs tp_t!ttt xaktest.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p,m.
