S/2021/737

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 August 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 10 August 2021 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to write to you with regard to the financing of the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
Pursuant to article 3 of the Agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of Sierra Leone on the Establishment of a Residual Special Court for
Sierra Leone, “the expenses of the Residual Special Court shall be borne by voluntary
contributions from the international community” and “the parties and the oversight
committee may explore alternative means of financing the Residual Special Court”.
The oversight committee has informed me that the Court will run out of funding at
the end of 2021 and that, while fundraising efforts will continue, it is not expected
that there will be sufficient voluntary contributions for the operations of the Court
beyond 2021.
The Residual Special Court was established pursuant to a mandate from the
Security Council and has been carrying out residual functions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone since 1 January 2014. Those functions include supervising the
enforcement of sentences of the persons who were convicted by the Special Court;
providing for witness and victim protection and support; preserving and managing
the archives of the Special Court; responding to requests for access to evidence by
national prosecutorial authorities; responding to requests from national authorities with
respect to claims for compensation; reviewing convictions and acquittals; conducting
contempt of court proceedings; providing defence counsel and legal aid for the conduct
of proceedings before the Residual Special Court; and preventing double jeopardy.
The Residual Special Court is a lean institution with a small number of staff. The
Registrar is the only senior full-time official, and the judges, the Prosecutor and the
Principal Defender are remunerated on a pro rata basis for work actually performed.
In order to minimize costs further, the office of the Residual Special Court in The
Hague is co-located with and receives administrative support, on a cost-reimbursable
basis, from the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The senior officials of the Residual Special Court have continued to raise funds
in 2021 with a view to broadening the donor base of the Court. Furthermore, in May,
I wrote to all Member States to appeal for voluntary cont ributions for the Court. Two
pledges have been made in 2021, for $20,000 and €10,000, and one contribution of
$30,000 has been received for the 2022 fiscal year, for which I am grateful. No
additional contributions or pledges have been made towards the bud get of the Court
for the 2022 fiscal year, however.

21-11454 (E)

230821

*2111454*

S/2021/737

The Residual Special Court is helping to consolidate the rule of law and
contributes to efforts aimed at achieving peace and security in Sierra Leone and the
region. If it does not secure sufficient funding, it will not be able to fulfil its important
mandate. The failure of the Residual Special Court would diminish the legacy of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone and severely undermine the achievements made in
pursuit of accountability for the serious international crimes committed in Sierra Leone.
In the light of the foregoing, I intend again to propose to the General Assembly
that the costs of the Residual Special Court for 2022 be provided through a subvention
under the assessed programme budget. A subvention would be a temporary measure
to address the current financial situation. Moreover, I will continue to seek additional
voluntary contributions for the Court, as well as to assess the potential for achieving
greater efficiencies and possible savings, in coordination with the Court.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

2/2

21-11454
