WNI

NATIONS

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

nd

7.’ 1982
NEW YORK

CONTENTS
... .. .. .. ... .. ... .. . ..... ... .. .. .. ...

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . , , . , . . , , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2392)

The situation in the Middle East:
(tr) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);

(k) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316) . , . , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . .

I

WPV.2392 and Corr. 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of sukh~as&nbol
indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. .‘.) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates. the supplement, in which it appears or in which
.,
”
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2392nd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 12 August 1982, at 2.15 p.m.
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

Pwsent: The representatives of the following States:
France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
China,

Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT:
This meeting of the Security
Council has been convened in response to an urgent
request made to me this morning by the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

agenda (S/Agenda/2392)

I.

Adoption

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15162);
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/15316)

3. Members of the Council have before them document S/15355, which contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by Guyana, Jordan, Panama, Togo,
Uganda and Zaire.

of the agenda

4. I should like to draw the attention of the mem:
bers of the Council to the following other documents:
S/15345/Add.2,
which is an addendum to the report
submitted by the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Council resolution 517 (1982); S/15348, which contains the text of a letter dated 5 August from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council:
S/15349, which contains the text of a letter dated
9 August from the representative of Nicaragua to the
President of the Council; and S/ 15350, which contains the text of a letter dated 9 August from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council.

Adoption of the agenda

5. Members of the Council have received photocopies of a letter dated 12 August from the representative of Lebanon to the President of the Council. This
letter will be distributed in due form tomorrow morning
as a document of the Council under the symbol S/ 15353.

The situation in the Middle East:
(n) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162).
(b) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)

6. Members of the Council have also received photocopies of a letter dated 12 August from the representative of Jordan to the President of the Council. This
letter will be distributed
tomorrow
morning as a
document of the Council under the symbol S/15354.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings [2374th, 2375th, 2377th,
2385th und 2389th meltings],
I invite the representatives of Lebanon and Israel to take places at the Council table: I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization (PLO) to take a place at the
Council
table; I invite the representatives of Cuba,
Egypt, India and Pakistan to take the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

7. The first speaker is the representative
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

of the

8. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interprettrtion
from Rsrssirrn): The Council has been urgently convened at the request of the
Soviet delegation in view of the worsening situation
in Lebanon in connection
with Israel’s continuing
aggression.
9. First, for the fourth day in a row, Israeli forces
are continuing unceremoniously
to violate the ceaseI

fire in Beirut. They are continuing the barbaric bombardment and the firing. There have been even further
alarming communiquis
indicating
that the Israeli
forces are attempting
to advance into the heart of
Beirut.

its destruction would mean the further accelerated
destruction of the economy of the whole of Lebanon.
15. The other development
that made this emergency meeting imperative is the ruthless devastation
of west Beirut, which continues unabated, notwithstanding the various Council resolutions to which
I have already referred in connection with the letter of
the representative of Lebanon. I think it is important
to explain to the Council what took place today,
even though it has been happening every day for the
past four days and notwithstanding all the resolutions
that the Council has adopted on this matter and the
fact that the PLO has definitively agreed to withdraw
its forces from west Beirut, as communicated
to
Mr. Philip Habib and to all parties concerned as a
result of negotiations with the Government of Lebanon.

10. Secondly, as can be seen from the letter which
was just received by the President of the Council
from the representative of Lebanon [S/153.53], Israeli
forces with tanks have moved into regions located
north of Beirut. Under present conditions,
in the
opinion of the Soviet delegation, the Council should,
in keeping with the resolutions it has already adopted
on this matter, undertake immediate action to put an
end to Israeli aggression.
I I. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): The Council has convened today to discuss extremely ominous developments on two fronts.

16. The following is the ugly situation that developed
today, as set forth in a letter received by the Jordanian
Mission from the observer of the PLO:

12. First is the letter that the representative of Lebanon has sent to the President of the Council in which
he informs him of the following:

.L. . . the grave Israeli aggression that has, since
dawn today, 12 August 1982, turned west Beirut into
a firing range for the Israeli air force, army and navy.

“On instructions from my Government,
I have
the honour to bring to your immediate attention a
very grave development in the situation in Lebanon.
The Israeli armed forces, taking advantage of the
intensive negotiations being conducted concerning
the fate of west Beirut, have undertaken military
advances in areas north of Beirut. Israeli armoured
carriers and tanks have reached as far as Byblos
and, from there, into the mountain chain further into
north Lebanon.

“In nine continuous hours of air attacks on west
Beirut, Israeli planes had inflicted an estimated
300 casualties in the 16 different residential quarters
and Palestinian refugee camps in the bombing.
“Israeli planes carried out more than 100 sorties
-about, 12 per hour-using
phosphorus and fragmentation bombs, as well as 2,000-pound bombs
and several types of rockets. The areas attacked
included Verdun, Tallat Al-Khayyat, Aisha Bakkar,
Burj Abu Haidar, Barbour and a number of other
heavily populated districts.

“This expansion constitutes yet another violation of Security Council resolutions
508 (l982),
509 (1982), 516 (1982) and 517 (1982). This present
development
escalates the conflict to new dimensions that undermine,
if unchecked, the ongoing
negotiations
undertaken
by President
Reagan’s
envoy, Ambassador Philip Habib, and the attaining
of a peaceful settlement in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.”
[S//5353.]

“At 8.30 a.m. Beirut time, the hellish scream of
Israeli war planes filled the skies of Beirut as over
25 Israeli bombing runs has been carried out since
dawn. The scope of the raids widened to include
the areas of Ramlet Al-Baida and the Arab University vicinity. As the Israeli planes dove low over the
city and bombs tore into the heavily populated
residential areas, the citizens ran for cover, crowding
poorly equipped and ill-suited bomb shelters.

13. This is an extremely
ominous development,
because, until now and for almost two and a half
months, the Israeli war machine and fascist leadership
have literally destroyed the south of Lebanon. For
more than eight weeks, they have been systematically
destroying the capital of Lebanon, Beirut. And they
have started their advance on the north, evidently to
destroy what has not yet been destroyed, including
and, I believe, primarily,
the large historic cities of
Tripoli and Baalbek and other important areas.

“By 9 a.m., Israel had carried out over 30 bombing
runs against the Palestinian refugee camps of Burj
Al-Barajneh, Sabra and Shatila and Bir Hassan.
“At 10.45 a.m., the Israeli campaign to annihilate
what remains of Beirut’s four Palestinian refugee
camps was well into its fifth hour and escalating by
the minute. Wave after wave of Israeli war planes
struck hard, dropping phosphorus bombs. . #”

14. Furthermore,
the advances mentioned by the
representative of Lebanon indicate that the Israeli plan
is obviously either to take over or encircle the Bekaa
valley, which is the bread-basket of the whole of Lebanon. It is one of the most highly developed agricultural areas in the world and, even though small in size,

A friend of mine, a Canadian doctor, described to me
how those phosphorus bombs not only burn the
victim’s skin and bone, but penetrate the tissue Until
2

the doctor has no alternative but to amputate the leg
or limb or whatever has been afflicted in order to save
the victim’s life. It is a gruesome story, which I need
not detail. I repeat:
“dropping phosphorus bombs to ensure the total
destruction of the last refuge of Beirut’s Palestinian
citizens. In addition to the camps of Burj Al-Barajneh, Sabra, Shatila and Mar Elias, the Beirut residential areas of Berbir, Ramlet Al-Baida, Corniche
Al-Mazraa and the southern suburbs were all subjected to insane Israeli bombardment.
“At noon, the sixth hour of the continuous Israeli
air raids, over 400 buildings had been totally destroyed”and I would repeat that figure“over 400 buildings had been totally
crumbling over the occupants.”

destroyed,

As the Council is well aware, the Israelis are using
vacuum bombs which ensure that a building of 7 or
8 floors can collapse and kill everybody in or beneath
it.
“The casualty figure is expected to rise. Most of
the victims are believed buried under the rubble of
homes and trapped in shelters. Civil defence and
ambulance teams’ rescue efforts are severely
hindered because of the intensity and continuity of
the air raids.
“The conscience of mankind cannot remain
silent before this horrendous crime against the Palestinian and Lebanese populations of Beirut. With the
utmost urgency, we urge the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities.”
[S/15354, untwx.]
17. I do not believe that I need to mince words to
describe the suffering of the hundreds of thousands
of innocent civilians in west Beirut. I know that the
air bombardment had stopped after the nine-hour
spell, but I was informed that the shelling did not stop
and that the Israeli forces have been making all-out
efforts to get into west Beirut, as they have been doing
over the past six days. So far, their attempts have
ended in failure. Thus, the shelling and the attempts
to get into west Beirut are continuing, in spite of the
fact that we are all informed that Mr. Philip Habib has
succeeded and that he has more or less achieved a
package plan to solve the Beirut problem. Yet we see
this further wanton destruction and devastation and
the death of a whole city, one of the most beautiful
in the Middle East, the cultural and commercial centre
of the Middle East,
18. On behalf of Guyana, Jordan, Panama, Togo,
Uganda and Zaire, I should like to submit the following
draft resolution:

“Rrc~,f~~tmitrg
its resolutions
508 ( 1982), 509
(l982),511 (1982~,512(1982~,513(f982),515~1982~,
516 (1982) and 517 (1982).
“Expressing
its most serious concern about
Israel’s continued military activities in Lebanon and,
particularly,
in and around Beirut,

“I.
&rnrrnu’s that Israel and all parties to the
conflict observe strictly the terms of Security Council resolutions relevant to the immediate cessation
of all military activities within Lebanon and, particularly, in and around Beirut;
“2. Donutds
the immediate
lifting of all restrictions on the city of Beirut in order to permit
the free entry of supplies to meet the urgent needs
of the civilian population in Beirut;
“3. Rcyw.st.s
the United Nations observers in
and in the vicinity of Beirut to report on the situation:”
I believe there are approximately
observers now in west Beirut.

IO United

Nations

“4.
Detncrnds that Israel co-operate fully in the
effort to secure effective deployment of the United
Nations observers and to ensure their safety:

“5. Reywsis
the Secretary-General
to report
to the Security Council on the implementation
of
the present resolution within three hours from now:
“6. Dwiclcs
to meet, if necessary, in order to
consider the situation upon receipt of the report of
the Secretary-General.”
[S//.53.55.]
19. That is the draft resolution which I have the
honour to submit to the Council on behalf of the group
of above-mentioned
non-aligned countries.
20. The PRESIDENT:
the Palestine Liberation

I call on the representative
Organization.

of

21. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): The situation is rather serious: I would say it is
very serious and dangerous. I thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this urgent meeting, and
I wish to thank the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics for having called for such
a meeting.
22. A message sent by Chairman Arafat at 1900 hours
Beirut time, which would, I think, be one o’clock our
time, reads as follows:
“Planes stopped bombing at 1640 hours local
time. Artillery
shelling still continuing.
Habib
announced an hour and a half ago a cease-fire as
from 1700 hours. The planes stopped, but the shelling
did not.

“It is essential that practical measures be taken
to ensure the safety of Lebanese and Palestinian
civilians and to protect them from this immoral
and insane military action which was directed at
them today, without reason, at a time when we”
-the PLO-“had
reached an agreement with the
Lebanese Government,
according to the Jeddah
Accords [XV S/15329, nnncx], and that Government” -the Government of Lebanon-“with
Habib.
“The

other was about the continuation, even the intensification, of the genocidal warfare perpetrated by the
Israeli forces of aggression in Lebanon. Apparently,
it is no longer the political or military structure of the
PLO that is being subjected to obliteration: it is the
physical existence and the survival of the Palestinians
as a distinct people that is being subjected to annihilation. Furthermore, it is the Lebanese State, the fabric
of Lebanese society and the very existence of the
Lebanese structure that have come under the heel of
Israeli aggression and Israeli forces of occupation,

Security Council

must take firm and deciits own decisions and to
protect the lives and property of civilians.”
sive measures to protect

30. If it is the responsibility
of the entirety of the
international community to put an end to this genocide and to disarm the aggressor, it is all the more
the direct, historical and political responsibility of the
big Powers, and particularly those with special connections and relationships with the Government of
Israel, to bring it back to sanity in order to salvage
the future of the Middle East and its peoples from an
appalling and tragic destiny, in case this slaughter
persists and these blood-baths overwhelm the city of
Beirut and the whole of Lebanon.

23. I wish to thank my brother, the representative of
Jordan, for having read our letter [S/15354, nnncs],
but since then the number of victims is estimated at
500 and the number of homes destroyed at 600. The
number of bombs and rockets dropped over Beirut
in today’s attack was 1,600. There were 12,000 shells
launched from the sea and 30,000 shells from 105, 120,
155 and 17%millimetre
land-based artillery. So you
can understand how serious the situation was when we
came to the Council.

3 1. When we address the big Powers that have
special connections with Israel, we are addressing, in
particular, the United States Administration,
whose
efforts are still enthusiastically
under way to help
achieve a peaceful settlement of the Lebanese crisis.
However, we cannot and should not ignore or bypass
a basic fact-namely,
that it is highly essential to
intensify these efforts at this moment in a more forthcoming, purposeful and urgent manner. While its
ongoing efforts are appreciated, the United States
Government is required squarely to confront the persistence of this ongoing Israeli invasion, bombardment
and combing of Beirut, which has left the civilians
homeless, starving, thirsty, wounded and sick, a situ*
tion which signifies a deliberate attempt by Israel to
secure the collapse of all endeavours to forestal the
annihilation
of the Palestinian people in Lebanon.
Any reluctance or hesitation to act decisively and Put
an immediate end to these barbaric atrocities will
never be tolerated by Egypt, the Arabs or the international community.

24. Much has been said about a violation ofthe ceasefire. Naturally,
with a force of tanks and infantry
besieging a city, those tanks attempt to advance, and
the right of the defenders of the city is to knock them
out. Using that as a pretext, the Israelis then commit
further murderous bombardment
of civilian targets
in the city of Beirut. That is all the more reason why
the United
Nations, through the United
Nations
Disengagement
Observer Force, which is in Beirut
and elsewhere in Lebanon, should assume its responsibility and tell us exactly what is going on.
25. We do know that, on 4 August, the United Nations reported on some of the lines where the forces
stood, but it has never told us where those forces were
located on I August.
26. I sincerely hope that, for once, the Council will
respond to the call of those civilians who are being
massacred and maimed and being denied water, electricity and medical equipment. The call of humanity
makes it incumbent upon the Council to take immediate action.

32. It will amount to a real mockery of the whole
world if we continue to talk about an imminent agreement or an honourable and just solution while the
Israeli actions are being permitted to persist. It is amPlY
clear that Israel is buying time, day by day and moment
by moment, to accomplish a so-called final solution by
killing as many Palestinians and Lebanese as PQP
sible. Pretexts are being hatched and fabricated every
day by the Israeli authorities through insisting on
impractical,
humiliating
and unimaginable demands,
such as complete lists of evacuees, and also through
procrastination in accepting any form of multinational
force in Beirut that would secure a safe withdrawal of
the Palestinians, The Israeli objective is quite clear:
to wipe out all traces of the existence of the PLO
and of the Palestinians as a people or a national entity.

27. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
28. Mr. MOUSSA
(Egypt): Mr. President, I thank
you for having convened this meeting and called
on me now.
29. The last 48 hours have witnessed two diametrically opposed accounts: the first, reported by the
media, was to the effect that Mr. Habib was on the
brink of reaching an agreement between the parties
concerned-that
is, Israel, the PLO and Lebanon; the
4

33, My Government declares in the most articulate
and solemn terms that Israel stands fully responsible for the continuing acts of aggression, with all
the implications of this situation. We most vehemently
and strongly condemn this persistance in aggression
and intransigence. To the Israeli Government we say
simply: there is no escape from achieving a comprehensive and just settlement of the Middle East crisis,
the core of which is, and will continue to be, the restoration of the exercise by the Palestinian people of
their national legitimate rights, particularly their rights
to self-determination,
sovereignty and nationhood on
their national homeland in Palestine. This is the lesson
of history. Palestine will never cease to exist, in spite
of the haemorrhage that spilled the blood of the people
of Palestine. The heroic Palestinian people will rise
and redeem itself and gain dignity, freedom and independence, whatever the price.

negotiated cease-fire we allowed our optimism
to
become euphoric: after all, it is the United States, the
super-Power, because of its special relationship with
Israel which has negotiated the cease-fire, so it is
bound to stick: so let the Security Council be paralyzed, let the Security Council be removed from the
scene, let no one intervene in this noble United States
effort, let the United States continue with the peace
process that it has initiated, because we have a residual historical confidence in its ability. So, please. Security Council, we said, Israel would only be bothered
if you convened; Israel would be disturbed; Israel
considers the Security Council and the whole mechanism of the United Nations as its adversary.
38. Therefore, Israel must not be disturbed, because
if Israel is disturbed then the United States cannot
influence Israel: therefore, indirectly all of us sought
collectively
to provide Israel with temporary immunity in order to allow the United States to exercise its
influence. Israel paralysed the Council-all
its resolutions. Resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) are
almost in the dustbin of history, with no relevance.
Cease-fire after cease-fire has been violated, and Israel
says it is the PLO fighters who have violated and
broken it and that therefore Israel had to retaliate.
And it has been a massive retaliation.

34. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is Mr. Clovis
Maksoud, Permanent Observer of the League of Arab
States, to whom the Council extended an invitation,
at its 2374th meeting, under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
3.5. Mr. MAKSOUD:
Here we go again. In the last
two months we have experienced 10 or II Habibnegotiated cease-fires. Every time Mr. Habib negotiated a cease-fire we welcomed it, expressed our deep
appreciation
and considered it a major American
contribution
to the peace. Every time we expressed
our confidence in the United States because of its
special relationship with Israel, we were willing to forgo
our judgement of the issues in order to give the United
States a free hand, as if to compensate the United
States for its special relationship with Israel. Yet,
every cease-fire was broken; every cease-fire introduced
new fire-power,
greater fire-power, more
destruction.

39. How do we know the PLO violated the ceasefire? Did Israel allow neutral observers-United
Nations observers, anybody’s observers-to
be on
the spot and discover whether the PLO had violated
the cease-fire? Or did it want to remove any United
Nations presence-any
observer presence-so
that
it could undertake its carnage continuously,
repeatedly, massively, destroying Beirut without any mercy
or compassion for civilians or anyone else? Why?
40. By contrast, we said: “If the PLO has violated
the cease-fire, let there be verification.”
Israel refused,
and there were resolutions asking the Council to send
observers: then there was an Israeli refusal and a
paralysis of the resolutions.
According
to Israeli
double-talk,
on the one hand this massive retaliation
was in response to PLO violations, and, on the other
hand, it was the only way to ensure that the PLO
would negotiate a settlement and be bound by it. Well,
we cannot figure out-and
I do not think anybody
in the world can figure out-what
it is that Israel
wants to accomplish by its genocidal policy of carnage
and holocaust at the expense of the civilian population
of Beirut. What does it want to accomplish by destroying seven or more hospitals, including the American University Hospital, or the buildings which house
civilians of Beirut? Was this in response to PLO violations, or was it supposed to be the language that the
PLO understands and, therefore, an attempt to squeeze
the PLO into making a commitment
to the outcome
of Habib’s negotiations?
\
41. It was both. On the one hand, to muster international opinion, Israel says this was in retaliation

36.
Every time we thought that the credibility of the
United
States itself had to be redeemed we were
advised to have patience: “Mr. Habib is doing all he
can.” As a matter of fact, he has developed into a great
hero, and, in a way, he is. His ability to negotiate a
peace settlement amidst the bombs striking Beirut is
heroic in some ways. We have told ourselves, as Lebanese, as Palestinians,
as Arabs: let us give him a
chance; they have a special relationship with Israel;
Israel is bound to allow the United States the leverage,
to have the initiative
when other Powers seek to
intervene on behalf of rationality, on behalf of peace.
37.
We shared the United States assessment that
this was a sort of interruption
of their own peace
process. We shared it because we were under the false
and illusory notion that America’s special close relationship
with and sponsorship of Israel’s objectives
in the region would allow the United States to curtail
Israel,
to provide it with an incentive to allow the
United
States to move freely. With every Habib5

for PLO violations. On the other hand, in order to
satisfy its own primitive,
racist instincts, it says that
this is the language that the non-Israelis understand.

more babies killed, more babies amputated, hospitals
incapable of coping with what is taking place. And we
say that Mr. Habib means well because he is a noble
man.

42. And the United States, faced with this situation,
falls into the other dilemma: the United States, through
its intelligence operations, knows who violated the
cease-fire. Mr. Habib, being on the spot, knows who
violated the cease-fire. Yet the United States has
been unwilling to see its judgements become policies,
because the United States felt that it was in an inner
debate between itself and itself: “Do we condemn
Israel? Then if we do, Prime Minister Begin will become very angry. And if Prime Minister Begin becomes
very angry, then woe unto the consequences of the
Habib mission; woe unto the consequences of the
Camp David agreements, the two principal pillars of
American policy in the Middle East.” And then we
plead, day after day-Arab
kings, Arab presidents,
the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States,
Arab representatives-we
plead.

48. The agreement is concluded and the PLO is
committed to it. And then, while Mr. Habib is in
Jerusalem negotiating the final outcome, what happens? In the meantime, Israel deems it necessary to
expand the area of deployment and logistical existence
of its military forces in areas way outside of Beirut:
in Byblos, up in Naqoura, and in other towns and
villages in Mount Lebanon, as you, Mr. President,
have been notified by the Lebanese Mission (S/15353].
49. Why does Israel do that? We do not know because at this moment Mr. Habib is negotiating the
matter of Beirut. But what about the other aspects?
What about the new dimensions of Israel’s expansion?
What about potential new strikes in a repeat performance of what has taken place in Beirut‘?

43. Sometimes it reaches the extent of begging the
United States: “Please,
because of the orphans,
because of the decimated babies in Beirut, because
of the people in hospitals that are being bombarded,
please, United States, lift the siege of Beirut so that
people can drink, so that we can avoid typhoid and
cholera and other epidemics. Please, United States,
let some food enter Beirut. Please, United States, if
you cannot stop Israel from its massacre of Beirut,
at least do not let the people die dehydrated. Please,
United States, match your words with performance.”

50. The answer to these questions cannot be given
at this moment because we are at a very sensitive
stage of the negotiations on the Beirut peace plan.
In the meantime, last Wednesday we had what was
until then the most ferocious attack on Beirut. Yesterday, however, we had an even more ferocious
attack, which, in turn, was surpassed in ferocity by
today’s attack.
51. How long can we all wait? How long can we
suffer this trauma, witness the holocaust in front of
our eyes and then, in addition to that, have to face the
filibustering techniques of Israel in the Security COUP
cil, to prevent it from adopting adequate resolutions?
How long must we stand by idly as Israel continuously
paralyses its will and demeans the legitimacy of the
world body?

44. We cannot deny that we seem to get adequate
responses and polite answers. “We are doing our
best.”
45. We have heard that statement repeatedly. The
people of Beirut have constantly clung to the notion
that when a great Power like the United States says
“we are doing our best”, the United States means
that it is doing its best. What we are asking is: is this
the best that the United States can provide? We do
not think so. We think that there is sufficient resilient
moral power within the United States to restrain Israel
from its deliberate policy of genocide.

52. How long can the international
community
helplessly witness this carnage? Once in a while a Red
Cross bus comes in, Once in a while some food comes
in. Once in a while, for three hours, the water taps
are turned on, but not the electric power. Once in a
while we are allowed certain amenities of life, only
because, I am sure, Mr. Habib said that it was necessary.

46. And then we come to an agreement. Ah sorts of
agreements are made-the
Lebanese Government, the
PLO leadership and Mr. Habib himself agreeing.
Mr. Habib goes to Israel. Then there are certain
points: for one thing, they do not want French troops;
then they accept them. Then they do not want the
United Nations: “How many United Nations troops
will be going in? How many will be going out?”

53. Negotiating with Mr. Habib, under the circumstances of these genocidal air raids and the other
attacks on Beirut, the Prime Minister of Lebanon
could not take it anymore, Even Mr. Habib almost
lost his patience today, and it appears that at noon
today even President Reagan finally lost his patience.

47. Then they reintroduce
new issues. Then
Mr. Habib, with his characteristic
patience, refines
the notes, deliberately trying to persuade us to be
even more patient; and while we are more patient,
there are more attacks, more strikes, more victims,

54. Did they lose their patience to the extent of
restraining Israel, rendering it compliant with the
international community, or only to the extent of sestraining Israel to give us further breathing-space until
Mr. Sharon has decided that Israel’s thirst for blood
has been satisfied?
6

55. How long does the international community have
to stay on the sidelines of history, allowing Israel to
make its own aggressive history? That is the point.
Our patience has really been exhausted. 1 do not think
that any Lebanese, or any Arab, or anybody in the
world who has witnessed on television this great distortion of human morality, this great attack on normal
human lives and values, unprecedented,
as I said
earlier, in contemporary history-a
veritable carnage,
an Auschwitz-cannot
have been affected by it.

aggression against Lebanon. Continuation
ent situation is utterly unacceptable.

of the pt%s+

64. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker
representative of Israel. 1 call on him.

is the

65. Mr. BLUM
(Israel): While listening today to
Mr. Maksoud, 1 was reminded of the note all-egedly
attached to the manuscript of one of the speeches of
Sir Winston Churchill which said: “Raise your voice;
argument is weak.”

56. Israel then has the temerity, the audacity, to
attack people who dare to question its will and policies.
Indeed, anyone who might criticize Israel’s intransigence or its violations of laws, charters and human
decency is labelled as anti-Semitic.
It is as if Israel
were trying to cover up its terrorism on the ground in
Beirut with intellectual and political terrorism of anybody who dares question its policies.

66. 1 propose to lower my voice. 1 will not even ask
Mr. Maksoud what the countries of the Arab League,
which he represents here, have done in recent weeks
to ensure the departure, promptly and without delay,
of the terrorists from Beirut in order to relieve the
people of Beirut and of Lebanon of the terrorist presence that has brought untold suffering on that sorely
tried people and on the entire region.

57. It is time that the Security Council, with the
United States, told Israel: enough is enough.

67. I, for one, certainly do not recall any sermon by
Mr. Maksoud in the Council on the latter topic. It
would certainly be interesting to find out whether he
has addressed the members of the Arab League, with
the same fervour displayed here in the Council, on the
question of relieving the people of Beirut of the terrorist presence.

58. Mr. OTUNNU
(Uganda): 1 speak today with a
great sense of sorrow and frustration, but because of
the lateness of the hour 1 will be extremely brief.
59. Uganda is one of the sponsors of the draft resolution now before the Council [S/15355] because we
are appalled at the conduct of Israel and we are horrified by the suffering of the Lebanese and Palestinian
peoples.

68. As I have had occasion to state repeatedly in the
Council in recent weeks, Israel stands for a solution
that would ensure, through political and diplomatic
means, the departure of all terrorists from the Beirut
area. Israel seeks to avoid any further bloodshed and
destruction,
if possible. Israel has thus repeatedly
stated that it will observe and maintain a cease-fire
provided that it is mutual and absolute. However, for
reasons best known to the terrorists themselves
-which,
incidentally,
have been alluded to in the
Council here today--the terrorists have systematically
broken each and every cease-fire in recent weeks.
These violations have resulted in scores of casualties
among the Israel Defence Forces, as well as among
the civilian population
of east Beirut, because in
Beirut-and
this is conveniently
forgotten-there
is
also an east, not only a west.

60.
It is now nine weeks since Israel invaded Lebanon without any provocation. These nine weeks will
go down as the darkest period in the tragic history of
the Middle East. Israel has unleashed a most gruesome
carnage, a hell on earth, on the Lebanese and Palestinian peoples. By all accounts, the use of cluster and
phosphorus
bombs and the indiscriminate
shelling
of civilian targets have become commonplace.
61.
The numerous cease-fires are better known for
Israel’s
violations
than for their observance. Every
Council resolution cited in the present draft resolution
has been ignored by Israel. Even as we are meeting
here, Beirut, the capital of Lebanon, is burning, and
women and children are being killed and maimed.

69. In the course of yesterday alone, 22 soldiers of
the Israel Defence Forces were injured as a result of
the terrorist violations of the cease-fire. The breaches
of the cease-fire by the terrorists naturally compel the
Israel Defence Forces to return fire in order to silence
the terrorist fire and to protect our own soldiers.

62.
The Council cannot idly watch these atrocities.
We must do everything
within our power-even
though that power is now more limited than ever-to
bring Israel to order and to bring an end to the genocide going on in Lebanon. In spite of Israel’s continued defiance of the Council, we must continue in
these efforts. It is our responsibility under the Charter
of the United Nations, and we owe it to the Lebanese
and Palestinian
victims of Israel’s genocidal war and
to all the peoples of the Middle East who genuinely
desire and long for peace,

70. The attacks of the Israel air force against terrorist
targets in the Beirut area today, in response to terrorist violations of the cease-fire, lasted until 4.30 p.m.
local time. And then another cease-fire, the eleventh
in recent weeks, went into effect at 5.30 p.m. local
time, corresponding to I I .30 a.m. New York time. All
Israel troops have been instructed to cease fire, and
have in fact ceased fire since. They will continue to do

63.
Uganda will continue to contribute to all efforts
aimed at stopping the carnage of Beirut and the armed
7

so unless there is a violation
terrorists.

of the cease-fire by the

80. Those are the revisions that the sponsors of the
draft resolution wish to introduce.

1
1

7 I. It must be clearly understood that no cease-fire
can be effective unless it is mutual and absolute.

81. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding that
the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution submitted by Guyana, Jordan, Panama,
Togo, Uganda and Zaire [ihid.], as orally revised and
presented to us now by the representative of Jordan,

!

72. The PRESIDENT:
There are no further speakers, and we have before us a draft resolution [ibid.].
We all appreciate that the issue before us is urgent.
At the same time, I am informed that certain delegations would wish to have a short time to receive instructions from their Governments before proceeding
to the vote. I understand, further, that the sponsors
of the draft resolution have no objection to a short
break to allow the delegations concerned to receive
such instructions. It would therefore be my intention
to suspend the present meeting for a short time. It is
my understanding that, when we resume our formal
meeting here, the Council would be ready to proceed
to a vote on the draft resolution.
73. If there is no objection,
I shall suspend the
present meeting with the intention of resuming it at
4.30 p.m., or as close to that time as I can manage it.

T/w meting HYIS snspend~d
surrwd ut 6.00 pm.

c/t 3.50 pm.

und I’(*-

74. The PRESIDENT:
It is my understanding that
one of the sponsors of the draft resolution which is
before the Council wishes to make a statement in
regard to it.
75. Mr. NUSEIBEH
(Jordan): After consultation
with the other sponsors of the draft resolution before
us, and with their agreement, I wish to introduce the
following revisions to it.
76. In the first preambular paragraph, the Security
Council, instead of “reaffirming”
would be “recalling”
all the resolutions mentioned.
77. The second preambular
as follows:

paragraph

would read

“E.qwessirzg
its most wriouLs
wnc’ern
about
continued military activities in Lebanon and, particularly, in and around Beirut,“.

82. In order to be quite clear and since there has
been oral revision by the sponsors, I should simply
like to read the draft resolution in its revised form,
I first note that there are changes in the two preambular paragraphs of the existing draft and also in
operative paragraphs 4 and 5. I shall now read the
draft resolution as orally revised by the sponsors.

“Recwlling
its resolutions 508 (1982), 509 (1982).
511 (1982), 512 (1982), 513 (1982), 515 (1982), 516
(1982) and 517 (1982),
“Expwssing
its most wrious
L~OIWPI’II about
continued military activities in Lebanon and, particularly, in and around Beirut,
” I. Derncrnds that Israel and all parties to the
conflict observe strictly the terms of Security Council resolutions relevant to the immediate cessation
of all military activities within Lebanon and, particularly, in and around Beirut;

“2. Demrrrzds the immediate lifting of all restrip
tions on the city of Beirut in order to permit the free
entry of supplies to meet the urgent needs of the
civilian population in Beirut:
“3. Requests the United Nations observers in,
and in the vicinity of, Beirut to report on the situation;
“4. Dvmruzds that Israel co-operate fully in the
effort to secure the effective deployment of the
United Nations observers, as requested by the
Government of Lebanon, and in such a manner as
to ensure their safety;

Operative paragraph 4 would read as follows:

“5. Reyuests the Secretary-General
to report
as soon as possible to the Security Council on the
implementation
of the present resolution;

“Demnds
that Israel co-operate fully in the
effort to secure the effective deployment
of the
United Nations observers, as requested by the Government of Lebanon, and in such a manner as to
ensure their safety;“.

“6. DwidPs
to meet, if necessary, in order ta
consider the situation upon receipt of the report Of
the Secretary-General.”

78.

79.

Operative paragraph

5 would read as follows:

“RPyuests
the Secretary-General
to report as
soon as possible to the Security Council on the
implementation
of the present resolution;“.

83. That is the text of the draft resolution as orallY
revised by the sponsors. Unless I hear any objection,
I shall now put the draft resolution, as orally revised,
to the vote.

93. We must put an end to the suffering of Beirut
as soon as possible. That is the first and most urgent
matter. My Government is working energetically and
unstintingly to that end.

84. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
following the voting.

94. Mr. WHYTE
(United Kingdom):
There have
been reports today that some 200 more people have
died in Israeli bombing in Beirut earlier in the day.
Some reports give a higher figure. Whatever the
precise figures-and
in the blood and wreckage of
Beirut there are no precise figures--the
fact which
continues to horrify my Government is that thousands
of innocent civilians, Lebanese and Palestinian,
are
being killed and wounded by the Israeli forces in Lebanon, in pursuit of objectives which are by no means
clear and, in any event, are not, in our view, about to
be realized.

85. Mr. LICHENSTEIN
(United States of America): The United States wishes to express its deep
concern about the continued violence in Lebanon.
We are concerned because of the destruction and
bloodshed that have resulted from the violence. We
are also concerned that the new fighting presents an
obstacle to the completion of the negotiations for the
peaceful resolution of the Beirut crisis and, beyond
that, the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty.
86. As is known, a cease-fire was announced this
morning. It is our fervent hope that this cease-fire will
be permanently maintained. The United States would
like to reiterate in the strongest terms its view that
actions in the Council should support and not complicate the negotiating process. The resolution we have
adopted today is, in our judgement, constructive. We
urge the Council to avoid any initiatives that could
upset the negotiations
during rhis present critical
phase.

95. Mr. Philip Habib is doing a magnificent job. If
he succeeds, it seems that the Palestinian
armed
forces will leave Beirut and go elsewhere, but the
Palestinian problem will not thereby go away.
96. What the Government of Israel is now doing in
Lebanon will not resolve the Palestinian
problem,
and the security of the State of Israel will not thereby
be assured.

87.
I reiterate the fervent hope of my Government
that the cease-fire in Beirut will be maintained so that
a settlement can be achieved that will bring peace to
Lebanon and to the entire region. Let the guns be
permanently
stilled.

97. My delegation voted for resolution 518 (1982)
because we want to see an end to the fighting. We
hope that agreement in the negotiations still in progress will be reached, and then, in the view of my
delegation, what we need is some new thinking about
how to satisfy the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinians, without which there is never going to be peace
in the Middle East.

88.
Mr. LOUET
(France) (interpretation
from
F/-enc./?): Resolutions
adopted by the Council are
meant to be implemented.
This is an obligation incumbent on all Members of the Organization. No Member
State is exempt from that responsibility.

98.

Mr.

MI Guojun (China) (into’prctation
,fiom
In defiance of the condemnation
of world
opinion and openly refusing to implement
Council
resolution
517 (1982), the Israeli authorities
have,
for some days, continued the massive bombing of west
Beirut and, yesterday, began to move a large number
of tanks towards northern Lebanon.

Chinese):

89.
According to Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations: “The Members of the United Nations
agree to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security
Council in accordance with the present
Charter,”
90.
This is why my delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution submitted to us this morning by the
representatives
of Guyana, Jordan, Panama, Togo,
Uganda and Zaire.

99. Innocent Lebanese and Palestinian
tinue to be massacred. The sovereignty
has been further violated.

91.
In the face of the suffering of the people of Lebanon and the destruction of Beirut, we do not want to
prolong
this debate. What counts at this point is settling the situation there. That is the matter on which
we must focus our attention.

100. Faced with the continued deterioration
of the
situation in Lebanon, the Council is in duty bound to
assume the responsibility
of taking further action to
ensure the implementation
of resolution 5 17 ( 1982) for
the effective deployment
and functioning
of United
Nations observers in order to put an end to the bombing
of west Beirut and the aggression against Lebanon
carried out by the Israeli troops.

92.
As the representative
of Lebanon said in the
Ietter
addressed to you this morning [S//53533, we
must
do nothing to jeopardize the negotiations now
under way or the success of a peaceful settlement in
accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the
Council.

people conof Lebanon

101. Therefore, in this connexion, the Chinese delegation commends the non-aligned
members of the
Council for the efforts they have made.
9

102. In accordance with the position of principle
of the Chinese Government,
the Chinese delegation
voted in favour of the draft resolution contained in
document S/l5355/Rev. 1.

We know that, for many reasons, not all wars and not
all conflicts now taking place are so graphically rrported each day or debated so fully.

103. Mr. MIYAKAWA
(Japan): Until this morning,
my delegation had entertained a strong hope for the
impending culmination
of the recent arduous negotiations in a formal agreement among the parties concerned to put an end to the tragic situation in and
around Beirut and to reaIize the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Lebanon.

I12. It may be true that our record as a Councit
seems limited. Nevertheless, we must say it, with all
of this in mind: we are appalled at what is happening
in Beirut. In our view, no considerations of strategic
calculation
of pressure, no geopolitical
considerations, no considerations of self-defence, or, indeed,
the tragic past history of any people, can possibly
justify it.

104. That is why we have been shocked to learn of
the expanded Israeli military activities which have
been reported to the Council this morning. My delegation fully shares the concern expressed in the letter
addressed to you this morning by the representative
of Lebanon [ihid.], the country most directly concerned, that these activities, if unchecked, undermine
the ongoing negotiations
undertaken
by President
Reagan’s envoy, Mr. Philip Habib, and the attainment of a peaceful settlement in accordance with the
relevant Council resolution.

I 13. It is true that there is a complex background,
but we are told that agreement in principle has been
reached on the immediate issues. Each day’s decision to continue fighting, to bomb further, to shell
further, must now stand on its own and be judged in
its own terms. Each day’s dead and injured must nob
be counted separately.
114. We wish well to Mr. Habib and to the negotiations. We wish to do nothing to disrupt them. Beyond
the immediate issue, we want to see Lebanese sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity restored and, in accordance with the wish of the Government of Lebanon, all foreign forces, except those
which it has authorized, withdrawn from Lebanon.

105. My delegation strongly deplores these continued military activities, which might jeopardize the
finalization of the agreement which we hope is in sight,
in addition to the resultant further sufferings and
hardships of the civilian population
in and around
Beirut.

11.5. We believe, too, that the complex Middle East
situation must be addressed in an effort to work towards a comprehensive, just and lasting peace and
that this must be done sooner rather than later and
must take account of all aspects of the problem.

106. Accordingly, my delegation voted in favour of
resolution 518 (I982), and it sincerely hopes that this
call of the Council will be heeded immediately
and
that the peaceful settlement of the crisis in and around
Beirut will be secured, thereby opening the way
towards the restoration of peace in the whole territory
of Lebanon, in accordance with the relevant resolution of the Council.

116. But Beirut today and tomorrow cannot wait.
The children, the civilians, the hospital patients cannol
wait so long. The present carnage must stop. We are
entitled in the Council to insist on that at least, and to
do so without prejudice to any larger issues.

107. The PRESIDENT:
I should now like to make
a statement in my capacity as representative
of
IRELAND.

117. Over the course of two months, the Council,
in exercise of its authority under the Charter of the
United Nations, which all Member States have agreed
to accept, has adopted all the right resolutions-508
( 1982), 509 ( 1982) and so on. The list gets longer bY
the week. Today we have adopted resolution 518
( 1982). These resolutions so far remain unimplemented.
If the Council is ever accused of being ineffective, it
will certainly not be for want of effort.

108. The Irish Government and the public in Ireland
are appalled at what is happening in Beirut. It is impossible not to be appalled at what has been happening
night after night, week after week-indeed,
month
after month.
109. We are aware of the complexity of the Middle
East situation. We have always tried to be fair and
balanced in our approach to it, in the Council and
outside it, and to understand, as far as we can, the
deep emotions and passions on either side.

I IS. I want here not to address the larger issues, not
even those of our earlier resolutions of June and July,
but to focus on the most recent resolutions we have
adopted, in the past 10 days, in regard to Beirut.
119. In the face of a complex situation, with allegations of breach of cease-fire on either side, we find
it, I must say, particularly difficult to understand WhY
one of the parties, Israel, alone among the parties,
should flatly refuse to allow neutral and unarmed
United Nations observers to observe the cease-fire

I 10. We are aware, too, of the delicacy of the present
negotiations, and we wish well to those who have
engaged in them,
111. We are also aware, and we are often reminded,
that blood is being spilled elsewhere in the world.
IO

measure, we cannot fail to note that, being a minimum
measure, it brings little more to the structure of a
peaceful settlement than did previous resolutions,
all of which have been challenged and not been implemented.

and to help as best they can to consolidate it in accordance with the resolutions of the Council. We know
the long record of acceptance of such observers
on various frontiers and cease-fire lines in the Middle
East. That record goes back some 35 years. The
observers have always carried out their task faithfully
and well, in extremely difficult and complex situations.

126. This is a call for a cease-fire that comes after
the cease-fire. We cannot but regret that. However,
had we, as the country concerned, been associated
more closely with the drafting process, we would
have probably suggested the introduction
of more
meaningful, practical elements directly reIated to the
present developments
in the situation, particularly
those to which our letter of this morning [ihid.] alludes.
Indeed, we cannot accept the present developments,
nor do we have any explanation for them.

I20. Against this background, what appears to us
still to be a refusal by Israel to accept these observers
in and around Beirut is extremely difficult to understand, and it must raise for us some very serious
questions.
121. The focus of the present resolution is limited.
It concentrates on the cease-fire, on the lifting of
restrictions on Beirut in the interests of its civilian
population and, particularly, on the need to admit and
allow the observers to report. The text, in all the circumstances,
is extremely moderate. We therefore
voted for the resolution as a minimum measure in the
present situation, and we most strongly urge-indeed,
we beg-that
it be implemented.
122.

I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.

123.

I call on the representative

I24.
Mr. TUBNI
(Lebanon):
observations
to make.

127. We would also have wanted this resolution to
reflect more comprehensively-as
you, Mr. President,
have hinted-the
basic policy of the Lebanese Government, namely, that Lebanese sovereignty must be
restored and must be exercised solely and exclusively
in all of Lebanon and, therefore, that all non-Lebanese
forces should withdraw from Lebanon.
I28. What has happened today in and to Beirut is
beyond our capacity to describe or qualify. The atrocities, the carnage, leave us silent. They would have
made us despair had it not been for the reaction of
various Governments
and also of the Council. We
take what you have given us today as a symbol of
solicitude and support, and we thank you for it.

of Lebanon.

I have a very few brief

125. I want to say that every time we have a new
resolution
we cannot but express satisfaction and
appreciation.
Even though this resolution is, as you
have just described it, Mr. President, a minimum

II

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Nations.

New

DES NATIONS

KAH

OPrAHM3AI[BiN

I-IOXYUHTB

CONSEGUIR

MBJ4AIIMH

PUBLICACIONES

York

Ol;‘I>E/~MHEHHMX

DE LAS NACIONES

Unidas
e&n
en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

00300

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

sont en vente dans Its librairies
et les agences
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
A : Nations

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

in United

LES PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Units
monde entier.
Informez-vous
aup&
des ventes.
New York ou Gentve.

COMO

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
liom bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

dfpositaircs
du
Unies, Section

HAIUUt

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Secci6n de Ventas,

@-h0989-June

198Y--2.050
