A/65/PV.102

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

102nd plenary meeting
Wednesday, 22 June 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 33
Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/65/L.79)
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
make a few remarks with regard to mediation. In my
view, mediation is essential to the prevention and
peaceful resolution of conflicts. The role of mediation
in the maintenance of international peace and security
is clearly recognized in the Charter of the United
Nations, whose Article 33 explicitly calls on parties to
a dispute to resort to mediation.
The importance of mediation was reaffirmed in
resolution 57/337 on the prevention of armed conflict,
adopted by consensus by the General Assembly at its
fifty-seventh session, the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1), and the various reports of
the Security Council on the promotion of mediation.
In practice, mediation is often used by States,
regional and subregional organizations and civil
society to settle disputes, and the United Nations
deploys a number of political missions in support of
these efforts. But the success stories are not well
known. One of the aims of the draft resolution before
the Assembly today (A/65/L.79) is precisely to
strengthen the visibility of mediation as a tool for the
peaceful resolution of conflicts.

sidelines of the general debate in September 2010, that
the idea of a draft resolution on this topic emerged.
Here, I wish to highlight the leading role played in this
process by Finland and Turkey. I would also like to
underline some elements that, in my view, are central
to the text before the Assembly today.
First, the draft resolution emphasizes the
strengthening of the operational capacities of the
United Nations with regard to mediation, in particular
of the Mediation Support Unit of the Department of
Political Affairs. Member States are encouraged to
make the necessary resources available to the United
Nations, to develop their national capacities in
mediation, and to draw on the competence of the
United Nations to do so.
Secondly, the draft resolution encourages
Member States to draw on the mediation capacities of
regional and subregional organizations and calls on
these organizations to cooperate and to coordinate their
activities with the United Nations and civil society so
as to ensure coherence.
Thirdly, the draft resolution emphasizes the evergreater role of civil society and encourages an increase
in the number of women in mediation roles.
Finally, the mediation role of the General
Assembly is strengthened through the request to the
Secretary-General to present an annual report on the
implementation of the draft resolution and to hold
regular information meetings on mediation.

It was during the meeting on the promotion of
peace through mediation, which was held on the
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-38319 (E)

*1138319*

A/65/PV.102

Overall, mediation is at the heart of the mission
of the United Nations. I am therefore pleased to invite
the Assembly to adopt this draft resolution, which
strengthens the role of mediation in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and which strengthens the
Assembly’s commitment in this area.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Finland to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.79.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
present
draft
resolution
A/65/L.79,
entitled
“Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution”, on behalf of the Group of Friends of
Mediation, convened by Finland and Turkey.
The draft resolution emerges from the conviction
that mediation has enormous untapped potential. As the
President just reminded us, the Charter recognizes
mediation as a major tool for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The resolution builds
on the ideas presented in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and the trail-blazing 2009
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/189) on
enhancing mediation and its support activities.
Mediation is a cost-effective and efficient means
to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. The prevention of
conflicts through mediation and early action is
instrumental in reducing human suffering, creating
conditions conducive to lasting peace, and paving the
way to sustainable development.
However, mediation has not gained the political
attention or the resources it deserves. We are proud to
introduce the first-ever General Assembly resolution
on this important issue. The aim is to consolidate the
normative basis, reinforce support of mediation
activities and enhance Member States’ engagement in
mediation efforts. Strengthening the role of mediation
is a concern of all Member States. We are delighted to
put this consensual draft resolution before the General
Assembly. Action today will demonstrate, loudly and
clearly, that the General Assembly can make a
significant contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The draft resolution seeks to strengthen the
Secretary-General’s good offices and United Nations
mediation support capabilities. The Mediation Support
Unit of the Department of Political Affairs plays a

2

crucial role as the United Nations focal point. We are
grateful for its very useful insight in the negotiations.
Regional and subregional organizations play a
major role in modern-day mediation. Cooperation
between actors and coherence of purpose are essential
to successful mediation. Success requires teamwork.
We welcome the contributions of many regional
organizations — for example, the African Union, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the
European Union — to the work of the Group of
Friends.
Many regional and subregional organizations are
gearing up their mediation capabilities. Their efforts to
further develop mediation skills and build up mediation
support structures deserve our full support. Finland, for
example, is proud to partner with the African Union by
supporting the African Union mediation capacity.
The draft resolution seeks also to address the
particular
challenge
of
increasing
women’s
involvement at all stages and levels of peace processes,
in line with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000)
and other relevant resolutions on women, peace and
security.
We thank all Member States for their active
participation and flexibility in the negotiations leading
to this landmark draft resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey, who will also
introduce the draft resolution contained in document
A/65/L.79.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset I would like
to thank the members of the Group of Friends of
Mediation — or, as mentioned in the draft resolution
contained in document A/65/L.79, the “mediation for
peace initiative” — for preparing the draft resolution
that the Assembly will vote on today, and all Member
States for their active participation in the negotiations
and valuable contributions and flexibility.
In the course of the negotiation process, useful
suggestions were made by various delegations. We are
grateful for those proposals, which substantially
enriched the text. Let me also thank the Secretariat, in
particular the Mediation Support Unit of the
Department of Political Affairs, which provided the
meetings with necessary information and clarification
on some issues. As a result, we have now a
comprehensive draft resolution that encompasses all

11-38319

A/65/PV.102

salient aspects of the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention and
resolution.
Let me briefly mention some points made in the
draft resolution. Among other important elements, it
highlights the necessity of cooperation and
coordination among the various actors involved in a
specific mediation context. Mediation is at its best
when we act in a spirit of partnership to complement
each other’s efforts and facilitate ongoing endeavours.
The draft resolution also invites Member States to
optimize the use of mediation and other tools
mentioned in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.
As underlined by some delegations during the
negotiations, capacity-building is critical to mediation
efforts. I am glad that there are references to this
important aspect. In this vein, the draft resolution
welcomes the endeavours of the African Union in
developing its mediation capacities and structures.
Apart from international organizations, the role of
regional and subregional organizations has also been
duly emphasized. I am also pleased that the importance
of the full and effective participation of women — and,
in this regard, the role of UN-Women — has been
mentioned.
We look forward to the report on the
implementation of the resolution and guidance towards
more effective mediation, both of which the draft
resolution requests from the Secretary-General. These
are two of the main products of the draft resolution.
Mediation has become more relevant in today’s
international security environment. Therefore, it was
necessary to place greater emphasis on the role of
mediation at the global level as the most cost-effective
and efficient way to prevent and resolve conflicts. In
this respect, I believe that the adoption of the draft
resolution is timely. It will provide us with a valuable
basis for our future endeavours. We will continue to
actively engage on this matter in and outside New York
to further the very elements contained in the draft
resolution, with a view to providing more space to
allow mediation to prevent and resolve conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Serrano (European Union): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).

11-38319

The candidate countries Croatia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and Montenegro; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, member of the
European economic area; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
Please allow me first of all to take this
opportunity to thank all United Nations partners, in
particular Finland and Turkey, for their efforts in
preparing the innovative draft resolution contained in
document A/65/L.79. Of course, I also want to
congratulate you, Sir, on the impending adoption of the
draft resolution.
In recent decades, we have seen the strengthened
determination of all actors to boost mediation efforts in
order to end the scourge of conflict. The increased
focus on mediation emerged from the realization that
we live in a world of increasing interdependence,
where conflicts and instability in a certain country or
region directly or indirectly affect all of us. As the late
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld put it, war
anywhere becomes the concern of all. We welcome the
strengthened efforts to use mediation as a tool for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict prevention
and resolution; still, more needs to be done.
The United Nations was established with the
main aim of preventing conflict. It is indeed important
to ensure that the United Nations be well equipped and
ready to take on that responsibility. The draft
resolution to be adopted today is an important
achievement in that endeavour. The EU believes that
the draft resolution indicates the need to resort to
mediation efforts more often.
While our toolbox in the area of conflict
management for involvement after the outbreak of
violent conflict or in the reconstruction phase is quite
developed, our instruments in the area of conflict
prevention and resolution, such as mediation, are less
developed, receive less political attention and attract
fewer financial resources and are therefore applied less
systematically. In addition, early warning capacities
have been developed in particular by regional and
subregional organizations, but the international
community still needs to close the gap between early
warning and early action.

3

A/65/PV.102

The draft resolution is an important step in
redressing these imbalances and in further
strengthening our capacity for early action. In addition,
mediation is the cheapest and often the most efficient
way to promote the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. It is also an
important instrument for addressing political strife,
promoting reconciliation and fostering long-term
stability.

The European Union is committed to enhancing
its efforts to solve protracted conflicts and to further
developing its own mediation capacities based on the
EU Joint Concept on Strengthening EU Mediation and
Dialogue Capacities adopted in November 2009, as
well as to cooperating closely with the United Nations
and other international actors in this area. In the
recently established European External Action Service,
a specific division is dedicated to mediation.

The United Nations is a key actor in the area of
peace mediation. Over the years, it has developed a
high level of expertise. United Nations mediation
engagement is based on a clear and strong mandate and
benefits from a developed mediation support system,
namely, the Mediation Support Unit in the Department
of Political Affairs and its standby team of mediation
experts.

EU mediation involvement takes many different
forms, from classical and formal track-1 mediation at
the political level to supporting more informal dialogue
processes and providing financial and/or political
support to mediation initiatives of other actors, be it the
United Nations, regional, national or non-governmental
actors. The European Union also has a variety of
instruments of preventive action at its disposal, from
EU special representatives to trade and development
policies.

The European Union is pleased to support the
strengthened United Nations capacity in this field and
welcomes the request in the draft resolution to develop
guidance for more effective mediation that takes
advantage of the experience of regional and
subregional organizations, Member States and other
actors actively involved in mediation initiatives.
The European Union and its member States stand
ready to continue to contribute. As indicated in the
draft resolution, existing guidelines in the field of rule
of law and accountability should be fully taken into
account and implemented. We applaud in particular the
strong directives given by the successive SecretaryGenerals in their 2004 and 2009 reports on mediation
(S/2004/616 and S/2009/189), whereby the granting of
amnesties and other forms of immunities for war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide were
excluded from any agreements sponsored by the United
Nations, and in which it was underlined that when
international justice is at work, it shall be left to follow
its course. We also call for strict implementation of the
guidelines restricting contacts of mediators and other
United Nations personnel with persons who are the
objects of arrest warrants.
Even though the United Nations pays a prominent
role in peace mediation, other actors also have
important contributions to make. The EU aims at
providing added value to mediation initiatives based on
its own history and experience as a peace project after
the Second World War and its commitment to a rulesbased, just and peaceful international system.

4

The EU remains committed to cooperating
closely with international partners in this area. We see
great potential for working even closer with the United
Nations in the future by developing joint training
opportunities, sharing expertise and lessons learned,
and working together on the establishment of
mediation rosters.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
paves the way for increased efforts on mediation, more
systematic use of mediation, and the increased
participation of women at all stages, at all levels and in
all aspects of mediation, in line with Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions. The
European Union is fully supportive of this trend and
will join efforts to implement the draft resolution. We
look forward to the Secretary-General’s report on
mediation and to discussing this important issue at the
next session of the General Assembly.
Mr. Guerber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
The adoption today of the first General Assembly
resolution specifically dedicated to the question of
mediation will be a major step. The fact that the entire
international community has actively addressed this
theme is proof of the growing need to pool our efforts
to make mediation more effective and, in this way, to
redress a clear shortcoming.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having organized this debate at short notice. My thanks
also go to the Governments of Finland and Turkey,

11-38319

A/65/PV.102

which have supported the process since September on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Mediation, in which
my delegation plays an active part.
Through the draft resolution shortly to be
adopted, the whole international community recognizes
that the need for mediation has grown in recent years.
Recent academic research suggests that the
international community would have every interest in
finding ways to strengthen its action in the field of
mediation through greater coherence. Indeed, the
solution to most conflicts in recent history has been
precisely in negotiation rather than in military victory.
Switzerland recognizes the key role of the United
Nations in mediation, and stands ready to work with it
in the mediation of peace processes.
It is true that the number of actors on the ground
has grown. Some even use the word “proliferation” to
describe the growth in the number of players now
active in this field. Too often — and current events
testify to this — the world of mediation and mediators
has become competitive rather than cooperative.
To draw the greatest benefit from this multiplicity
of actors, it will be necessary to assist mediators in
their interaction and expertise. The draft resolution
before us (A/65/L.79) addresses this matter in
particular by encouraging cooperation, partnerships
and the exchange of information at all levels. It also
recommends greater efforts to promote women to head
mediation teams, which we can only welcome.
Switzerland aims to make a sustained and
multilevel contribution to the implementation of the
draft resolution. I will give just two specific examples.
First, we take seriously the invitation to place
appropriate resources at the disposal of the United
Nations, in particular for the building of the
Organization’s capacities. In the past few years, we
have organized — together with swisspeace — a
number of workshops for experts from the Mediation
Support Unit and its Standby Team of Mediation
Experts, most recently on the importance of mediation
processes. We intend to continue on this path.
In addition, we will continue to make mediation
specialists available to the United Nations, as we are
currently doing in several contexts. We will also pursue
initiatives for capacity-building for peace negotiations
between conflicting parties. We are also prepared to
offer such mediation capacity-building programmes to

11-38319

regional and subregional organizations, as requested in
the draft resolution.
Secondly, we believe that one fundamental
element of the draft resolution is the request made to
the Secretary-General to develop guidance for more
effective mediation in consultation with Member States
and other relevant actors active in mediation. It is
important that the annex to the report requested to that
end benefit from the widest possible range of views.
We also encourage each Member State to start a
dialogue on that subject with the Secretary-General
without delay in order to assist him in achieving what,
in our view, should lead to a sort of non-binding label
of quality that would allow every mediator to take
certain values and experiences into consideration.
Rather than limiting the scope of action of
mediators, such an undertaking would enable them to
benefit from available good practices and past learned
lessons by highlighting the challenges with which
mediators are sometimes faced. Ultimately, the means
to ensure more consistent and effective mediation on
the ground are needed.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): Let me congratulate
the Permanent Missions of Finland and Turkey on
having initiated a process that will lead to today’s
adoption of draft resolution A/65/L.79, entitled
“Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict prevention and
resolution”. We would not have achieved such a good
result without the leadership, persistence and skills
demonstrated by the two co-facilitators. Norway is
pleased to be one of the sponsors of the draft
resolution.
Mediation represents an important tool for
preventing conflicts, resolving existing disputes and
consolidating peace. For that reason, a number of
prominent mediators have been awarded the Nobel
Peace Prize.
The added value of effective mediation is
increasingly recognized by the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations, Member States
and civil society at large. It is therefore highly
encouraging that the General Assembly will be able to
adopt this historic draft resolution, ensuring that
mediation will appear on the agenda of the Assembly
in the years to come.

5

A/65/PV.102

Norway has long and practical experience of
mediation. We attach great importance to working
closely with the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations, and the non-governmental
organization community. For that reason, Norway has
made a standby team available to the Mediation
Support Unit, within the Department of Political
Affairs of the Secretariat, that is operated by the
Norwegian Refugee Council. Members of the standby
team are from a number of countries, including the
global South.

The President (spoke in French): We will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/65/L.79. May I
take it that the General Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/65/L.79?

Norway is firmly committed to the full
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and subsequent resolutions. Norway is therefore
pleased with the strong gender dimension of the draft
resolution. It is vital to ensure the full and effective
participation of women in peace processes, and that
more women are appointed as lead negotiators.

Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Resolution 65/283 on strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution, adopted by the
General Assembly today, was the outcome of a long
and intense negotiation process.

By adopting today’s draft resolution, the process
to further strengthen mediation in the service of peace
has started in the United Nations. A number of issues
must be further explored, such as resource
mobilization, stronger partnerships among relevant
actors, and ensuring the greater participation and
involvement of women in mediation. Norway looks
forward to being an active partner in that process.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now take action on draft resolution
A/65/L.79, entitled “Strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in the
draft document, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/65/L.79: Albania,
Bangladesh, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Croatia, the Czech Republic, France, Ghana, Greece,
Indonesia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Malta, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Pakistan, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and Uruguay.

6

Draft resolution A/65/L.79
(resolution 65/283).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
give the floor to those representatives who wish to
speak in explanation of position on the resolution just
adopted.

Cuba engaged actively in that process and
presented a significant number of proposed
amendments to the text. We are satisfied with the final
balance of the resolution, which is the first referring
specifically to mediation to be adopted by the General
Assembly. We commend the delegations of Finland and
Turkey, which acted as co-facilitators of the
consultations, for their excellent work and
professionalism.
Cuba is firmly committed to the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes. War, confrontation,
hostility and sanctions have never been and never will
be the way to preserve international peace and security.
On the contrary, many conflicts could have been
avoided and many lives saved had dialogue and
negotiation prevailed.
Over 111 million people have died in modern
wars, while civilian deaths accounted for 5 per cent of
the total casualties in the First World War. In the wars
of conquest waged after 1990, innocent deaths have
accounted for 90 per cent of casualties, in particular in
Iraq, with more than 1 million deaths, and in
Afghanistan, with over 70,000 deaths. The proportion
of children in that data is horrifying and
unprecedented.
Currently,
without
exhausting
diplomatic
instruments or even attempting to use peaceful
methods, NATO is unjustifiably using its most modern
lethal weapons in Libya. The Alliance’s bombs are
killing the same civilians whom it supposedly seeks to
protect. Once again, Cuba calls for the immediate

11-38319

A/65/PV.102

cessation of military operations in Libya and, instead,
for the promotion of a process of dialogue that will
enable the Libyans themselves to peacefully solve their
differences without foreign interference.
Neutrality, equality, impartiality and the full
consent of the parties involved are basic conditions for
effective mediation. As noted in resolution 65/283,
mediation must be carried out in full respect for
international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, including the principles of sovereignty,
territorial integrity and non-interference in internal
affairs. The purposes and principles of the Charter
cannot be rewritten, distorted, limited or conditional.
Mediation can be and has proved to be effective
in certain situations. Meanwhile, the adoption of this
resolution cannot give rise to the misinterpretation that
mediation is the only or the most effective mechanism
for the peaceful settlement of disputes in all situations.
There can be no preconceived formulas. Each
situation must be addressed according to its specific
characteristics. What is clear is that no mechanism for
the peaceful settlement of disputes, including
mediation, can be effective as long as some States
continue to use or threaten to use force against the
territorial integrity or political independence of other
States. Conflict will not be prevented and international
peace and security will continue to elude humankind,
so long as certain States insist on turning to
unilateralism and fail to meet their obligations under
international law.
There is an unacceptable and growing tendency
of the Security Council to rush to threaten coercive
action or to authorize its use in some cases, while
remaining silent, indifferent or inactive in others. The
selective procedures of the Council have consequences
for the credibility of the United Nations as a whole and
affect the efforts of the Organization in the prevention
and peaceful settlement of disputes, including through
mediation. The Security Council has the responsibility
to fully utilize the provisions of Chapter VI of the
Charter for the peaceful settlement of disputes, instead
of excessively and hastily referring to Chapter VII as it
has frequently done.
Lastly, my country stresses that the link between
peace and development, explicitly enshrined in the
resolution adopted today, is fundamental to all efforts
aimed at preventing, managing and settling disputes.

11-38319

Ms. Poroli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
Republic of Argentina joined the consensus on
resolution 65/283 on strengthening the role of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflict prevention and resolution. In so doing, we
reaffirm yet again our commitment to the ideals and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and our
conviction that multilateralism is crucial to
international peace and security.
Any avenue to the peaceful settlement of disputes
is equally valid in resolving conflicts. We note in
particular our conviction that only through these
methods can we ensure just and lasting solutions. In
this respect, we underscore the special role entrusted to
the Secretary-General by the Charter in the area of
good offices and mediation, and the primary
responsibility of all Member States to peacefully
resolve their disputes pursuant to the Charter, as noted
in paragraph 1 of the resolution.
In that context, we reiterate once again our
expectation that the good offices entrusted to the
Secretary-General by the General Assembly and the
Special Committee on Decolonization in successive
resolutions concerning the Malvinas Islands will bear
fruit, and that the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland will respect its commitments under
the Charter and to the Organization and reopen
negotiations with our country to achieve a peaceful
solution to the mentioned sovereignty dispute as soon
as possible.
Mrs. Ancidey
(Bolivarian
Republic
of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela supported resolution 65/283,
entitled “Strengthening the role of mediation in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution”, and reaffirms yet again the commitment of
the Bolivarian Government to the alternative methods
to resolve disputes and to foster peace and harmony
among peoples.
From the outset, Venezuela played an active role
in the intensive negotiations on the draft of the
resolution just adopted. On the basis its commitment to
the use of alternative methods in the settlement of
disputes, my delegation presented proposals and ideas
that have been incorporated into the text. We wish to
thank in particular the Turkish and Finish delegations
for their excellent work and tireless efforts to craft the
text that we adopted by consensus today.

7

A/65/PV.102

The resolution contains elements that are
extremely important to the international community
and emphasizes the solid principles enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations, including the sovereign
equality of all States, respect for their territorial
integrity and political independence, the duty of
Member States to refrain from the threat or use of force
in any manner inconsistent with the purposes and
principles of the Organization. It is precisely pursuant
to these principles that the United Nations and its
Mediation Support Unit must orient their work for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and conflict prevention
and resolution.
The resolution is a symbol of how combined
efforts within the only deliberative body of universal
representation — the General Assembly — can
generate peaceful tools, in contrast to all the terrible
initiatives that, on behalf of peace, have focused on the
use of war.
Venezuela reiterates that biased visions lead to
biased responses. We cannot pretend to create peace by
waging war on the pretext of protecting some to the
detriment of others. That is why we welcome the
adoption of this resolution on mediation — the first of
its kind within the Organization. Venezuela will pursue
its efforts to promote and to implement such initiatives
and methods for resolving conflicts that revive the
interest of the international community specifically in
the peaceful settlement of disputes through peace.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We have just adopted
resolution 65/283, which recognizes the central role of
good offices and mediation in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The concept of
mediation has always been at the forefront of the
attention of the United Nations and of regional
organizations, and we believe that this concept should
include the views of all concerned Member States.
From the very beginning of the informal
consultations, we were hopeful that we would produce
a strong consensual text that would identify the
irreplaceable role of mediation in preventing and
resolving conflicts. During the last phase of our
deliberations, however, we were unable — at least, I
speak on behalf of my delegation — to reach a
consensus on a formulation regarding one principle of
international law. In this regard, we wish to highlight a
point that we strongly believe cannot be ignored, given
the context of the resolution.

8

Article 1 of the Charter of the United Nations
calls upon all Member States
“[t]o develop friendly relations among nations
based on respect for the principle of equal rights
and self-determination of peoples, and to take
other appropriate measures to strengthen
universal peace”.
Over the decades following the adoption of the
Charter, understanding of the substantive legal
principle of self-determination has evolved into its
recognition as a fundamental right. Undoubtedly,
today’s resolution is a new element to further
strengthen the mediation dimension of the United
Nations and regional organizations. As such, we
believe that it should consolidate the purposes of the
Charter and the principles of international law and
ensure their balanced and inclusive reflection in the
text.
We agree with the content of almost all of the
paragraphs. However, we cannot agree to the limitation
imposed on the self-determination of peoples in the
fifth preambular paragraph. While recognizing the
utmost importance of the right to self-determination of
peoples who remain under colonial domination or
foreign occupation, we believe that this right is not
limited only to those specific cases. The narrow
reference in the fifth preambular paragraph can in no
way prejudice the right to self-determination, freedom
and independence of all peoples as derived from the
Charter of the United Nations, both international
covenants on human rights and numerous relevant
United Nations resolutions, among other instruments,
especially given the subject matter of the resolution.
Having said this, Armenia disassociates itself
from the consensus and would like to believe that the
reference contained in the fifth preambular paragraph
will not set a precedent for future resolutions and
initiatives. However, Armenia hopes that this
resolution will serve as another helpful tool in
promoting the role of mediation in conflict by
embracing the principles of mutual respect and
mutually agreed solutions and rejecting the language of
the use or the threat of use of force.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to join previous speakers in congratulating
all delegations on the adoption of resolution 65/283 on
strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful

11-38319

A/65/PV.102

settlement of
resolution.

disputes,

conflict

prevention

and

The President (spoke in French): I call on the
representative of Armenia on a point of order.

I would also like to convey our special thanks to
Finland and Turkey for their skilful efforts, which
enabled us to reach agreement on, and succeed in
garnering overwhelming support for, this important
resolution.

Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I have requested a
point of order since, as you stated, Mr. President, we
are in the stage of explanation of vote after the vote.
The delegation of Azerbaijan is listed as one of the
sponsors of resolution 65/283. I am therefore seeking
your ruling as to whether that country may take the
floor at this stage. Rule 88 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly states that the President shall not
permit the proposer of a proposal to explain his vote on
his own proposal. I would appreciate your clarification.

As a sponsor of the resolution and an active
participant in the drafting process, Azerbaijan fully
supports the resolution, the adoption of which is an
essential achievement for reinforcing the promotion of
mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes,
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as for
providing existing and future mediation mechanisms
with useful guidance.
A number of mediation efforts have been
successfully undertaken, contributing to the reduction
of tensions and ensuring that peace processes move
forward. Both the United Nations and regional
organizations and arrangements play an important role
in helping to mediate conflicts. At the same time, more
should be done, including through mediation, to
address the major threats and challenges that continue
to affect the basic elements of the international legal
order.
Mediation is a diverse and complex process that
is influenced by the specific conditions brought by the
parties involved into the conflict management system.
Success depends on a number of critical factors, among
which is the need to ensure that both the parties
involved and mediators are guided by the normative
standards set by the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, as well as by the objectives of the
comprehensive settlement of conflicts.
This understanding is fully supported in the
resolution, which reiterates that all Member States
should strictly adhere to their obligations, as laid down
in the Charter of the United Nations, and recognizes
that responsible and credible mediation requires,
among other things, respect for national sovereignty
and compliance with international law.
We consider it important that the resolution
recalls all relevant resolutions on matters related to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and
resolution, including through mediation. Such
references obviously include —

11-38319

The President (spoke in French): After
verification, I find that the point of order raised by the
representative of Armenia is indeed correct. As a
sponsor of the resolution, Azerbaijan cannot take the
floor in explanation of position. I therefore regret that I
must inform the representative of Azerbaijan that he
cannot continue with his statement.
We have heard the last speaker in explanation of
position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
33?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 62 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Draft resolution (A/65/L.69/Rev.1)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that the General Assembly considered, in a joint
debate, agenda item 62 and its sub-items (a) and (b)
and agenda item 12, “2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in
Africa”, at its 30th and 31st plenary meetings on
14 October 2010.
I give the floor to the representative of Argentina
to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.69/Rev.1.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and
China, a draft resolution entitled the “New Partnership

9

A/65/PV.102

for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation
and international support”, contained in document
A/65/L.69/Rev.1, under agenda item 62 (a). The Group
would like to thank the following countries that have
joined the list of sponsors: Australia, Belgium, Finland,
France, Hungary, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal,
Slovenia, Spain and the United Kingdom.
The Group of 77 and China would also like to
express its warm thanks to the delegations of Kenya, as
facilitator, and Algeria, as coordinator of the Group, for
their expertise and competence in conducting the
deliberations on the draft resolution.
The Group reaffirms its full support for the
implementation of the African Union’s New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and
recognizes the progress made by African countries and
regional and international support for the New
Partnership, while acknowledging that much needs to
be done to ensure its full implementation.
Through NEPAD, African leaders have taken
ownership, assumed leadership and transformed the
content of the development agenda. In that context, we
consider that NEPAD is based on the dual principles of
ownership and partnership. Africa owns, leads and
manages the process. Nonetheless, African leaders
recognize the critical importance of international
support. The international community has pledged that
support in various forums and, most notably, in the
General Assembly in the form of numerous resolutions.
At the same time, the G-77 and China also
recognize that, while economic growth is returning,
there is a need to sustain the recovery, which is still
fragile and uneven, in order to address the continuing
adverse effects of multiple crises on development and
the serious challenges they pose to the fight against
poverty and hunger, which could in turn undermine
efforts to achieve internationally agreed development
goals, including the Millennium Development Goals,
particularly in Africa.
We acknowledge the efforts of developed
countries to increase the resources available for
development, including commitments by some of those
countries to increase their official development
assistance. In that context, however, we are deeply
concerned that the commitment to doubling aid to
Africa by 2010, as articulated at the Group of Eight
Gleneagles summit, has not been fully attained. In this
regard, the G-77 and China stress the need for rapid

10

progress towards fulfilling the Gleneagles promises, as
well as substantial commitments by other donors, to
increase aid through a variety of means.
Equally important, the G-77 and China appreciate
the support that some of its members have extended to
Africa through South-South and triangular cooperation
programmes, bearing in mind that South-South
cooperation is not a substitute for but rather a
complement to North-South cooperation.
Despite the efforts to implement NEPAD, Africa
is still far from realizing the levels of support required
under that partnership. While we welcome the support
provided by international partners, and the United
Nations in particular, much more needs to be done.
Finally,
the
Group
urges
the
international
community — especially donor countries, multilateral
institutions, the private sector and civil society — to
support NEPAD generously. For those reasons, the
G-77 and China hope that the draft resolution will be
adopted at this meeting.
After consultations, we would like to introduce
the following oral amendment to paragraph 6 of the
draft resolution, which would read as follows:
“Takes note of the Political Declaration on
HIV/AIDS, intensifying our efforts to eliminate
HIV/AIDS, adopted at the High-level meeting on
HIV/AIDS on 10 June 2011”.
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/65/L.69/Rev.1, as orally amended.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department of General
Assembly and Conference Management): I would like
to announce, that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
co-sponsors of draft resolution A/65/L.69/Rev.1:
Australia, Belgium, Finland, France, Hungary, Israel,
Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Portugal, Slovenia,
Spain, Ukraine and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
The President (spoke in French): We will now
take action on the draft resolution. May I take it that
the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/65/L.69/Rev.1, as orally amended?

11-38319

A/65/PV.102

Draft resolution A/65/L.69/Rev.1, as orally
amended, was adopted (resolution 65/284).

members of the Committee on Conferences for a period
of three years, beginning on 1 January 2011.

The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 62 and
agenda item 62 as a whole?

Members will also recall that, at the sixty-fourth
session of the Assembly, one seat from the Eastern
European States remained to be filled for a period of
three years beginning 1 January 2010. On the
recommendation of the Chair of the Group of Eastern
European States, I have appointed the Republic of
Moldova as a member of the Committee on
Conferences for a period beginning Wednesday,
22 June 2011, and ending on 31 December 2012.

It was so decided.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/65/107)
The President (spoke in French): Members will
recall that, at its 47th plenary meeting on 9 November
2010, the Assembly took note of the appointment of
Austria, China, Ethiopia, Japan, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya and the United States of America as

May I take it that the Assembly takes note of this
appointment?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in French): Regarding the
remaining vacant seat for the Latin American and
Caribbean States, I urge that regional group to submit
its candidature as soon as possible.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 113.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

11-38319

11
