-

THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

th
MEET ‘ING: 20
ail

19x2

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2397)

,. . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . , . . . . . . . . . .. . .

Adoption of the agenda , . . , . . , . , , . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . . . , . . .
The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421
(1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways and means of
making the mandatory arms embargo against South Africa more effective
(S/14179) ..,,....,..,.....,...,.........,...,.,,..,,,.,...,,..,..,

1

S/PV 32397

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
/I i.’ .,”
.‘. , ;
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the (lfjlcial Rgcords of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Sekurity Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions md
Decisions of the Security Cowxil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2397th MEETING
eld in New York on Monday, 20 September 1982, at 11 a.m.
P~.~itl~nr:

Mr. Masahiro

NlSlBORI

(Japan).

chairman for I981 of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 42 I ( 1977). If there is
no objection, and in accordance with rule 3Y of the
provisional rules of procedure, I shall invite Mr. Muiioz
Lcdo to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

PI.I~SOIZ~:The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana. Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland. Spain. Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Provisional

4. Mr. MUNOZ LED0 (Mexico), Chairman of the
Security Council Committee
established by resolution 42 I ( 1977) fir?fcIp/,cJttrlio/7.fi.om
Spr/ni.shJ: I should
like to thank members of the Council who have invited me to participate in this meeting to inform the
Council of my activities as Chairman of the Security
Council Committee
established by resolution
421

agenda (S/Agenda/2397)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee
established
by resolution 421 (1977) concerning the question of South Africa on ways
and means of making the mandatory arms
embargo against South Africa more effective (S/14179)

Adoption

(1977).

5. I congratulate
the President of the Council,
Mr. Masahiro Nisibori, on his great competence and
on the businesslike manner in which he is guiding its
work, and I express the wish that the serious matters
before the Council will be discussed in a fruitful way
that will help to enhance the Council’s authority.

of the agenda

6. I also express thanks to Mr. Nisibori’s
prcdccessors for their efforts in bringing about this meeting,
which is now finally being held. In addition. it is only
fitting that I recognize the effort of some non-permanent members, representatives of developing countries, who have made it their business to bring fresh
impetus to the Committee’s
work,

The question of South Africa:
Report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning
the
question of South Africa on ways and means of
making the mandatory
arms embargo against
South Africa more effective (S/14179)

7. The application
of the arms embargo against
South Africa has frequently been a source of frustration for many Members of this body and to most of
the international community represented here.

I. The PRESIDENT:
As was agreed in the course of
consultations on 16 September, the Council is meeting
today in connection with the question of South Africa
to consider the report of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) concerning
the question of South Africa on ways and means of
making the mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa more effective [S//4/79].

8. On 4 November 1977. the Council adopted resolution 418 (19771, in which, acting under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations. it unanimously
imposed a mandatory arms embargo against South
Africa, to be applied universally,
On Y December
1977, it decided to establish a Committee of the Security Council to study ways and means by which the
embargo could be made more effective [~solr/tion 42/

2. Members of the Council will recall that the report
of the Committee submitted in accordance with paragraph I I of resolution 473 (1980) was introduced at
the 226lst meeting of the Council, on 19 December
I980. by the representative of Bangladesh in his capacity as Chairman for 1980 of the Security Council Committee established by resolution 421 (19771.

flY77)l.

9. The carrying out of that task. however, has been
hampered for many reasons, and the hoped-for cooperation and understanding on the part of certain
States has not been forthcoming.
For that reason,
resolution 418 (1977) has not been implemented,
and
our Committee was brought to a virtual standstill.

The Council has agreed in consultations to heal
;t statement from Mr. Munoz Ledo in his capacity us

3.

1

IO. The adoption of the embargo was the culmination of 21 long process of growing awareness of the
threat created by the policy of the Pretoria rbgime to
the enforcement of the principles of the Charter and
to international peace and security.

pane the debate on it and the decisions that would
have to be taken until the beginning of the following
year. None the less, until now the Council has not
formally come back to this matter. Several considerations of a tactical or political nature have time ;hnd
again deferred consideration of this item that is finally
being dealt with today.

1 I. The embargo was then regarded as the first step
in a new strategy designed to establish a different
political balance in the region, that would favour the
full liberation of the peoples of southern Africa and
the independence of Namibia.

18. The Committee’s
report is comprehensive
its conclusions are clear. It states that:

“illicit transfers of ‘arms and related /nlltc+ir/ of
all types’ to South Africa continue to take place.
Clandestine operations are carried out from i1n
undetermined number of countries. in circumvention of the arms embargo. Devious routes are used.
on which the Committee
has scant information.”
[S//4/7Y, ptrrw. 75. 1

12. The interest the international
community had in
reversing a process of injustice and opprobrium
in
southern Africa led to the Council’s recourse to Chapter VII of the Charter. The need to make sanctions
effective led it to establish this Committee, to which
it entrusted the task of studying ways and means by
which the mandatory arms embargo could be made
more effective against South Africa and which was
authorized to seek from all States further information regarding the action taken by them in this regard
and requested to report back to the Council with its
relevant recommendations.

113. The Committee similarly determines the existence of loopholes that encourage violation of tlv
embargo and points out with concern that various
interpretations exist of given provisions of resolulion
418 ( 1977). Finally it makes a number of recommendiltions on which the Council should take a decision.
in my opinion, if it still has the will to have its decisions respected.

13. The Committee
adopted working procedures
that included a compilation
of data with regard to
embargo violations.
the holding of hearings with
experts and witnesses and the establishment of contacts with non-governmental
organisations. The Committee sent questionnaires
to Governments
whose
nationals or whose territories were involved in complaints of embargo violations,
and it requested the
Secretariat to provide all members with available
information.
including information
gleaned from the
media.

20. The recommendations
contained in the report
should serve as a basis for further action by the Council and the Committee. All States should be urged, its
is stated in the report, to undertake concrete steps to
close the loopholes, and to ensure that arms-export
agreements include guarantees which would prevent
embargoed items from reaching South African organ.
izations through third countries.

14. Despite this, the inadequacy of the investigatory
resources available to the Committee and the lack of
genuine co-operation on the part of some States frequently limited the Committee’s
possibilities
for
action.

21. The Committee
also recommends that States
should prohibit the export of spare parts for embilk
goed aircraft and other military equipment subject to
the embargo, revoke or terminate all industrial licences
previously concluded with South Africa to manufacture such equipment
and prohibit government
agencies and corporations
under their jurisdiction
from transferring technology or using technology
subject to their control in the manufacture of arms
and related ~nr&;Gc~l in South Africa and from making
investments to that end. It also recommends that the
export to South Africa of “dual-purpose”
items
should be prohibited, that is, items provided for civilinn use but with the potential for diversion or w w
version to military use.

IS. In June 1980. the Council. concerned at the
worsening situation in South Africa, adopted resolution 473 (IY80). in which it reiterated its call to all
States strictly and scrupulously to implement resolution 418 (1977). It further asked the Committee
to
redouble its efforts to secure fufl implementation
of
the arms embargo.
16. The Committee met on numerous occasions to
assess the compliance with the various resolutions and
to discern the reasons for violations. As a result of
the work concluded in September
1980 the Committee issued a report, contained in document S/14179,
which my predecessor as Chairman. Mr. Mohammed
Kaiser of Bangladesh, submitted to the Council at its
final meeting of 1980, on 19 December 12261,~ mc~cti/zg].

22. The Committee recommends that the term “arms
and related n~rrc;Gl of all types” should be clearly
defined to include all equipment intended for the
military and police forces, and that all forms of nuclear collaboration should cease. States should ensure
that their national legislation or comparable Policy
directives guarantee that specific provisions to imPle
mcnt resolution 418 (IY77) include stiff penalties for
violations. and they should adopt provisions to Pr*

17. 1 wish to recall that, because of the lack of time,
it was agreed to submit only the report and to post2

-

and

hibit within their national .iurisdiction the enlistment
or the recruitment of mercenaries or any other military personnel for service with South Africa‘s forces.
23, The Committee
recommends that States should
put an end to exchanges of military attach&. as well
as exchanges of visits by government
personnel.
experts in weapons technology and employees of arms
factories, when such visits and exchanges increase
South Africa’s war capabilities, and recommends that
the embargo should include imports of arms and
related nztrtc;/*icl from South Africa.
24, The Committee
considers--and this is of prime
importance-that
the machinery to this effect should
be strengthened. so that the implementation
of the
embargo will be effective, and that a sanctions branch
should be created within the Secretariat to assist the
Committee in carrying out its functions.
25. The motives and reasons which led the Security
Council to impose an arms embargo on South Africa
and subsequently to renew it remain valid and have
become even more so. The opo~h~id rt$gime continues
to deny fundamental
rights to the majority of the
population and cruelly to persecute its opponents.
Abroad. acts of aggression arc repeatedly carried out
against neighbouring
States and, at the same time as
the independence of Namibia is being held up, additional conditions are being imposed on its people,
which, if accepted. may result in the withholding of
its independence.
26. On the other hand, the effectiveness of the measures adopted by the Council has been limited, which

hampers the possibility of making the provisions of
Chapter VII of the Charter effective and calls into
question the very respectability of the Council. Chapter VII, as the Secretary-General
has reminded the
Assembly in his report on the work of the Organization. is a key element in the collective security system
and hence in the preservation of world pence.
My delegation has made every effort to carry
out the responsibility conferred upon it by the Council.
It did so with a deep sense of service to the internntionnl community and with the great respect for the
principles of the Charter that my country has.

27.

28. As soon as our task was over, I informed members of the Council that we were willing to put into
effect a change in the BUIWLI of the Committee.
We
regret that for various reasons the mandate has not
been renewed, but we consider it right to carry through
the conclusions and recommendations
of the Committce’s report. When it resumes its work. there should
be II reaffirmation of the political will of States concerning the aim pursued, since otherwise the efforts
of the Committee will be thwarted.
20. In closing, I wish to express my gratitude to the
members of the Council, past und present, who have
faithfully worked to see that the provisions of this body
are carried out. despite the pressures and lack of
understanding brought to bear against them. My most
fervent hope is that in the future difficulties will be
fewer and the results more sure.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may br obtained
liom booksturcs
and dtstrihutor*
your bookstore
or write to: United Nations,
Sales Section.
NW
SE PROCURER

LE.5

PUBLICATIONS

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Units sent en vente dam les librairies
monde entier. Intixmez-vous
auprizs de votrc libraire
ou adressez-vnus
des ventes. New York ou Gen6ve.

et les agences
A : Nations

COMO

UNIDAS

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

Ls publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas pWes de1 mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
cstBn en venta en librcrias
a su librero
o ditjiase
a: Nacioncs

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

d+ositaircs
du
Ilnies.
Scctton

y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Seccicin de Vrntas,
