S/PV.8699

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8699th meeting

Thursday, 9 January 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Pham Binh Minh/Mr. Dang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Reinsalu
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Müntefering
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Gonsalves
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Baati
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Craft

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the United Nations Charter
Letter dated 31 December 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/1)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-00676 (E)
*2000676*

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
Upholding the United Nations Charter
Letter dated 31 December 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2020/1)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, the Head of Government, Ministers
and other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Angola, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Hungary,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Malaysia,
Maldives,
Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, the Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela and Yemen to participate in
this meeting.

09/01/2020

Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Robert Mardini,
Permanent Observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/1, which contains a letter dated
31 December 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject
of today’s meeting. I thank Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached among the members
of the Council, I shall take it that the members of the
Security Council agree to the statement, which will be
issued as a document of the Security Council under the
symbol S/PRST/2020/1.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Vietnamese
presidency of the Council for organizing this timely
debate. I congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council at the beginning of
its tenure on the Council itself.
I also welcome the presence of the Chair of the
Elders, Mary Robinson. And I am pleased that we are
beginning the year of the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations with a discussion on its
founding document.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Her Excellency
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, to participate
in this meeting.

Peace is our most precious value and the essence
of our work. All that we strive for as a human
family depends on peace. But peace depends on us.
Unfortunately, the New Year has begun with fresh
turmoil and long-standing suffering. Geopolitical
tensions have reached dangerous levels, most recently
in the Gulf, as well as from traditional military threats
to the economy to cyberspace. Conflicts that no one is
winning grind on and on and on, from Libya and Syria
to Afghanistan and the Sahel.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in the meeting: His Excellency

With turbulence on the rise, trust within and among
nations is on the decline. We see this trust deficit in
streets across the world, as people vent their frustrations

2/65

20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

and voice their feeling that political establishments
are out of touch, incapable or unwilling to deliver. We
see it in the work of the United Nations, including the
Security Council, when Member States struggle or
fail to find reasonable common ground. And, in this
vacuum, the climate crisis is now upon us with evergrowing fury, sparing no one. International cooperation
is at a crossroads. All of this presents a grave test to
multilateralism. It poses a challenge for the Security
Council, which under the Charter has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It underscores, more than ever, the
focus of today’s meeting, namely, upholding the United
Nations Charter.
At this time of global divisions and turmoil, the
Charter remains our shared framework of international
cooperation for the common good. In an era of
spreading hatred and impunity, the Charter reminds us
of the primacy of the rule of law and human dignity.
In a time of rapid transformation and technological
change, the Charter’s values and objectives endure.
The peaceful settlement of disputes. The equal rights of
men and women. Non-intervention, self-determination
and the sovereign equality of Member States. And
clear rules governing the use of force, as set out in
Article 2, paragraph 4, and Chapter VII of the Charter.
Those principles are not favours or concessions. They
are the foundation of international relations. They are
core to peace and international law. They have saved
lives, advanced economic and social progress and,
crucially, avoided a descent into another world war.
But when those principles have been flouted, put aside
or applied selectively, the result has been catastrophic:
conflict, chaos, death, disillusion and mistrust. Our
shared challenge is to do far better in upholding
the Charter’s values and fulfilling its promise to
succeeding generations.
While the Charter and its purposes and principles
remain as relevant as ever, our tools must adapt
to new realities. We must use them with greater
determination and creativity. That includes ensuring
the implementation of the Security Council’s decisions
by Member States pursuant to Article 25 of the Charter.
One of the most effective ways to demonstrate our
impact is to invest in prevention. We spend far more
time and resources managing and responding to crises
than on preventing them. Our approach needs to be
rebalanced. The founders of the United Nations had
a crystal-clear focus on prevention when drafting the

S/PV. 8699

Charter, from the opening words of its Preamble to
dedicating an entire Chapter to the pacific settlement
of disputes. Chapter VI outlines many available tools,
including negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration and judicial settlement. We have ample
evidence that these can be effective when applied
with purpose and unity. I call on the Council to
further utilize the powers granted to it by the Charter,
including investigations of disputes in accordance with
Chapter VI and the referral of legal questions to the
International Court of Justice for advisory opinions in
accordance with Article 96 of the Charter.
Let us also recognize that the Sustainable
Development Goals, which are objectives in their
own right, are among our best tools for prevention. I
urge all Member States to make greater investments
in the 2030 Agenda, in particular in gender equality,
inclusion, social cohesion, good governance and a fair
globalization that advances the rights of all, unleashes
the talents of all and gives all a stake in society.
In addition to prevention, the Charter was visionary
in imagining a world in which the United Nations
worked dynamically with regional organizations to
maintain international peace and security. While
Chapter VIII predates most of our regional partners,
it sets a framework for cooperation and division of
labour. We are investing in regional partnerships
in crucial new ways. I have put significant emphasis
on a strategic partnership with the African Union,
including through its Silencing the Guns initiative and
its Agenda 2063. The European Union continues to
provide strong support across our agenda. At the same
time, we are working to strengthen ties with all other
regional organizations. Among them, of course, is the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, so ably chaired
this year by the Council’s President, Viet Nam.
Throughout its history the Security Council has
adapted its work based on the changing nature of
conflict and enhanced multilateral cooperation in
peace and security. Peacekeeping is not mentioned
in the Charter, but it is firmly rooted in its ideals and
epitomizes the kind of collective action for peace that
the Charter envisaged. Today some 100,000 United
Nations peacekeepers protect civilians and promote
peace in several of the most troubled regions of the
world. United Nations peacekeeping remains a vital
and cost-effective investment in global peace and
security. But effective peacekeeping requires strong
international support. The Action for Peacekeeping

20-006763/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

initiative stresses our shared commitment to make
our peacekeeping missions stronger, safer and fit for
the future.
Finally, as we commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, I wish to direct a
special message to the Security Council. The privilege of
membership carries vital responsibilities to uphold the
Charter’s tenets and values, particularly in preventing
and addressing conflict. Present and past disagreements
must not be an obstacle to action on today’s threats. We
must avoid double standards; but perceptions of double
standards must not be an excuse for no standards at all.
War is never inevitable; it is a matter of choice — and
often it is the product of easy miscalculations. Peace,
too, is never inevitable; it is the product of hard work,
and we must never take it for granted.
At this time when global fault lines risk exploding,
we must return to fundamental principles. We must
return to the framework that has kept us together.
We must come home to the United Nations Charter.
Strengthening our commitment to that resilient,
adaptable and visionary document — and thus to the very
notion of international cooperation itself — remains
the most effective way to collectively face the global
challenges of this grave moment, and the decade
before us. The Charter compels us to do everything
in our power to save people from the scourge of war
and injustice. As we face new threats, but also new
opportunities for a better world, that is the work that
must define the seventy-fifth anniversary year.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Robinson.
Mrs. Robinson: I am honoured to address the
Security Council again as the Chair of The Elders at
this important open debate. I thank the Government of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the invitation.
As we mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations, I wish that the founder
of The Elders, Nelson Mandela, could address the
Council, in his powerful and inimitable voice, with
his strong vision and purpose. Instead, the Council has
me, with my Irish accent, trying to rise to the occasion.
For rise to the occasion we must. At the start of a new
year and a new decade, The Elders are clear that the
world faces two distinct, existential threats: nuclear
proliferation and the climate crisis.
4/65

09/01/2020

Responding to those threats is critical, but made
harder at a time when multilateral cooperation is
being undermined by populism and nationalism.
The Elders issued a statement in early December in
which we urged all world leaders to acknowledge
that effective multilateralism is in their own national
interest, regardless of size or strength. Getting others
to cooperate by means of internationally agreed
mechanisms is less costly and more reliable than
unilateral force. This collaborative approach is at the
heart of the United Nations Charter, and the only way
in which we can hope to tackle challenges such as the
climate crisis and nuclear proliferation.
We also need this sense of cooperation as the
world seeks to address the recent alarming escalation
of tensions in the Middle East. Indeed, it is my
understanding that Iran’s Foreign Minister, Javad Zarif,
was due to address the Council today. He was going
to speak about the role of the United Nations Charter
in supporting international peace and security but has
been prevented from doing so as tensions have risen
between Iran and the United States. This is highly
regrettable. It is precisely in times such as these that we
need to hear the voices of all concerned.
As the Secretary-General has reminded us, Chapter
VI of the Charter of the United Nations requires parties
to any dispute that threatens international peace and
security to hold negotiations or use other peaceful
means to resolve their conflict. The gravity of the
current situation in the Middle East means that dialogue
and negotiations are urgently needed, and I urge the
representatives in the Chamber to consider what the
United Nations can do to bring them to the table in the
spirit of its Charter.
What we need today is a new vision and bold sense
of purpose on how we will tackle the scourge of war.
With respect to nuclear arms control, The Elders have
spoken out clearly and forcefully about the need for all
nuclear Powers to get serious about disarmament and
to pursue policies of nuclear minimization in order to
preserve peace for future generations. We sum those
up as the four “Ds”: doctrine — every nuclear State
should make an unequivocal declaration of no first use;
de-alerting — almost all warheads should be taken off
high-alert status; deployment — substantially reduce
the one-quarter of all nuclear warheads that are currently
operationally deployed; and decrease — dramatically
cut the number of nuclear weapons in existence, with
the United States and Russia reducing to a total of no
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

more than 500 each. The Elders hope that instead of
a new arms race in 2020, we will see a re-energized
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and an agreement between the United States and the
Russian Federation to extend the New START Treaty
until 2026.
With regard to the climate crisis, The Elders
recognize the need for a bold new initiative. The
disappointing outcome of the twenty-fifth session of
the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change in Madrid
shows that there is still insufficient political will for
urgent, collective action to avert catastrophe. We need
a new mindset. There are those, for instance, who call
for work to begin on a new fossil fuel non-proliferation
treaty, which is a bold and innovative idea that seeks
to bring transparency, accountability and agreement
to the cessation of fossil fuel production in a way that
supports jobs and livelihoods. New ideas like those
are needed.
We need a new mindset that recognizes the
urgency of the challenge the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change posed in its report Global Warming
of 1.5°C. We need new ideas borne from a shared
understanding that we need to reduce global carbon
emissions by 45 per cent by 2030. The Security Council
should be a key player in shaping that new mindset,
but unfortunately it is seen by many as not being fit for
purpose. Too many members, not least those with the
special responsibility of holding permanent seats, treat
it as a forum for advancing their own narrow interests
rather than a means of addressing common challenges.
I address the Council today as a woman, and indeed
a grandmother. If women had equal power in the world
today, I believe that we would have a very different
problem-solving way of dealing with the challenges
that we face. Women drew up a remarkable agenda
in Beijing 25 years ago, but not enough progress has
been made since to really champion equality, and both
within and outside the United Nations women now face
a backlash in marking that anniversary.
I ask the Security Council in particular to give
greater priority to the terrible problem of systemic
violence and discrimination against women and girls,
which is a cause of immense suffering. I call on the
Council to implement its numerous resolutions dealing
with gender inequality with full funding. That should

S/PV. 8699

start with resolution 1325 (2000), the twentieth
anniversary of which we will mark this year.
I also urge the Council to listen to the children
and young people who have come together in their
millions to strike for Fridays for Future. They have
understood the importance of thinking globally and
acting locally. They are bonded together by the threat
that they see posed by the climate emergency. That
bond has enabled them to reach out in solidarity, and
even love, to those most vulnerable, most affected and
least responsible for what is causing the climate crisis.
They are asking us not to listen to them but to listen to
the science. We should all take heed. The science of the
climate crisis makes it imperative that we implement
in full the voluntary commitments of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, with its 17 Sustainable
Development Goals, and the commitments of the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change.
We need a bold new vision in which every country,
city and corporation commits to being carbon neutral
by 2050. We need a change of mindset to enable a just
transition to clean energy in a way that allows us to stay
at or below 1.5°C of warming. We need to put a proper
price on carbon. Every country needs to take seriously
the report of the Global Commission on Adaptation,
Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate
Resilience, and build resilience in communities for the
new normal that we are experiencing — an experience
exemplified by the terrible bushfires in Australia.
The calls for action are getting louder. Civil society
is coming together for a People & Planet call to action
in 2020 on 20 January, and the fiftieth anniversary
of Earth Day in April promises to see the greatest
mobilization in human history. When Nelson Mandela
addressed the General Assembly on 3 October 1994
(see A/49/ PV.14) as President of South Africa, he posed
the following question. Given the interdependence of
the nations of the world, what is it that we can and must
do to ensure that democracy, peace and prosperity
prevail everywhere? In response, he suggested that a
new initiative was needed — one that should inspire all
of humankind because of the seriousness of its intent.
The time for such an initiative to protect people and
the planet is surely now. Future generations will neither
forget nor forgive if we squander this opportunity.
The President: I thank Mrs. Robinson for
her briefing.

20-006765/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Viet Nam.
Seventy-five years ago, the founders of the
United Nations instilled into the Charter their hope
and aspiration to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war. They enshrined in the Charter
the principles of sovereign equality, respect for the
political independence and territorial integrity of
all States, restraint from the threat or use of force,
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States
and the settlement of disputes by peaceful means.
Those fundamental principles have become the
foundation of contemporary international law, guiding
friendly relations and cooperation among nations,
and spurred the development of a comprehensive
body of international law governing all areas, from
non-proliferation and disarmament and the promotion
and protection of human rights to trade, environment
and climate change.
The history of the United Nations is living proof
of the true value of the Charter. Respect for the United
Nations Charter has been pivotal in preventing another
world war, promoting peaceful solutions for conflicts
all over the world and maintaining international peace
and security. Recent worrying events in the Middle
East underscore ever more the utmost importance
of upholding the Charter, especially the principles
of non-use of force, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States and the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
Disrespect for the Charter and international law,
on the other hand, has been posing serious threats
to international and regional peace and security and
challenging the very relevance and legitimacy of the
United Nations. Today emerging and complex global
challenges make it impossible for single nations to
cope. Inequality of opportunity, unilateralism and the
abandonment of multilateral efforts are among the root
causes of protracted armed conflicts. Power politics,
the use or threat of use of force, coercion, interference
or aggressive actions against the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of other States are escalating
tensions in many regions.
In such difficult times, the United Nations Charter
proves to be more relevant and essential than ever.
We must act to ensure that the United Nations and its
actions reflect the common interests of all Member
6/65

09/01/2020

States. We must promote multilateralism and equitable
relations among States in accordance with the United
Nations Charter. That is the only way to maintain
international peace and security, promote sustainable
development, address climate change and facilitate
post-conflict reconstruction, for a better, more peaceful
and just world.
Viet Nam believes that States bear the primary
responsibility in promoting and safeguarding adherence
to the United Nations Charter and international law at
all levels. We also believe that, as the organ charged
by the Charter with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council must be at the forefront to ensure
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter,
and that Council members must take the lead by setting
good examples themselves. In that vein, I wish to put
special emphasis on three points.
First, we must reinforce our commitment to
multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core.
States should make maximum use of the tools available
to them under the Charter, especially in the areas of
conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes. In that regard, I share entirely the
view of the Secretary-General that conflict prevention
and mediation are among the most important means to
relieve human suffering.
Secondly, we should enhance the role of regional
organizations and expand their collaboration with
the United Nations and the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace and security in their respective
regions and beyond. In South East Asia, the United
Nations Charter was the source of inspiration for the
Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), which has become the legal framework of a
stronger, more cohesive ASEAN community. ASEAN
today has affirmed its central, indispensable role in
the regional security architecture and in addressing
regional challenges and maintaining regional and
international peace and security.
Thirdly, we need to ensure adherence by all
States, large and small, to the fundamental principles
of international law and the United Nations Charter in
the planning and implementation of all development,
security and defence strategies, as well as foreign
policies. We must cultivate a culture and a mindset of
adherence, which, as history suggests, is the only way
for peace to be sustained.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Seventy-five years ago, as the United Nations
came into being, Viet Nam declared its independence,
bearing in mind the monumental values of the Charter.
Since the very early days of independence, Viet Nam
expressed its wish many times to be a Member of the
United Nations and its willingness and commitment to
upholding and adhering to the purposes and principles of
the Charter. As a nation heavily scarred by war and now
on the path of reform, development and international
integration, Viet Nam has a profound understanding
of the utmost importance of upholding the Charter in
ensuring lasting peace, building an international order
based on international law and promoting friendly and
equal relations among States.
As a non-permanent member of the Council
and a Member of the United Nations, Viet Nam is
strongly committed to upholding the United Nations
Charter. In the spirit of a partnership for sustainable
peace, we will spare no effort to contribute to the
endeavours of the United Nations and the international
community to ensure the effective adherence to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter
for the ultimate aim of global peace, security and
sustainable development.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.
Mr. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
The many-sided complexities, contradictions and
challenges manifest in the global political economy and
system of international relations conspire to demand,
more than ever, a United Nations fit for the purpose
of ensuring a multilateral, rules-based international
order of peace, security, prosperity and sustainable
development for all of humankind. Indeed, we in
a country like Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
an exemplar of small-island exceptionalism, awash
as it is with a historical bundle of debilitating and
uplifting legacies and the contemporary encumbrances
and possibilities of our Caribbean civilization, see
the necessity and desirability of a vibrant and wellfunctioning United Nations as a matter of the highest
priority. We signal that with my presence.
The foundation stone, known as the Charter of the
United Nations, was shaped and laid, by outstanding
visionaries and realists, to meet the immediate
exigencies of the post-world war global condition and the

S/PV. 8699

foreseeable prospect of an evolving comity of nations to
dwell together, if not always in unity, but cooperatively
in the pursuit of peace, security and prosperity.
Each generation, in humankind’s quest for a better
life, is always faced with inherited and fresh challenges.
Accordingly, each generation is both blessed and
burdened with a mission of continuity and change, as
the circumstances admit. At the dawn of the second
decade of the twenty-first century, and in the seventyfifth year of existence of the United Nations, it is
justifiable and wise to remind ourselves of the enduring
core purposes and principles of the United Nations,
recommit to them and sensibly reshape and reform our
United Nations in appropriate ways to better execute its
mandates in a rapidly changing global order. But what
we must not do is to reject or dismantle the foundation
stone, which the original builders so carefully put in
place and which their esteemed continuators have so
painstakingly maintained or fortified. In that regard,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends Viet Nam
for spearheading the initiative to hold today’s debate.
We endorse the presidential statement (S/PRST/2020/1)
just adopted. I adopt and call as my own the words of
the Secretary-General and the Chair of The Elders.
Fundamentally, the Charter of the United Nations
codified and developed an efficacious international
legal framework to regulate relations among sovereign
States, in a rational and principled way, so as to maintain
and promote international order in the interests of all
humankind. The international legal framework is,
by its very nature, multilateral. It is axiomatic that
there cannot be a unilateral United Nations — that is
an oxymoron. Its very essence must be multilateral.
In holding aloft international law of a deepening
multilateralism, the founding fathers drew upon right
reason and experience and proceeded to codify and
elaborate the requisite statutes, rules, settled customs
and norms for authoritative decision-making.
Every Member of the United Nations knows fully
well that which is plainly acceptable or unacceptable
within the terms of the Charter and international law. To
be sure, there are always spheres of genuine contention
and disputatious conversations derived from national
interests or technical interpretation. However, too often
there is an inclination by too many Member States to
present what is plainly wrong as right, and vice versa.
We all know that it is unacceptable for one State
or a group of like-minded States to drive a horse and

20-006767/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

chariot through the bedrock principles of sovereignty,
independence, the equality of States, non-interference,
non-intervention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Similarly, we all know that it is plainly wrong for any
State or group of States to be in quest of hegemony
or to be engaged in the unilateralist weaponizing of
international trade, commerce, finance or banking.
We all know that the treasured right to self-defence
cannot be exercised disproportionately or outside the
boundaries of international law. We all know, too, that
it is unacceptable to support or harbour terrorists and
international criminals, to facilitate the spread and use
of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons or to deny
people basic fundamental human rights.
Yet, in the hallowed halls of our United Nations,
there is a daily diet of justification for that which is
plainly wrong or unacceptable. We ought to resolve, in
this new year, to desist from such justification.
One of the essential contributions to be made by
small States like ours is the tireless advocacy of the
timeless principles enshrined in international law.
With no ideological or geostrategic axes to grind, we
consider it our solemn obligation not only to articulate
these principles but also to ensure that they are applied
consistently and upheld in the international community
as universal truths, rather than selective, uneven and
unpredictable tools to further hegemonic power or
Great Power ambitions.
The Charter of the United Nations also
promises us development and economic well-being,
which bear upon international peace and security.
Accordingly, our best collective efforts require the
fixing of underdevelopment, economic insecurity
and vulnerability to external shocks so as to limit
unnecessary conflict and discord. Similarly, we must
acknowledge and act upon the security consequences
of climate change, the misuse and abuse of the Earth’s
resources, including the seabed, and the weaponizing
of outer space.
As I conclude, I want to say a few simple,
straightforward things. The arrogance of power,
however derived, too often imbues human beings and
nation States with a sense that restraints on them are
impermissible. This corrupting power is ignoble and
slowly, even imperceptibly, deprives the powerful of
much of the virtue that they possess. Powerlessness,
too, can be, and often is, debilitating. Powerlessness
8/65

09/01/2020

invites cowardice and the opportunism of the meek; it
is also a strong stimulus for solidarity.
In the end, the absence of virtue, a tendency to
ignobility, irresponsibility and rank hypocrisy are
clear and present dangers that attend both the powerful
and the powerless, although not in equal measure.
The metaphoric cards are stacked in favour of the
powerful; accordingly, from those to whom much is
given, much more is rightly expected. On behalf of the
proverbial least of those among us, let us be steadfast
in our commitment to the core principles and values
of our United Nations and be a conscience in this
unruly and chaotic world of much promise. Hopefully,
a renewed grace in our United Nations may take us to a
better, more peaceful, secure and prosperous place for
humankind’s abode.
The President: I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Estonia.
Mr. Reinsalu (Estonia): On behalf of Estonia, I
would like to thank the Government of Viet Nam for
convening this important debate on the role of the
Charter of the United Nations and to thank our briefers
for their statements.
At the outset, allow me to express my deepest
condolences to the loved ones of the victims of
the Ukrainian plane crash near Tehran. I hope the
circumstances of that tragedy will be investigated
promptly, fully and independently.
Our multilateral system established after the
Second World War is a network of agreements and
organizations created to save future generations from
grave suffering and endless wars. It is widely believed
that
institutionalized
international
cooperation
provides relative stability, security and predictability.
If that cooperation fails, then the probability of
conflict increases and we fail to collectively stop acts
of aggression, terrorism and other grave violations of
international law.
We are living in turbulent and uneasy times. Recent
tensions in the Middle East seriously concern us. I have
condemned the attacks on the United States Embassy
in Baghdad and condemn the missile attacks on the two
bases in Iraq, which also house Estonian troops. Despite
some recent signs of de-escalation, the situation remains
tense. I call for serious negotiations between the parties
to ease tensions and avoid nuclear proliferation.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

When it comes to worldwide cooperation, there
is no other organization like the United Nations. It
is regarded as the primary infrastructure for global
cooperation. Our support for the United Nations and its
Charter is based on the assumption that many problems
can be solved — or solved better — together rather
than bilaterally or single-handedly. Such cooperation
produces global public goods, such as better health,
security and knowledge. The Charter of the United
Nations represents the constitution of this cooperation,
and it can serve as a source of peace and stability only
when its principles are upheld.
In that context, we observe with concern how
violations of international law, including the United
Nations Charter, are taking place in our continent,
Europe. The Security Council has drawn attention to
grave breaches of international law against Ukraine and
Georgia. At the same time, the General Assembly has
adopted resolutions expressing grave concern over the
actions against the sovereignty, political independence,
unity and territorial integrity within the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine and Georgia. Those are
concerns we wholeheartedly share.
According to the Charter, the Security Council is
responsible for upholding and promoting international
law. Those who drafted the Charter also stressed respect
for human rights. We know that States that respect
human rights and dignity are more stable, both within
their own national borders and in relation to other
States. Therefore, it remains crucial that, in situations
of grave violations of international humanitarian law,
the Security Council engage and react. That has not
been the case with regard to the tragedy in Syria, where
the veto has been used over and over again. For that,
we know the Syrian people are paying the highest
possible price.
The Secretary-General has reminded us that, while
the Charter’s principles are as relevant as ever, we must
continue to update its tools and must use those tools
with greater determination. Those are very wise words.
Those with special tools and privileges granted by the
Charter also have a special responsibility, particularly
when it comes to the veto. Estonia believes that
countries should refrain from voting against initiatives
aimed at preventing or halting mass atrocities. The
Security Council must lead by example.
Estonia started its membership in the Security
Council this month. I would like to thank all who

S/PV. 8699

placed their trust and confidence in us. It is a great
responsibility and an opportunity to exercise global
responsibility. We look forward to talking to one and
all and are open to hearing their concerns and ideas.
The principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the international rule of law will also guide our work in
the Council.
The President: I now call on the Minister of State
in the Federal Office of Germany.
Ms. Müntefering (Germany): Before I begin my
remarks, let me thank the Secretary-General and Her
Excellency Mrs. Robinson for their briefings.
I also congratulate Viet Nam on joining the Security
Council and assuming this month’s presidency. We
should all applaud Viet Nam for the topic of today’s
debate. I certainly do, because the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
are, in fact, the fundamental reason for our work here at
the United Nations. They guide our peaceful coexistence
as nations large and small. Seventy-five years after
their adoption, it is not clear how we will be able to
transmit this remarkable progress for humankind to the
next century. What will the world look like another 75
years from now, on the threshold to the twenty-second
century? Written at the end of the darkest days in the
history of humankind, the Charter represented new
hope for the peoples of the world. Threats to peace
and security were to be resolved thereafter through the
force of the law rather than the law of force.
Germany became a Member of the United Nations
in 1973. With our accession to the United Nations not
even 30 years after the horrors of Second World War,
my country was given a seat at the table of nations once
again. Our past instils in us a particular responsibility
to champion the United Nations Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. As a member
of the Security Council, we are also guided by the will
to defend and strengthen the rules-based international
order and to promote universal respect for human
rights. We firmly believe that respecting the Charter
and commonly agreed international rules is the best
way to help to foster peace and security and the wellbeing of all nations and peoples.
My plea today to all representatives around this table
and the wider United Nations is to return to the roots
of this Organization, which was built on the basis of
sharing power, mutual respect and joint responsibility.
That shared power came from a position of power,

20-006769/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/01/2020

from lessons learned and conviction. And, talking of
founding fathers and mothers, Eleanor Roosevelt said:

will also strive to promote norms and principles for
upholding stability in cyberspace.

“It is not enough to talk about peace. One must
believe in it. And it is not enough to believe in it.
One must work at it.”

In that vein, we encourage the Security Council, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations, to address
new threats to peace and security, including gross
human rights violations, the effects of climate change
and the risks emanating from new technologies, which
often act as drivers of conflict.

Conflict after conflict in the past — from the Sahel
to the Balkans, from Asia to North Africa — has
taught us the lesson for today, that lasting peace and
security can never be achieved by military means. We
need to prioritize prevention and look at long-term
drivers of conflict. Without respect for human rights,
good governance and social inclusion, peace will
remain elusive. The Security Council has increasingly
embraced the advancement of human rights as a
critical element of promoting peace and security and
preventing conflicts and atrocities. Germany attaches
great importance to that.
The women and peace and security agenda
is also a priority of Germany’s Security Council
membership. With the upcoming twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000), this year will be critical for
expediting the agenda’s implementation, including
resolution 2467 (2019), on ending sexual violence in
conflict. In its second year on the Security Council,
Germany continues to call for respecting international
law, including the law of the sea and international
humanitarian law, and promoting and upholding human
rights. We will continue to advance the disarmament
agenda and we will fight for accountability for grave
human rights violations, atrocity crimes and crimes
against humanity.
Multilateral cooperation is the backbone of our
foreign policy, and promoting the rules-based global
order with the United Nations at its core is at the heart
of our interests. That is why German Foreign Minister
Heiko Maas, his French counterpart, Mr. Jean-Yves Le
Drian, and other partners co-founded the Alliance for
Multilateralism last year. Its objective is to support and
strengthen the international rules-based order with the
United Nations Charter and other international law at
its heart. More than 50 countries are already working
together in that framework, both with the United
Nations and within it. We will strive to tackle emerging
threats through the development of new multilateral
agreed rules and principles. Examples include the
Humanitarian Call for Action and the principles agreed
in Geneva on lethal autonomous weapons systems. We
10/65

The recent events in the Middle East are of serious
concern to all of us. Regional security and stability
are at stake. A military confrontation, let alone a fullscale war, would have terrible consequences for the
lives of the people in the Middle East and beyond. We
are relieved to see signs of de-escalation and call for
maximum restraint. The United Nations was founded
on the central aspiration to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war. We must be clear — conflicts
can be solved only by political means.
It is up to us whether our grandchildren will
remember us with pride and hope for a better future as
we today commemorate the work of the pioneers who
founded the United Nations, as the power of justice is
justice of power.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): As this is the first
open debate for the year 2020, South Africa would like
to take this opportunity to welcome the new elected
members — Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam — to the Security
Council. We wish them all the best during their twoyear terms. We have no doubt that the newly elected
members will play a constructive role in the work of
the Council, and we look forward to working with them
to that end.
We
also
thank
the
outgoing
elected
members — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait,
Peru and Poland — for their positive contributions
to the work of the Council. Finally, we thank you,
Mr. President, for dedicating the first thematic
debate, during this historic seventy-fifth year of the
Organization, to the Charter of the United Nations,
which forms the foundation of the Organization’s very
existence and our ongoing work.
As a founding Member of the United Nations,
South Africa — together with fellow African States
Ethiopia, Egypt and Liberia — participated in the
drafting and adoption of the Charter in San Francisco.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

South Africa deposited its instrument of ratification on
7 November 1945.
We note with regret that the Foreign Minister of
Iran was not granted a visa to attend this meeting,
thereby denying an important actor in the troubled Gulf
region an opportunity to express the country’s views
on peace and security in the context of a debate on the
United Nations Charter. The denial of entry to the States
Members of the United Nations — in this case to one that
participated in the drafting of the Charter and deposited
its instrument of ratification on 24 October 1945 — to
participate in a United Nations debate contravenes the
1947 hosting agreement and undermines the resolution
of disputes through constructive dialogue.
The signing of the Charter of the United Nations
in San Francisco in 1945 was a seminal moment in the
relations of States that invoked a sense of unity for
a common cause — a moment during which, as the
second Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjöld, later
pointed out, “The hopes that were then aroused in
many hearts outran the limitations of human nature”
(see SG/382). The signing of the United Nations
Charter was and remains an expression of hope that the
peoples of the world can live in peace and prosperity, in
larger freedom.
The United Nations Charter represents a normative
and contractual framework for the values that we as
nations of the world aspire to and the commitments we
intend to abide by. Following the unsuccessful attempt
of the Covenant of the League of Nations to create
an environment in which another world war could be
averted, the United Nations Charter succeeded in the
creation of a multilateral system of governance that
has ensured that countries are able to convene within
a rules-based environment and framework to discuss
and promote issues of international peace and security,
human rights and development.
We recognize that since its inception the Charter
has played a significant role in regulating relations
between Member States by forbidding the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State and advocating for the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
While the Charter reinforces respect for
the sovereignty of nations, it also, in Article
33, calls on all nations to collectively pursue a
non-antagonistic and mutually beneficial approach to
its international relations.

S/PV. 8699

Despite the noble aspirations of the Charter and its
positive impact, some Member States have violated, and
continue to violate, some of its central tenets. Article
2.1 of the Charter maintains that the United Nations is
based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all
its Members; however, unilateral actions and disregard
for international law continue to this day.
We must stress that the Charter is a compact that
Member States have agreed to voluntarily abide by for
their mutual benefit. There cannot be selective adherence
to the Charter, as that would undermine the very
credibility of the compact. The selective implementation
of the Charter undermines the Organization and
the post-Second World War international system of
governance that we have developed.
The Charter makes very clear that the Security
Council is the sole body that can authorize the use
of force. Additionally, the Charter provides that
States may act in self-defence, including confronting
imminent threats; but such threats must be credible, real
and objectively verifiable for the use of force without
Security Council authorization to be justifiable.
South Africa is of the view that, to uphold the
original intention of the Charter, which ultimately is
predicated on peace, even in the event that there is
evidence of a real and credible threat, any recourse to
the use of force based on self-defence should be brought
to the Security Council for authorization. Ultimately,
the Charter seeks to prevent the use of force. Therefore,
the issue is not just about whether the use of force is legal
or not, but whether its use contributes to the Charter’s
vision of a more peaceful and prosperous world.
The Charter provisions of the equality of nations,
mutual respect and adherence to international law must
be upheld if we are to resolve current disputes through
negotiated settlements and prevent the outbreak of
further conflicts. This approach is necessary in the
context of emerging threats to international peace and
security such as the growing number of intra-State
and trans-State conflicts, the rise of non-State actors,
terrorism, transnational organized crime and other
such acutely global threats. We should not allow for
competing political interests to undermine respect
for international law and self-determination in cases
such as that of the Western Sahara and the occupied
Palestinian territories.
The Charter is explicit on the role of regional
organizations, as reflected in Chapter VIII, which

20-0067611/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

makes provisions for regional arrangements to address
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security. That is a testament to the vision
of the drafters of the Charter, as, at the time, regional
organizations were not as developed or equipped to
deal with peace and security matters as they are today.
Today Chapter VIII is even more relevant in terms
of regional organizations, particularly the African
Union and regional economic communities on the
African continent, as they have established peace
and security mechanisms, including those dealing
with mediation, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. As
Members of the United Nations, we must continue our
efforts to strengthen cooperation and coordination with
regional arrangements to ensure that our efforts are
complementary and mutually reinforcing.
While the Charter remains relevant, we must
acknowledge that the world today is very different
from the world that existed 75 years ago, when the
Charter was signed. At the time of signing, there were
51 Member States. The majority of Member States
from Africa and Asia that make up today’s 193 Member
States were not yet independent but still colonized.
While the values that underpin the Organization
should not be changed, Charter amendments are
necessary to ensure that the Organization reflects
the current global reality. In the first few years of
the Organization’s existence, Member States were
willing to make the necessary amendments to the
Charter, and the five Charter amendments that were
made accommodated the growing membership of the
United Nations.

09/01/2020

and necessity for international peace and security and
for creating a world that understands that the interests
of each nation are imbedded in the interests of all of us.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates Viet Nam’s initiative to convene
today’s open debate. We are pleased to see you, Your
Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, presiding
over the meeting. We thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing, which contains
a host of important observations and insights worthy
of in-depth consideration by us all. China also thanks
Mrs. Mary Robinson for her presentation.
I wish to take this opportunity to express my
deepest condolences in connection with the demise of
passengers from various countries in the Ukrainian
airplane crash that took place in Iran, and I express my
heartfelt sympathy to the victims’ families.
Seventy-five years ago, the Charter of the United
Nations officially came into force, marking the birth of
the United Nations and the start of a brand-new chapter
in human history. The Charter of the United Nations
is a great historical text that came into being in the
twentieth century as a cornerstone of multilateralism.
The Charter establishes the basic norms governing
international relations today, develops generally
recognized principles of international law and charts
the way forward for human society.

However, it has been 47 years since the most
recent Charter amendment. For the Organization to be
effective and remain relevant, it must reflect the current
state of the world, and we must be willing to make the
changes necessary to ensure that Member States are
adequately represented in all the principal organs,
including the Security Council.

Over the past 75 years, the four purposes and
seven principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations make up the basic credo by which States
interact with one another. The principles of, inter alia,
sovereign equality, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
the prohibition of the threat or use of force, respect for
the political independence and territorial integrity of
States and non-interference in their internal affairs
have taken root in the hearts and minds of peoples
and have contributed significantly to world peace
and development.

We must use the opportunity of the commemoration
of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter and the
United Nations itself to recommit to the aspirations
we had when it was signed. That would require us to
recommit to upholding and returning to the letter and
spirit of the Charter and its central principles, through
which we pursue international peace and security and
continue to pursue the mutual benefit and development
of all. That is not an optional approach but a prerequisite

If we look around the world today, universal peace
remains elusive. Unilateralism is on the rise, dealing
heavy blows to the international rule of law and order. As
a result of spreading protectionism, the world economy
is plagued by uncertainties. That is compounded by
acts of bullying, the effects of which are being felt
around the world and are jeopardizing global peace and
stability. The recent sudden heightened tension in the
situation in the Arabian Gulf region has significantly

12/65

20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

increased the risk of war. Much remains to be done to
achieve peace and security, as today’s world makes it
more imperative than ever to uphold the Charter.
This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations. Recalling the spirit of the Charter
is the best way to commemorate the Organization’s
seventy-fight birthday, and that is especially relevant
given the present context. One need only open the
Charter to find its unequivocal message expressed in
the first paragraph of the Preamble, namely,
“to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow to mankind”,
That is the founding aspiration of the United Nations
and, more important, the mission of the Organization’s
193 States Member. Seventy-five years later, we must
ask ourselves: Have we really succeeded? Will this
and succeeding generations be saved from the scourge
of war? The answer, which remains as yet unknown,
will depend on whether every State bears in mind the
founding aspiration proclaimed in the Charter and
honours the mission enshrined within it.
In upholding the Charter, we must pursue mutually
beneficial cooperation. The world is undergoing the
most dramatic shifts in a century. No country alone
can take on the challenges confronting humankind. No
country can afford to regress to self-imposed isolation.
It is imperative to create greater opportunities through
cooperation, overcome risks and challenges and achieve
shared development. It is also imperative to strive for
win-win results on an equal footing and refrain from an
all-for-me approach, so that all countries enjoy equal
rights and benefits from equal opportunities on a level
playing field.
In upholding the Charter, we must be guided by
the international rule of law. Countries must interact
with one another in good faith, with integrity and
must not waver or go back on their word. International
cooperation must be anchored in rules, which means
that one must not do whatever one wants. We must
firmly oppose the practice of putting one country’s
own interests above those of others, oppose the wanton
misinterpretation of international law, oppose the
hegemonic logic of its selective application and oppose
long-arm jurisdiction and unilateral sanctions.
In upholding the Charter, we must adhere to the
principles of equity and justice. Equity means that

S/PV. 8699

matters of an international nature should be discussed
and managed by us all; that all countries are equal
regardless of their size; and that big countries have
a duty to help smaller ones, as do rich countries
poorer ones. Justice is manifested in mutual respect
for one another’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial Integrity. It is also manifested in respect for
every country’s independent choice of path towards
development and right to pursue a better life and a
bigger space for development.
In upholding the Charter, we must take effective
measures. The Charter should not merely ornament a
bookshelf, much less be used for lip service. It should
be put into practice on the ground to generate tangible
results. The Charter confers upon the Security Council
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. That is the sacred
mission of the 15 members of the Council. We must
always act in the interest of the greater good, namely,
safeguarding world peace. We must enhance mutual
trust, strengthen unity, avoid the politicization of certain
issues and remain committed to diffusing conflicts and
preventing wars so that we can have a safer and more
secure world.
Currently, the United States unilateral military
adventurism has led to heightening tension in the
situation in the Arabian Gulf region. China supports
Secretary-General António Guterres’ call for peace. We
have been actively engaged in diplomatic efforts and
are committed to playing a responsible and constructive
role in safeguarding international law, equity, justice
and regional peace and stability.
We call on all parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint, return to dialogue and consultations
without delay, jointly work towards a de-escalation
of the situation and collectively uphold the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. If the situation in the
region were to spiral out of control, it would not serve
the interests of any party. Restoring peace is of crucial
importance to the entire world. The Security Council
should discharge its duty emanating from the Charter
with regard to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
China was the first country to sign the Charter.
It has consistently and scrupulously adhered to
the purposes and principles of the Charter and has
unfailingly supported efforts to defend the authority
and functions of the United Nations. In 2015, before

20-0067613/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

the General Assembly (see A/70/PV.13), President Xi
Jinping systematically expounded on the importance of
building a community of shared future for humankind,
which is a continuation and sublimation of the purposes
of the Charter.
In the face of the new era and new situations,
China’s commitment to the Charter is unwavering, and
China will honour every one of its promises to support
the United Nations. China will uphold the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, play its important
role as a permanent member of the Security Council,
remain committed to taking an impartial stand on both
international and regional hotspot issues and propose
constructive solutions to safeguard international peace
and security.
China will uphold the sovereign equality, political
independence and territorial integrity of all countries
and non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs,
and is ready to share its development experience and
provide the necessary assistance to countries in need.
But China will not impose any models or attach any
political strings to its assistance.
China will uphold the principles of the non-use
and non-threat of force. Peaceful development has long
been enshrined in China’s Constitution. Regardless
of its stage of development, China will never seek
hegemony or expansion. China will faithfully fulfil
its obligations under the Charter, actively participate
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, seriously
fulfil its financial obligations to the United Nations and
support the United Nations central role in international
multilateral affairs.
China will actively implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. China will have completely
eradicated absolute poverty and comprehensively built
a well-off society by 2020. China will promote the
high-quality joint construction of the Belt and Road
Initiative so that the dividends of China’s development
will be able to benefit all countries in the world.
The world we live in is full of hope. It is also rife
with challenges. We must not give up our dreams just
because reality is complex. We must not abandon our
pursuits just because our ideals are not within easy
reach. Let us act together and work tirelessly to realize
the purposes and principles of the Charter and build a
community of shared future for humankind.
14/65

09/01/2020

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Vietnamese presidency for convening this debate on
upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain
international peace and security. I also welcome the
participation of the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary
Robinson and thank them for their briefings. Their
message must be heard — we will prevent and stop
wars only through a return to dialogue, negotiation and
cooperation. That is the raison d’être of the Security
Council and the United Nations.
As President Macron mentioned in his speech
before the General Assembly on 24 September 2019 (see
A/74/PV.3), it is up to us, in a world that has become
multipolar, to reinvent robust multilateralism that sees
the spirit of the United Nations Charter and diplomacy
prevail over national isolationism, States respect their
obligations unconditionally and the Security Council
act to restore peace and security. That is more necessary
now than ever in the Middle East, given the current
tensions and the risk of conflict. At a time when civilian
populations there have already suffered too much from
the scourge of war and terrorism, it is time at last to
move towards de-escalation.
Within the framework of this strong multilateralism,
we believe in the imperative need to privilege the
channel of political negotiation to put an end to conflicts
where military and violent logic prevails, as is the case
in Libya, Syria, Yemen, the Sahel, the Sudan, South
Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Central African Republic. The Secretary-General
and his special representatives play an eminent role
in this regard and we must support and accompany
their efforts.
To be strong, this multilateralism must address the
challenges of our time, whether it be the fight against
inequalities, climate change or discrimination against
women. In 2020, it is essential that all States fortify
the commitments they have made under the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. We must also take into
account the impacts of climate change on international
peace and security. We hope that the SecretaryGeneral will regularly report on these risks and suggest
measures to prevent these future sources of conflict.
The United Nations needs the support of
all — regional organizations, civil society and
business — to face these challenges. That is why,
alongside Mexico and UN-Women, France will launch
coalitions of actors resolutely committed to the
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8699

emancipation of women during the Generation Equality
Forum, which will be held in Mexico City and Paris
in 2020, 25 years after the Beijing World Conference
on Women. The Security Council must contribute to
it within the framework of the women and peace and
security agenda.

reform the Security Council to reflect the reality of the
contemporary world.

Our action in favour of international peace and
security must be carried out within the framework of
the rules and principles laid down in the Charter. The
universality of human rights on which our organization
is based cannot be called into question in the name of
national, cultural or religious specificities.

Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Let me at the outset
welcome you, Sir, to preside over this body. We also
welcome the Prime Minister of Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines and other honourable Ministers to
the Council.

The Security Council cannot remain silent in the
face of massive violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights. That is why France and Mexico
called in 2013 for a suspension of the veto in the case of
mass atrocities in the form of a political, voluntary and
collective commitment on the part of the five permanent
members. To date, 105 Member States have joined this
initiative. We call on all States to join it.
The fight against impunity is essential to ensuring
that these violations do not recur and that justice is done
to the victims. In this regard, we call for the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute.
Finally, our Council must pursue its efforts to
take full advantage of the tools that the Charter makes
available to us. First among those are the tools for
the peaceful settlement of disputes. We welcome the
establishment by the Secretary-General of the HighLevel Advisory Board on Mediation. When other means
for the peaceful settlement of disputes do not allow that,
recourse to judicial methods of settlement may help
States to reach a solution. When circumstances require,
the Council must make use of the full range of tools
at its disposal, in particular peacekeeping operations
and sanctions.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment
to peacekeeping reform, through his Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, to ensure that this tool is
capable of addressing contemporary challenges. We
must strengthen coordination between the United
Nations and regional organizations and provide support
for African peace operations.
Modernizing our Organization is critical to making
it more efficient. France supports the reforms initiated
by the Secretary-General. There is an urgent need to

To conclude, I recall that building peace requires
courage. Let us form the wish that this courage and this
responsibility will mobilize us for the year to come. It
is in our common interest.

I thank the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Chair of The Elders, for their briefings.
Indonesia echoes their call to reaffirm the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and renews its
commitment to promoting the pacific settlement
of disputes.
Indonesia aligns itself with the statements to be
delivered by the representatives of Azerbaijan, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, and of the Philippines,
on behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), respectively.
The Charter of the United Nations embodies our
collective hope and determination to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. At the same
time, it provides a rules-based platform for dialogue
and cooperation, bringing together nations large and
small based on sovereign equality. Three-quarters
of a century have passed since the adoption of the
Charter, and it is saddening that we are seeing growing
resort to unilateralism, countries withdrawing from
internationally agreed commitments, and increasing
use of coercive measures to achieve national policy
objectives. We have witnessed such activities recently
in the Middle East and many parts of the world.
While we commemorate the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations Charter in 2020, it is
ironic that we are also starting the year on a very sombre
note. The very Charter that we hold dear is in jeopardy.
It is being violated again and again. We cannot afford
to become spectators and let our collective efforts of
the past three-quarters of a century be forgotten or see
our future generations lost to the scourge of war — the
very thing that we, the peoples of the United Nations,
committed to avoiding. It is essential that we take action.
First, we must stop unilateral actions in violation of
the Charter. Instead, we should promote dialogue and

20-0067615/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

the peaceful settlement of disputes. The use of force
has never been a solution and never will be. Indonesia
calls on all Members of the United Nations to fully
comply with the Charter and its implementation. To
those that are not complying, we join the SecretaryGeneral in the clear message that he sent very recently:
“Stop escalation, exercise maximum restraint, restart
dialogue and renew international cooperation.”
Secondly, we have to fully and faithfully implement
the Charter through our renewed commitment to
multilateralism. No nation, no matter how powerful,
can effectively address global challenges on its own.
We need inclusive and mutually beneficial collaboration
and dialogue among nations, as well as the sharing of
national best practices and lessons learned. To underpin
multilateralism, we need to also continue strengthening
the role of regional and subregional organizations.
Neighbours know best.
In line with Chapter VIII of the Charter, we
recognize the important role of regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security, as we have strived to do in our ASEAN region.
We need to ensure that all agreements, resolutions,
decisions and declarations that we have agreed upon as a
collective family of nations are faithfully implemented,
whether they relate to economic and social issues,
climate change or the issue of Palestine. There can
be no exceptions. We cannot talk about upholding
the United Nations Charter if we fail to address the
question of Palestine. Our seventy-fifth anniversary is
being celebrated in many places, but not in Palestine,
which still lacks a homeland. Prevailing disrespect
for international law and the principles of the Charter
has further diminished the chances of achieving the
two-State vision for sustained peace and stability in
the region.
Thirdly, We need to reaffirm our collective support
to the United Nations and its three pillars: peace and
security, development and human rights. All of them
should be promoted equally and moved forward at the
same pace. Each organ of the United Nations has its
own unique mandate based on the Charter to do that.
We continue to support the United Nations reform, as it
is critical to ensuring the Organization remains relevant
and fit for purpose and has impact on the ground
In conclusion, the Security Council needs to be
reminded not only of our political commitments, but
also of our duty to implement those commitments, to
16/65

09/01/2020

ensure the primacy of human safety and security. The
United Nations was established upon the mandate of
“We, the peoples of the United Nations”. We cannot
afford to let our peoples down.
Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation welcomes you, Mr. President, and
the other ministers present here. We appreciate the
presidency of the Security Council selecting today’s
theme, which is extremely important as it is intimately
related to the main mission of the Council, namely,
achieving and preserving peace and security. That
should be undertaken by upholding the Charter of the
United Nations, whose adoption, 75 years ago, we are
celebrating this year. I also thank the Secretary-General
and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their valuable briefings.
The Charter was drafted and adopted after the
horrific tragedy of two world wars, which led to the
loss of millions of lives and unprecedented destruction.
Through its principles and values, the Charter reflects
the collective desire of people throughout the world
to establish an institutional and legal framework
governing relations among countries and guaranteeing
the maintenance of international peace and security in
order to save the world from repeated wars and conflicts.
More than seven decades have passed since
the founding of this international Organization,
during which the world has witnessed — and is still
witnessing — numerous accelerated events and
transformations as well as disputes and conflicts,
in addition to human tragedies that we had thought
would never be repeated. However, new challenges
have emerged, including violent extremism, terrorism,
climate change, nuclear proliferation, cyberterrorism
and the displacement of tens of millions of refugees.
All those threats pose a serious challenge to world
peace and security and have a negative impact on
development and prosperity.
This situation is linked to being far from having
achieved the vision and objectives of the Charter.
We believe that upholding the Charter as a reference,
unifying and binding document is essential to
achieving greater effectiveness as we tackle various
situations and improve the performance of the
Security Council as the primary organ entrusted with
implementing the Charter’s vision, especially in the
area of international peace and security. The principles
of the Charter — in particular the non-use of force, the
peaceful settlement of conflicts, non-interference in the
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

internal affairs of States, the right to self-determination
and the sovereign equality of States — still continue
to constitute the cornerstones governing international
relations. Moreover, the values of the Charter — in
particular equal rights, non-discrimination, tolerance
and good neighbourliness — continue to be guidelines
for achieving and maintaining harmony and
stability worldwide.
Tunisia upholds international legitimacy and
respects the Charter of the United Nations. Those
constitute guiding principles of our foreign policy.
We have established our national legislation based
on the principles of the Charter. After the revolution
to guarantee freedom and dignity and chart our path
towards democracy, we have been keen to conform our
legislation and policies to the Charter’s directives.
Tunisia has returned to the Security Council after
20 years — the fourth time that we have been members
of the Council. We still have the same commitments
and principles that govern our foreign policy. We have
a steadfast commitment and continuous contributions
towards bolstering international peace and security,
as well as preventive diplomacy and multilateralism.
We will also continue to promote dialogue and settling
disputes peacefully, rather than through the use of force.

S/PV. 8699

exclusion, climate change and the lack of sustainable
development, also contribute to crises and conflicts.
The success of the Security Council in its main
mission of maintaining peace and security greatly
depends on its unity and consensus among its members.
Unfortunately, over recent decades we have seen
obvious signs of weakness in that area, which reflects
negatively on the image and credibility of the Council.
That is clearly demonstrated by numerous hotbeds
of tension and conflicts at the international level, as
well as by many issues and crises that lack solutions
to date despite their direct impact on world security
and stability. They also cause human sufferings and
tragedies for many people, especially in the Arab region
and the African continent.
Based on Tunisia’s commitment to international
legitimacy and the purposes of the Charter, and out
of its desire for a more effective role by the Council,
as well as its commitment to just causes, at the top of
which is the question of Palestine, we renew our call for
respecting the relevant Security Council resolutions,
leading to a just and comprehensive solution enabling
the Palestinian people to regain their legitimate rights,
including establishing their independent State on their
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

It is along those lines that my delegation calls for
enhancing the measures provided by the Charter to
the Council with the aim to enabling it to work more
effectively, meet the challenges it faces and play its role
in the peaceful settlement of conflicts and crises, while
also avoiding new conflicts and stepping up measures
to maintain international peace and security. Preventive
and proactive work for maintaining peace and security
is of particular importance. We call upon the Security
Council to address crises in their initial phases while
benefitting fully from Chapter VIII of the Charter by
encouraging regional organizations to play their role in
preventing conflicts and settling crises.

Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. Minister, for coming here to be with us. I also
thank all the other ministers who have honoured the
Security Council with their presence today. I would
like to say how nice it is to once again have Mary
Robinson representing The Elders. I thank her for all
the work The Elders do to uphold the Charter of the
United Nations.

In that context, we appreciate the regular and
periodic meetings held between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
We also call for more cooperation with other regional
organizations, such as the League of Arab States. On
the other hand, my delegation calls for focusing on the
socioeconomic and human rights dimensions while
maintaining peace and security. Violating those rights
will lead to conflicts. Other socioeconomic challenges,
such as poverty, unemployment, marginalization,

We have heard many quotations from the Charter.
Nobody could accuse the founding Members of a lack
of ambition when they drafted the Charter. But at times,
the United Nations has often suffered from an almost
unbridgeable gap between the power of its central
vision and the actual actions that it has been able to
carry out. By “United Nations”, I do not just mean the
United Nations bodies, but also, we, the Member States.
And yet the United Nations takes action that directly
affects the lives of millions of ordinary citizens.

We very much welcome as well the spirit of
collaboration that the Permanent Mission of Viet Nam
has brought to this enterprise, including on presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/1, which the Council
adopted today.

20-0067617/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

The United Nations has 13 peacekeeping missions
operating in regions that are home to 1.8 billion people.
The World Food Programme delivers food to nearly
87 million people in 83 countries, providing 15 billion
meals. In 2018, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees supported 20.4 million
refugees, and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
supported a further 5.5 million Palestinians. The World
Health Organization vaccinates hundreds of millions of
people. In 2018, it vaccinated almost half the world’s
children, and it has eradicated smallpox and is close to
eradicating polio — the world is 98 per cent free.
If the United Nations did not exist, we would have
to create it. The Charter makes very clear the emphasis
on States cooperating to harmonize actions to attain
common ends. I hope that we can remember that Article
of the Charter as we deal with some of these intractable
issues of peace and security on the Security Council.
I was very struck by what Mr. Kofi Annan said
in his farewell address to the United Nations in 2006.
He said:
“Together we have pushed some big rocks to the top
of the mountain, even if others have slipped from
our grasp and rolled back. But this mountain, with
its bracing winds and global views, is the best place
on Earth to be. (A/61/PV.10, p. 3)
The rules-based international system, which the
Charter embodies, is the best prescription to those
bracing winds and the rocks rolling back down the hill.
The United Kingdom has the honour of being a
founding Member of the United Nations, like some
other members here today. We share the belief in
the rules-based international system and the United
Nations role at the apex of it. As we leave the European
Union, the United Kingdom looks forward to having
the United Nations as an even more important stage
for British foreign policy, as an active and independent
force, and we very much hope, as my Foreign Secretary
has said, as a force for good so that we can cooperate
with other colleagues to strengthen the security and
prosperity that the United Nations has helped create
over recent decades.
In a world in which change is moving at an everincreasing pace, the Charter should be seen as a
framework around which we can construct our responses
to those challenges. It should be an enabler, a point of
18/65

09/01/2020

reference and the constant source to which we turn
in a world burdened with increasing complexity and
uncertainty. Used in such a way, as we heard from the
Secretary-General and others today, the Charter gives
us what we need to help us head of crises, de-escalate
confrontations and develop effective responses to
conflict. Again, I draw the attention of our colleagues
to the things that we are battling with in the Council,
notably Libya, Yemen, Syria and tensions in the Gulf.
We should not regard the Charter as a straitjacket.
We want to have options for collaboration and action.
We do not want to reduce those options artificially,
because if we do we bring only detriment to the people
we represent and serve. The Secretary-General and
other colleagues have highlighted peacekeeping. If I
may, I would like to pay tribute here to Brian Urquhart,
who will be 101 next month. He did more than many
people to set up the United Nations peacekeeping
arrangements, and that is something which, like special
political missions, does appear not in the Charter;
rather, they are an excellent example of Member States
working together within the framework of the Charter
and in the context of the Security Council to address
the challenges of yesterday and today.
We believe that we need to retain that forwardlooking spirit as we look for ideas to tackle the
challenges of tomorrow, such as the rise in new
technologies, which my Prime Minister referred to in
his General Assembly address (see A/74/PV.4), the
challenges of antimicrobial resistance or the impacts of
climate change. Those were not foreseen by the drafters
of the Charter, but they very much remain on our minds.
While we face new threats that the founders of
the United Nations did not see, the responsibility that
all parts of the United Nations hold remains, and the
Secretary-General drew attention to that as well. It is
a well-worn phrase, but with great power comes great
responsibility, and I think that it is also something
that we should bear in mind. The Security Council
has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, but others, including
the Secretary-General, through Article 99 of the
Charter, also have a vital role to play. I would like to
echo what the Secretary-General said about Article 25
and the need to uphold the decisions of the Security
Council in that context.
A few people have mentioned reform and veto
reform. Let me therefore set out the United Kingdom’s
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

position. We are a signatory to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency code of conduct, which
commits us to not vote against credible Security
Council action to stop mass atrocities and crimes
against humanity. But the fact that we do not all agree
on the veto should not prevent us from making progress
in pursuing other areas of Security Council reform.
I want to say a word about State sovereignty and
respect for equality, State sovereignty and the principle
that countries are all equal and that stronger countries
should help weaker countries. That cannot be used as
an excuse for failing to address conflicts or violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.
It is violence and conflict, and not our attempts to
help Member States prevent them, that threaten State
sovereignty. Here I draw my colleagues’ attention to
Article 2 of the Charter, which makes clear that nothing
should upset the fundamental rights that the Charter
sets out.
I would like to close, if I may, by referring to the
current situation in the Middle East, since that has
featured in our debate today. My Foreign Secretary
recently visited Washington, D.C., and I would like to
reprise what he said there. He said that we recognize
the danger and threat that Iran poses to the Middle
East, and we recognize the right to self-defence. At
the same time, we want to see tensions de-escalated.
We want to find a diplomatic way through, and that is
why the remarks that we have heard recently about a
diplomatic solution are so important. It also means that
the Government of Iran should be willing to consider
and committed to a diplomatic outcome as well. I can
pledge that the United Kingdom stands ready to assist
any diplomatic efforts.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome you to New York, Mr. President,
and we are pleased to see you presiding over the Security
Council. We also extend our gratitude to the SecretaryGeneral and Mrs. Robinson for their briefings.
This year we will mark the closely connected
seventy-fifth anniversaries of the end of the Second
World War and the establishment of the United Nations.
Seventy-five years ago, the conditions were created for
the establishment of a post-war global order, and the
load-bearing structure of that was the United Nations as
the cornerstone of the system of international relations
and multilateralism.

S/PV. 8699

Enshrined within the Charter of the United Nations
are all the principles of multilateralism. Its purposes
and principles enjoy the status of imperative norms of
international law. The Charter’s provisions include the
inadmissibility of the use or threat of use of force and
the imperative of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
There can be no justification for non-compliance with
the Charter, under any circumstances. The foundation
of that structure is the system of collective security,
steered by the Security Council. I would like to
emphasize the word “collective”. The entire Charter
highlights the notion of collectivism and the fostering
of friendly relations and cooperation. In addition, the
Charter outlines the essential principle of the sovereign
equality of all States, large and small.
The process of creating a polycentric, multipolar
world has become irreversible and not everyone is in
favour of it. Attempts at revisionism with regard to
the principles of international law embodied in the
United Nations Charter are often disguised in pretty
packaging. Today’s fashionable concept of the rulesbased order is the most striking example. Such rules are
selected and employed as needed. The purpose of that
concept is to replace universally agreed international
legal instruments and mechanisms with narrow formats
in which alternative, non-consensus-based solutions are
developed in circumvention of legitimate multilateral
frameworks. In essence, we are dealing with attempts by
a small group of States to usurp the process of making
consensus decisions on key issues on the international
agenda while using this concept as a cover.
What is very dangerous is the fact that the
proponents of the concept of the rules-based order
have set their sights on the exclusive prerogatives of
the Security Council without hesitation. I will give a
few examples.
Following the failed attempt to force politicized
solutions through the Security Council — accusing
the Syrian authorities, without proof, of using banned
toxic substances — the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
was granted the authority to determine who had been
responsible for using chemical weapons. That was
nothing less than an encroachment on the authority of
the Security Council.
Another example of disregard for the authority of the
Security Council was the establishment of the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism

20-0067619/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes in
Syria, in contravention of the United Nations Charter.
Regrettably, there is an ever-increasing number of such
examples of the revision of international law. Recently,
we have seen the steady weakening of the disarmament
machinery — torpedoing of the Anti-Ballistic Missile
Treaty, withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty and threats to the New Strategic
Arms Reduction Treaty and the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Today, we face the risk of the
entire treaty architecture that covers nuclear missile
arms control being dismantled.
We believe that any action that seeks to interfere
in the domestic affairs of States for the purpose
of overthrowing their legitimate Governments is
unacceptable. We oppose the use of unilateral coercive
measures in the absence of the corresponding Security
Council resolutions or in addition to measures taken by
the Council, which undermines the role of the Council
in the maintenance of international peace and security
and is incompatible with the Charter and universally
recognized principles of international law, including
the peaceful settlement of international disputes, the
sovereign equality of States and non-interference in
their domestic affairs.
For many years now, the distortion of the norms of
international law and mindless intervention have caused
more suffering in the Middle East and North Africa
than in other regions. The lack of a settlement in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the illegal intervention in
Iraq, endless violence in Afghanistan, the murder of the
leader of Libya and destruction of the country, attempts
to overthrow the legitimate authorities of Syria and the
extrajudicial killing of an official of a sovereign State
in a third country are but a few examples of actions
that have left wounds on the body of international law
and order.
The quintessence of those regrettable developments
was the withdrawal of the United States from the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear
programme, which was approved by the Security Council
and is of key importance to nuclear non-proliferation.
As a result of increasing confrontation, the region and,
indeed, the entire world are on the brink of a conflict
whose consequences are unpredictable. We call for an
immediate de-escalation. The risk of conflict is too
great and the price too high.
20/65

09/01/2020

We must also note one more violation of and
non-compliance with international law and its
unconditional obligations by the host country of the
Headquarters of the United Nations. We have been
talking about this issue for a long time. The most recent
example of this artificial crisis was the denial of a visa
to Iran’s Foreign Minister, Mohammed Javad Zarif,
who was supposed to speak at today’s meeting.
The Russian Federation believes that strict
compliance with the United Nations Charter is the only
way to preserve peace. In that regard, we there is no
alternative to maintaining and strengthening a system
of international relations, based on the United Nations
Charter and the universally recognized principles and
norms of international law derived from it. Despite
all the complexities and contradictions in the modern
world, for us and for the majority of countries the United
Nations remains the backbone of international relations
and the legitimate universal tool that lets us collectively
search for responses to crises and challenges. It has a
unique mandate for addressing key international issues
and maintaining international peace and security and
we will continue to uphold it.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to have you here in
New York, Mr. President.
We thank Secretary-General António Guterres for
his important contribution and Mrs. Robinson for her
inspiring words. Similarly, we welcome the many highlevel representatives who have honoured us with their
presence at today’s meeting.
It is fitting that we meet here today to commemorate
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of
the United Nations and discuss the importance of
addressing ongoing challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security, as required by the
world in which we live. It is precisely when tensions run
high that respect for the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations becomes more essential and mandatory
than ever.
The Charter of the United Nations is far from being
a mere document with guidelines on international law.
This document serves as an indispensable guide for all
nations on the path to the same destination — that of
peace. It goes above and beyond Government mandates
and State matters. The main objective of the Charter of
the United Nations is to safeguard the dignity of human
beings through the maintenance of international peace
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

and security. Upholding its provisions is therefore not
a superfluous matter. On the contrary, it is a matter of
humanity and dignity, for which we are all responsible.
The Dominican Republic is honoured to have signed
the Charter of the United Nations and reaffirms, here
in the Chamber today, its commitment to defending,
promoting and respecting it. We, the peoples of the
United Nations, are called upon to uphold the Charter
in order to protect present and future generations
from the scourge of war. Preserving peace is essential
to building just and inclusive societies that provide
opportunities for people to develop in freedom and
where their human rights are guaranteed and economic
growth and political stability are ensured.
The Dominican Republic would like to emphasize
the importance of promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes within the framework of multilateralism
as a mechanism for conflict prevention, while taking
into account the various tools that the Charter places
at the disposal of States for that very purpose. We
urge the international community to have faith in the
power of dialogue and compromise to resolve disputes,
while preserving peace and security throughout the
world as the guiding principle, above any dispute and
particular interest.
In addition, we stress the need to continue
working to strengthen the culture of peace. Present
and future generations must view peace as the natural
order of things and conflict as an isolated event.
The development of a culture of peace through the
promotion of the Charter is a useful preventive tool that
can be realistically implemented by States, with the
cooperation of the regional and subregional bodies of
this consortium of nations.
The United Nations is the home of all nations,
where conflicts must be prevented and resolved to
bring to our peoples the hope of a future free from war.
It is here that we all have a common stepping stone for
building a better world. The Charter is our manual for
peaceful coexistence; let us continue to defend, respect
and promote it.
Allow me to conclude by recalling the words
of the Dominican humanist of continental renown,
Pedro Henríquez Ureña, who noted that the ideal of
civilization is not the complete unification of all men
and all countries but rather the harmonious preservation
of their differences.

S/PV. 8699

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Viet Nam for organizing
this debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and
Mrs. Mary Robinson for their inspiring presentations.
As many have recalled before me, 75 years ago our
Organization rose from the ashes of two world wars.
Carried by the shared memory of unspeakable horror,
the framers of the Charter of the United Nations wanted
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Today we must reaffirm this objective, but also reflect
on the major principles of international relations,
the most important of which is multilateralism. It
is an indispensable factor of international stability,
democracy and prosperity and is at the heart of
the Charter.
For Belgium, this week more than ever,
multilateralism is not limited to fine words during
the ministerial week of the General Assembly.
Multilateralism must translate day in and day out into
concrete actions, making use of the institutions created
under the Charter. In my country’s view, the role of the
Security Council is therefore paramount when there is
a threat to international peace and security.
In 1945, 51 of us signed the Charter and joined
the new Organization. Our United Nations family has
since almost quadrupled. Joining that family, however,
means accepting obligations for the benefit of a
higher purpose. In recent decades, we have developed
new means of implementing the Charter, including
international criminal courts, stronger mandates for
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians and the
imposition of targeted sanctions. Let us also mention
the efforts of the Secretary-General, who, through
his good offices, facilitates the peaceful settlement
of conflicts. Similarly, regional organizations play an
indispensable role, which has, moreover, continued
to grow, particularly in the areas of prevention and
early warning.
Yet we have not been able to protect all populations
from the scourge of war. A glance at the world map is
enough to see how fragile peace is. In addition, new
challenges are testing our resilience as an international
community, such as the multiplication of non-State
actors that threaten our security, the risk of an arms
race, and climate change and its impact on security.
To respond to those challenges, we need to make the
system we have created more operational. There are a
number of concrete initiatives aiming to achieve that.

20-0067621/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

The fight against war crimes, crimes against
humanity and crimes of genocide is the primary
responsibility of each State. However, the Security
Council also has a responsibility to act in a timely
manner, such as by referring to the International
Criminal Court a situation in which one or more of
those crimes appears to have been committed. Despite
the tools and means at our disposal, we often react too
slowly, sometimes too late. We have been slow to agree
on how to interpret the warning signs of a crisis, such
as massive human rights violations, and how to mount
a collective response.
The Charter also affirms the primacy of the
prevention and peaceful settlement of conflicts. The
International Court of Justice plays a crucial role in that
regard, in particular through its advisory opinions. The
Court will be fully effective, however, only if all States
accept its compulsory jurisdiction.
Finally, in Belgium’s opinion, reforms are needed
to strengthen the legitimacy, representativeness and
effectiveness of the Council. That is why we fully support
the code of conduct drawn up by the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group and the initiative
of France and Mexico to regulate the right of veto. In
particular, we cannot ignore the principle of the rule
of law in our own procedures and working methods.
To be consistent, the Security Council must guarantee
individuals the right to due process and to fair and clear
sanctions procedures.

09/01/2020

Those notions fundamental to American democracy
have gained broad acceptance over time.
We are proud to have played a foundational role in
the birth of this institution and to support the values
that inform its central tenets. The Charter reflects a
commitment to multilateralism that respects national
sovereignty by creating space for sovereign nations to
gather and deliberate, and the founding members of
the United Nations endeavoured to help us overcome
disagreements and achieve greater peace and security
for the human family.
Unfortunately, to echo a question raised last year
by Secretary of State Pompeo, we must ask ourselves
today: Does the United Nations continue to serve its
mission faithfully? As I remarked frequently during
the United States presidency of the Security Council
last month, the Security Council must acknowledge
that inaction, repetition and intransigence have created
a credibility gap. As the body with the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security, the Security Council needs to recapture its
sense of unity and purpose.

Mrs. Craft (United States of America): We are
very glad that you are with us today, Mr. President, and
the United States appreciates that the signature event of
Viet Nam’s Security Council presidency is focused on
the enduring importance of the Charter of the United
Nations. We also thank Secretary-General António
Guterres and the Chair of The Elders, Mary Robinson,
for her remarks.

Therefore, as we approach the seventy-fifth
anniversary, we should stand together to reaffirm
our commitment to uphold the core principles of the
Charter. The United States is a proud leader, partner
and host country of the United Nations, and we are
firmly committed to those principles. Members should
note, however, that reaffirming a commitment to the
Charter means to take seriously our responsibility to
act, not merely to talk, and to abide by the principles
of the Charter, not merely to profess support for them.
On far too many occasions, we have seen nations
that are parties to the Charter suppress human rights,
undermine the sovereignty of their neighbours, harm
their own citizens and even deny the right of other
nations to exist. That kind of hypocrisy is deeply
damaging to the credibility of the United Nations, as a
whole, and to this organ, specifically. The eyes of the
world will be on the United Nations during its seventyfifth anniversary — therefore, there is an especially
urgent need to bolster the Council’s credibility.

Seventy-five years ago, the nations of the world
came together to draft a charter meant to stand the test
of time. Today we recognize the enduring importance
of the Charter precisely because it is built on our faith
in fundamental freedom and human rights, the dignity
and worth of every individual and equal rights for all.

Through focused and sustained action, the Council
can continue to promote accountability in places like
Syria — seeking to ensure, among other objectives,
that those who use chemical weapons against their
own people are held responsible, that those who force
thousands of residents to flee their own countries are

In conclusion, as a founding Member of the United
Nations, Belgium remains committed to the Charter — to
its letter but above all to its spirit — and our wish is to
translate that commitment into concrete action.

22/65

20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

held to account and that those who threaten the world
with nuclear weapons are stopped. That work takes
time, focus and commitment, but it is essential. The
United States will continue to lead on those issues,
seeking close partnerships within the Council and in
the broader United Nations community.
We also recognize the need to reform many parts
of the United Nations to ensure that it effectively and
efficiently delivers on the mandate of the Charter. United
Nations reform remains a top United States priority, as
its full realization will ensure that the Organization is
fit for purpose across the three vital pillars of peace and
security, development and management.
By reaffirming our commitment to upholding the
United Nations Charter, we can send an important
signal to the world — that we maintain the same faith in
human rights and human equality as those who signed
the Charter in 1945 and that we will continue to act
on that faith in hopes of bringing greater peace and
security to all people. I hope that each of my colleagues
will join with us in reaffirming that commitment in
both word and deed.
I would now like to address recent events that
are connected to our discussion of the importance of
upholding the United Nations Charter. Last week, the
United States took defensive military action against
Iranian threats. President Trump’s decision was in
direct response to an escalating series of armed attacks
in recent months by Iran and Iranian-supported militias
on United States forces and interests in the region.
Those attacks are detailed in the letter we submitted
yesterday, pursuant to Article 51 of the Charter. That
decision was not taken lightly. For years, Iran and
Iranian-supported militias in the region have threatened
the lives of Americans and have shown unyielding
contempt for the authority of the United Nations.
President Trump has made clear that his highest
and most solemn duty is the defence of our nation and
its citizens. Therefore, we will act decisively in the
exercise of our inherent right of self-defence to protect
Americans when necessary, as is recognized under the
Charter. As President Trump made clear in remarks
delivered yesterday, we want a future — a great
future — for Iran. It is a future that the people of Iran
deserve, one of prosperity at home and harmony with
the nations of the world. Today, therefore, I want to
reiterate that the United States is ready to work towards
that end and to embrace all those people who join us

S/PV. 8699

in seeking it. Moving forward, we hope to find willing
partners in that work.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to apologize on behalf our minister,
who, due to time constraints, was unable to travel to
New York to attend this important debate.
On behalf of the Government of the Niger, I would
also like to once again congratulate the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam on its election to the Security
Council, a mandate begun with the great responsibility
of presiding over the Council for the month of January.
I also congratulate Estonia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and Tunisia, on their election as new
members of the Council, along with my country,
the Niger.
Finally, I would like to express my sincere gratitude
to Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing
and his ongoing commitment to the ideals enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations and thereby to
international peace and security.
The President has convened this debate on the
theme “Respect for the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations as soon as key element for
the maintenance of international peace and security”, a
theme whose relevance need not be demonstrated, as it
invokes the fundamental objectives of our Organization.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations in 2020, this debate is an opportunity
to remember our priorities in the face of the many
crises and challenges all over the world and to propose
appropriate mechanisms to address them. It is therefore
to your credit, Mr. President, that you have placed the
Charter at the centre of our concern.
This debate gives us the opportunity to renew our
commitment to multilateralism in the pursuit of the
noble objectives that we set ourselves 75 years ago and
to more effectively take into account certain imperatives
in the implementation of the Charter in order to prevent
the recurrence of the tragedies that led to the creation
of the United Nations in 1945.
Fortunately, despite the frequent crises which have
broken out in a number of regions, we have generally
been able to maintain international peace and security
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter — although we have not been able to take
effective collective measures to prevent and remove
threats to peace and to suppress acts of aggression or

20-0067623/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

other breaches of the peace, as provided by the purposes
and principles of the Charter.
In the 75 years since San Francisco, the end of the
great wars has not been synonymous with the restoration
of peace in the world. On the contrary, conflicts of
varying intensity have been compounded by threats
of a new kind, such as terrorism, cybercrime, serious
epidemics and the harmful effects of climate change,
to name but a few. In addition to the colossal number
of human casualties they have caused, those threats
have inflicted untold suffering on civilian populations,
especially women and children, throughout the world.
They have also generated massive displacements
of people at a level rarely equalled in the history of
humankind and have generated waves of migration
whose tragic consequences are all too well known.
Terrorism has become one of the worst threats to
international peace and security today. It deserves our
special attention because, in addition to taking lives, it
undermines the very foundations of nation States. That
is particularly true in my region — the Sahel — which,
in recent years, has seen terrorist groups use asymmetric
warfare to kill innocent civilians, stir up intercommunal
conflicts and no longer even hesitate to attack the
defence and security forces of States head-on.
In this arena and in others, the international
community should show solidarity. That is particularly
true of the Security Council, which, pursuant to the
Charter, has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. As we meet today, a
Nigerien military camp 40 kilometres from the Malian
border is being attacked by terrorist hordes.
Chapter I of the Charter, containing the principles
on which multilateralism is based and to which my
country is firmly committed, calls upon Member States
to promote collective measures to prevent and remove
threats to peace and to respect the sovereign equality
of Member States. As the President of the Republic of
the Niger, His Excellency Mahamadou Issoufou, said
in his address to the General Assembly at its seventyfourth session,
“multilateralism has made progress only in the
wake of bloody conflicts, as was the case with
the treaties of Westphalia, in 1648, and the Treaty
of Vienna, which founded the European orders
that succeeded the Thirty Years’ War, the Eighty
Years’ War and the Napoleonic wars, respectively.
The same was true of the attempt to establish the
24/65

09/01/2020

League of Nations after the First World War and the
creation of the United Nations following the Second
World War. Each time, the objective was to create
rules and institutions capable of establishing an
order that was conducive to peaceful international
relations and governed by the rule of law and that
could enable us to emerge out of a state of nature in
which every State had absolute freedom to resort to
force” (A/74/PV.4, p. 11).
In its Preamble, the Charter of the United Nations
quite rightly recalls the need to spare succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. We must therefore
not forget the teachings of history. The complex nature
of international relations makes multilateralism even
more necessary today in an increasingly globalized
world in which States are increasingly interdependent.
In conclusion, I would thank Viet Nam once again
for having made the wise choice of the theme of today’s
debate and also paraphrase my President by saying
that the world needs governing institutions. While it is
true that national interests govern the foreign policies
of States, these national interests are better defended
through cooperation rather than through confrontation.
My country, the Niger, remains committed to the
principles and ideals of the Charter of the United
Nations and, along with other Members, it will continue
to defend those
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with longer statements are kindly requested
to circulate the text in writing and to deliver a condensed
version when speaking in the Chamber. I wish to inform
all concerned that we will suspend this open debate at 1
p.m. and resume it at 3 p.m.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): First of all, I should like
to commend our friends from Viet Nam for having
made the wise decision to put this issue on the agenda
at this time, although, dear Sir, when you decided to
hold this open debate based on this topic, you might not
have been aware of the importance of that decision. I
congratulate you on having taken over the presidency,
and I wish you the best of luck in this regard.
As the Council is aware, I am representing a
small — or, if I had more self-confidence, I would say
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8699

midsize central European country — whose history is
replete with instances of being occupied and oppressed
by foreign Powers and dictatorships. We therefore always
had to fight for our own freedom and sovereignty, which
we gained only 30 years ago. So it is understandable
that country with a history like Hungary’s would highly
value the existence of the United Nations and consider
it as the most important international organization in
ensuring peace and security.

threats that migration poses to countries of destination
and transit.

I want to express how warmly we welcome the
membership of Estonia in the Security Council, whose
candidature we supported given the fact that they
are freedom fighters, as we are. We encourage it to
represent the interests of the small, freedom-loving
central European countries in an appropriate manner,
but I am fairly sure it is going to do so.

The third aspect of importance to us is that the
number of countries possessing nuclear weapons must
not increase. We consider proliferation as a global
security challenge. There are international rules and
regulations that set out the number and list of countries
that have nuclear weapons, and we definitely do not
want to see the number of such countries increase. We
believe that in future greater emphasis should be placed
on non-proliferation, arms control and disarmament in
order to prevent a new nuclear arms race.

I think that this is the right place to express our
deep concern at the recent developments in the Middle
East. We have learned the lesson in recent years that the
security situation in the Middle East and the security
situation in Europe have a very, very strong correlation
and that whatever happens in the Middle East has a
direct security impact on the European continent. We are
therefore strongly interested in seeing a de-escalation
of the situation and consider dialogue and diplomatic
efforts more important than ever before. We are fairly
sure that without all these, the situation will definitely
get worse and worse. We urge the United Nations, and
the Security Council itself, to fulfil its mission and take
all the measures necessary to maintain international
peace and security.
The United Nations Charter was signed 75 years
ago, so it is time to take it seriously and apply it properly.
I wish to highlight three specific aspects of importance
to Hungary in this regard.
First, Europeans have had bad experiences recently
in the form of massive flows of illegal migration, which
constitute a serious security threat, contrary to what
is suggested by the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration. We know full well that another
crisis in the Middle East would immediately cause
additional migratory pressure on Europe, a phenomenon
that we definitely want to avert, because the migratory
waves that have taken place so far have resulted in an
increasing threat of terror for the European Union. I
think, therefore, that this would be the right time for the
United Nations to recognize the danger and the security

The second aspect we would stress is that the fight
against terror must be continued. We consider the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) to be a global
threat to peace and security. We commend the United
States, which leads the international coalition against
ISIS, and are a proud member of that coalition, with
200 troops on the ground.

In conclusion, we Hungarians are committed to
strengthening the role of the United Nations given the
fact that we are experiencing quick changes and the
creation of a new world order, which could result in
continual security challenges. Such challenges should
be addressed according to the principles laid down in
the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: I call on the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste.
Mr. Soares (Timor-Leste): Let me begin by
congratulating the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on
its leadership as the President of the Security Council
for the month of January 2020 and further expressing to
it our sincere gratitude for having invited Timor-Leste
to deliver a speech before this body. I wish to also thank
Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders,
for their briefings.
Over the years, through the promotion of
international cooperation, we have witnessed and
experienced some progress in social and economic
development. Yet we are still far from having achieved
sustainable and equitable development and delivering
on the promise of the inclusive, just and peaceful
societies highlighted in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Evident challenges, ranging from violent
extremism, financial crises, transnational crime and
global poverty to environmental degradation, unilateral

20-0067625/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

foreign intervention and occupation, continue to pose
threats to international peace and security, human
dignity, and, above all, are serious threats to our
common existence as nations.
As a country that hosted successive United Nations
missions from 1999 to 2012, Timor-Leste has a history
that is forever intertwined with that of the Council.
Timor-Leste is an example of what can be achieved
when the Council unites around the common purpose
of upholding international peace and security. Our
experience leads us to believe that global challenges
and tensions can be addressed and prevented only
through multilateralism, based on a spirit of solidarity
and inclusivity and in a partnership aimed at upholding
fundamental human rights and human dignity, and to
that end the Security Council has a fundamental role.
Timor-Leste is committed to supporting global
efforts to uphold the United Nations Charter and related
international laws and norms. Our recent conclusion of
a maritime boundary treaty with Australia, through
the use of the special conciliation mechanism under
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
reaffirms our belief in the international rules-based
order and in the United Nations as the appropriate
platform to resolve conflicts.
We are witnessing the rise of conflicts around the
globe, which continue to pose both conventional and
non-conventional threats to global security. Climate
change, the drug trade, people-smuggling, trafficking
in persons and related transnational crimes, as well as
extremism, radicalism and terrorism, know no borders.
It is no longer the problem of any individual Member
State. They have become threats to everyone. We all
know well the connection between poverty and rising
inequalities, weak State institutions and the lack of
political will to act, on the one hand, and the rise of
those threats, on the other. In this context, the authority
of the Council and of permanent and non-permanent
members alike is called upon and critically needed to
properly respond to these threats to global peace and
stability, fulfil its mandate and uphold the Charter.
Timor-Leste is of the view that through genuine and
constructive cooperation at both the regional and the
global levels, as well as through integrated measures,
we can tackle and address the root causes of these
global challenges accordingly. In the context of the
United Nations, it is imperative for all organs within
the Organization to strengthen their work and engage
26/65

09/01/2020

in a coherent and complementary manner. We must
ensure that our actions contribute to fulfilling each of
the intended mandates of the principal organs of the
United Nations and do not undermine the importance
of multilateralism.
In this respect, and as we commemorate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we
urge all Member States to recommit to the purpose
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
along with the international laws and norms. We urge
in particular the major Powers to lead by example on
how to align decisions and actions on international
security matters with the Charter and to ensure that
actions taken will not contravene and undermine
the purpose and principles of the Charter of this
multilateral Organization.
While the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations is undoubtedly a moment of celebration of all
that has been achieved by the Organization, including
the Security Council’s role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is also an important
moment for reflection. For Timor-Leste, whose future
was decided through a Council-mandated mission that
organized a referendum, we reflect on why the Council
mandate for a referendum for the people of Western
Sahara has not been fulfilled. I make the same call for
attention to the issue of Palestine.
Timor-Leste’s Constitution enshrines the principles
of self-determination, respect for territorial integrity,
non-interference and collective security, and a just
and equitable world for all peoples and nations. We
also strongly believe in the settlement of disputes
through peaceful means, based on international laws
and norms. Unilateral coercive measures against any
State undermine the spirit of the Charter and do not
contribute to solutions.
Our recent history makes us firm believers in the
power of the Security Council and its role in upholding
international peace and security. However, we are also
conscious that the world today is very different from
the world that gave rise to the United Nations. Thanks
to the promise of the Charter, we who were once
colonized have joined the international community as
independent and sovereign States and are today proud
Members of the United Nations, joined together in
finding collective solutions to global challenges. The
composition and work of the Council can be more
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

effective if it is able to effectively reflect change and
address the rising challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs for Nicaragua.
Mr. Moncada Colindres (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): I should like to congratulate the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council. We warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam and thank him
for having organized this meeting on the defence of the
Charter of the United Nations.
We welcome the presence of Secretary-General
António Guterres; Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed Yusuf,
President of the International Court of Justice;
and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders, an
independent group of world leaders working together
for peace, justice and rights humans.
Nicaragua associates itself with the statement
to be made by the representative of the Republic of
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
This meeting represents an historic opportunity
that allows us to reflect on, reaffirm and defend the
commitment of States to the validity of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of its
foundation. Recent world events confirm that we are
on the edge of the critical limits of civilization and that
the long-sought peace among States and peoples is in a
state of dangerous and growing insecurity due to State
terrorism, aggression to sovereignty and violations of
international law.
Today as yesterday, we peace-loving peoples
always reject the language of aggression and war. No
State can resort to the use or threat of use of force in
international relations. Such exceptionalist policies
in violation of international law do not help resolve
conflicts peacefully; on the contrary, they aggravate
and subject the international situation to further stress.

S/PV. 8699

constitutional order and leading to widespread
violence, and at orchestrating coups d’état to overthrow
legitimate Governments elected by the people. That
reaffirms the premise of the concept note (S/2020/1,
annex) prepared by the presidency of the Council,
namely, that, when the purposes and the principles of
the Charter are applied, humankind and peace reap the
benefits, whereas, when they are violated, we put them
at serious risk. As we yearn for peace and believe in the
prevention and resolution of disputes through peaceful
and inclusive means, we reject policies of aggressive
interference and the imposition of unilateral coercive
economic measures and sanctions in violation of
international law.
We reiterate that Latin America and the Caribbean
are a zone of peace, in which Nicaragua remains an
important agent for ensuring stability, peace and
security. We have based and will continue to base
our international relations on friendship, solidarity
and reciprocity among peoples. We condemn
State-sponsored terrorism and the violation of the
sovereignty of other countries and international law.
We recognize the principle of the peaceful settlement of
international disputes through recourse to international
law and the Charter. In that context, we attach particular
importance to the International Court of Justice, which
enjoys our full support and whose work contributes to
global security in promoting the peaceful settlement
of disputes.
The United Nations must assume its historical
role in promoting respect, understanding, security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity, while working on
an equal playing field on which multilateralism and
the will of all men and women prevail. It is necessary
to promote a culture of peace, reject aggressive and
bellicose policies, war and confrontation, and reaffirm
the validity of the Charter, which has helped save the
world from another world war.

The vocation of peace and respect for the sovereign
equality of States and non-aggression obliges us to
resolve inter-State disputes through the provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and international law.

We express our concern and consternation in the
face of recent events that violate the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, including the selective
assassination of leaders of countries that are Members
of this Organization. Those illegal and unjustifiable
acts deepen the very serious situation facing peace and
security in the world.

On several occasions, Nicaragua has rejected
and condemned illegal actions aimed at changing
democratic Governments, thereby violating the

Nicaragua appeals to the international community
to comply with the aspirations that we set out for
ourselves 75 years ago to work together in solidarity,

20-0067627/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation and with respect for the Charter of the
United Nations to eradicate poverty and war. Those are
scourges that today constitute the greatest obstacles to
ensuring international peace, development and security,
which is the bedrock on which our Organization was
founded 75 years ago.
In conclusion, as we begin 2020, we wish to convey
a message from our Government of Reconciliation
and National Unity, presided over by Commander
Daniel Ortega Saavedra and our Vice-President
Rosario Murillo,
“From our Nicaragua, blessed and free forever, we
extend a greeting full of good will, with wishes for a
world based on dialogue, reason, peace and so much
more, in every respect, for all the Governments and
the peoples of the world. Humankind deserves the
greatest efforts and prayers to live with respect and
in understanding and peace”.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Worship of Haiti.
Mr. Edmond (Haiti) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to thank you very much,
Mr. President, for having kindly organized this open
debate as part of Viet Nam’s presidency of the Security
Council on an issue that is more timely than ever, that
is upholding the Charter of the United Nations for the
maintenance of international peace and security. I
would also like to commend the Vietnamese Permanent
Mission for the concept note (S/2020/1, annex) drawn up
for this meeting, which fortunately provides a valuable
framework to deepen our reflections on this topic.
This debate comes at a time of elevated tensions and
increasing concern in the Persian Gulf. In that regard,
I would be remiss if I did not associate myself with
the call for maximum restraint as made by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, with a view to avoiding
escalation, unnecessary destruction and suffering.
Our Organization, the fruit of a compromise
entered into in the wake of the Second World War,
has since shown itself capable of playing a crucial role
in the lives of all peoples and of resisting the myriad
challenges that we have faced over time. Initially
conceived by some 50 States, including the Republic
of Haiti, our Organization today has 193 Members with
a considerable broadening in its purview over recent
decades, which certainly testifies to the relevance and
deep importance of its Charter.
28/65

09/01/2020

For the peoples of the United Nations it has been
first been a matter of ensuring that we have the means
for collective and appropriate action in order, inter
alia, to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, which twice within one lifetime brought untold
suffering upon humankind. To reach that ambitious
objective, the founding fathers of the Organization
defined a range of purposes and principles in Articles 1
and 2 of the Charter, which constitute a true legal basis
for the multilateral system.
Furthermore, in the declaration of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at
the national and international levels, the States Members
of our Organization renewed their commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and justice, as well as to
an international order based on the rule of law, which
represents the essential underpinning for a more
peaceful, prosperous and just world. They affirmed that
they were
“determined to establish a just and lasting peace
all over the world, in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.”
(resolution 67/1, para. 3)
In other words, the Charter of the United Nations
holds a central place in international life. This
instrument makes the Security Council an important
pillar in the architecture of the Organization, conferring
upon it the primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security.
On the eve of the celebration of the seventy-fifth
anniversary of the United Nations, we reflect back
with satisfaction on the road that we have travelled
since 1945, although much remains to be done to raise
our Organization to meet the ideals of its founding
fathers. The scrupulous observance of the Charter of
the Organization will certainly contribute to develop a
multilateralism that is more conducive to international
peace and security. We must therefore fight relentlessly
and with all our strength to safeguard all the gains made,
while respecting the spirit and the letter of the Charter.
Tangible and irrefutable progress has been made in
a number of areas, particularly in the contribution to
decolonization, economic assistance, human rights and
even the codification of international law. With regard
to disarmament and the maintenance of international
peace and security, we still need to step up our
collective efforts. Today we must jointly and resolutely
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

address major challenges, such as the complex
problems of terrorism, transnational organized crime,
drugs, inequality, refugees, abject poverty and climate
change, to mention just a few.
The reform of our Organization, which must take
into account current and emerging challenges, remains
a pressing need. My country welcomes all the efforts
made to achieve a reform that holds out hope for peace,
justice and development for all, and will continue to
make an active contribution in that regard.
In conclusion, allow me to briefly mention the
upcoming commemoration to mark 10 years since the
earthquake that ravaged my country on 12 January
2010, which claimed the lives of at least 220,000
people, including 102 members of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, as well as the appalling
material damage. I take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the memory of all those who perished in that tragedy.
The people and the Government of the Republic of Haiti
will never forget them.
This is also an opportunity for me to reiterate to
the Council the readiness of the President of Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse, to make a lasting
commitment in the country to the path towards genuine
reconstruction. The holding of an inclusive national
dialogue conducive to peaceful political, economic
and social governance that respects the provisions of
the Constitution of Republic will be a sine qua non for
the work of our country’s President in future. In that
regard, it is my fervent wish that the United Nations,
in accordance with the provisions of its Charter, will
continue to play an important role in our country,
including through the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti, established pursuant to resolution 2476 (2019).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your country’s membership
of the Security Council and its presidency for the
current month. It is no small feat, by any account. I
am sure Viet Nam will excel in shouldering that
important responsibility.
At this point, I would like to make the following
statement on behalf of Canada, Germany, Sweden
and Ukraine.
We thank all who expressed their condolences in
connection with the crash of the Ukraine International

S/PV. 8699

Airlines passenger aircraft near Tehran International
Airport. We are grateful for the words of support to
the families and loved ones of the victims of the tragic
catastrophe. One hundred and seventy-six innocent lives
were lost — citizens of Iran, Canada, Ukraine, Sweden,
Afghanistan, Germany and the United Kingdom. The
circumstances surrounding the catastrophe are still
unclear. It is now up to the experts to investigate it
and to find answers to the question of what caused the
crash. To do so, our experts must receive unconditional
support for their investigation into the incident.
That brings me to the end of my statement on
that matter.
Before proceeding, I would like to put on record
that my delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.
We appreciate, Mr. President, your timely initiative
to launch the year marking the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations with a discussion on the importance
of upholding its founding document — the Charter of
the United Nations. Let us recall that, back in 1945, at
the San Francisco Conference, the very name of our
Organization was the subject of intellectual debate, in
particular with regard to the proposal by the prominent
United States President Franklin Delano Roosevelt to
name it the United Nations. It is interesting that those
countries that opposed that name were afraid that there
might be a conflict among the nations in the future
and that the name — the United Nations — would not
correspond to reality.
I wish to repeat the response of the Ukrainian
representative to those concerns in San Francisco.
“The delegation of Ukraine believes that one should
not have such a pessimistic outlook on the future
of our Organization. It should be constructed in a
way that would avoid the possibility of a division or
conflict among nations”.
He also insisted that every nation that would become a
member of the Organization would have to fully share
the principles that united the nations during the war and
fight for them. Today, I fully subscribe to the words
spoken by the representative of Ukraine in 1945.
Yet, today, 75 years later, as a representative of the
country that fought for the name of the United Nations
and appealed for optimism and as a representative of
the country that is the victim of an ongoing armed
aggression on the part of a permanent member of the

20-0067629/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

Security Council, can I say that we made the right choice
and fulfilled the aspirations of the founding fathers and
mothers, as one delegate put it, of the United Nations?
Indeed, there is no unity among nations. There are
ongoing wars among the Members of the United Nations
and old and new democracies work hard to ensure
unity at the national level — based on democracy,
human rights, rule of law and social cohesion. That key
message is consistently promoted by my own President,
Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
Since 1945, there have been very many Security
Council meetings, other events dedicated to the United
Nations Charter and anniversaries of all kinds. Let us
recall the Security Council summit held in January
1992. If you read its 146 pages of verbatim records,
members will see how good the speechwriters of all
the Heads of State and Government who took part in
it were. Members will see how euphonic and saturated
with ideas the speeches were — although, rather
amusingly, they occasionally departed from reality.
As we approach another milestone, we view Viet
Nam’s initiate to convene today’s meeting as a useful
opportunity to take stock of how the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter are being
honoured or not. Today’s meeting also takes place
against the background of escalating regional conflicts
and the ongoing war between United Nations Members
in Europe.
One thought I would like to share with those present
is that among the dozens of statements on the United
Nations Charter that I have read, there are several, to
which I myself would subscribe. Those statements,
with all the right words, glorify the supremacy of
international law and the triumph of the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter — except
for one thing — they were made by those who, upon
obtaining permanent membership of the Security
Council and joining the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe,
unleashed, in this century, more than one war against
their immediate neighbours. Therefore, let us not judge
them by the ornate style of their statements but by
their concrete deeds and compliance with the United
Nations Charter.
Despite the fact that the drafters of the Charter
envisioned, in Article 27, the intent to remove the
prospect of a Council member casting a vote when a
conflict of interest was clearly present, that integral
30/65

09/01/2020

part of the Charter is often overlooked for the sake
of political expediency. We regret that, under such
circumstances, the Council was unable to take action
on Ukraine’s request in 2015 regarding the deployment
of a robust United Nations-mandated multinational
peacekeeping force in occupied Donbas. After a couple
of years of inaction, the Russian Federation expressed
doubt that such a request had even been made.
Let me remind those present that two years later,
when the Russian Federation put forward its own
proposal, we provided our partners in the Security
Council with Ukraine’s vision of the major elements of
the mandate of a possible peacekeeping operation. Now,
five years later, President Zelenskyy of Ukraine points
to the importance of the deployment of peacekeepers
along the Ukrainian-Russian border.
Certainly, the quality of work of the Security
Council largely depends on the quality of its
membership. At this point, I wish to commend the
work of those non-permanent members who have
left the Council upon completion of their two-year
term. Our good friend and neighbour, Poland, which
contributed significantly to the Council’s activities,
will be particularly missed by us. We trust that the new
non-permanent members will be fully dedicated to the
fulfilment of their important mission.
I come to this anniversary not to speak of futility or
failure nor of doubt and despair. I come to raise a voice
of confidence in both the future of the United Nations
and the fate of the human race. Those are not my words.
They belong to the Head of State who spoke them at
the meeting dedicated to the twentieth anniversary of
the United Nations Charter in 1965, during a major
regional conflict.
Let me express the hope that by the time of the
formal anniversary events in October, we will all,
as truly united nations, by our actions — not our
words — and by stopping ongoing military aggression
and de-escalating regional conflicts, have the moral
right to joyfully celebrate rather than sombrely mark
yet another anniversary of the Organization, which was
created by the people and for the people. The famous
opening words of the United Nations Charter begin
“We the peoples of the United Nations ...”. We must do
our utmost not to fail our peoples.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Amolo (Kenya): Kenya is delighted to see the
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, His Excellency
Mr. Pham Binh Minh, preside this historic session.
Kenya warmly congratulates Viet Nam for three things:
its election to the Security Council; its accession to the
presidency of the Security Council as we enter the third
decade of the twenty-first century; and its accession to
the presidency of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, following the sterling stewardship of its
predecessor, the Kingdom of Thailand.
I also bring special warm greetings from his
colleague and friend, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Monica Juma. She fondly recalls a successful visit to
his great country not two months ago. We commend
Viet Nam for timing this debate to mark the end of
a turbulent decade and to spark a reflection on the
direction humankind should take in the next.
By reviewing our contract with this body and in
particular with the Charter of the United Nations,
we hope we can recommit and rededicate ourselves
to the letter and spirit of the Charter, underpinned
by international rule of law and buttressed by robust
multilateralism, so that all voices are heard on the
world stage and the toolkit available to resolve the
world’s challenges reflects the complexity and diversity
of humankind.
The insightful statements by the Secretary-General
and Chair of The Elders Mary Robinson enrich our
common understanding of the myriad challenges and
clarify the importance of approaching solutions in a
collaborative, coordinated and respectful manner.
Seventy-five years ago, the hopes and dreams
of humankind, left in tatters by another devastating
war, were renewed, rekindled and revalidated by
the establishment of this body, the United Nations
Organization, which was witnessed by 51 States, and
by the reaffirmation of its raison d’être as enshrined
in the seminal contract with all people, the United
Nations Charter.
They came together in recognition that no single
nation could solve the world’s problems alone. Today,
with 193 Member States, the importance of that reality
demands that we not only further identify, minimize and
eliminate the risks and threats strewn on our common
path but also grasp and exploit the many opportunities
that innovation, technology and cooperation can offer
to solve many of those problems.

S/PV. 8699

The spirit of democracy that underpinned
humankind’s desire to codify and secure a milieu
based on international law needs to be revisited and
entrenched. Looking back, it is commendable how
the Charter facilitated, through the establishment of
the various organs, the delivery of that promise in a
holistic way. The Charter had the foresight to link and
address in a structured manner the social, political and
economic problems threatening international peace
and security and asserted equal rights for all. The
United Nations Charter’s intrinsic value in defining
the peace and security architecture of the world was
to assert the concept of collective security, whereby
all of humankind, on equal, democratic footing, would
govern the commons.
Seventy-five years ago, only a handful of us
were free. Today, close to 200 are politically free. It
is inevitable, then, that the organs that manage this
architecture must also expand their representative
structure and democratize their decision-making to
reflect the geographic and demographic spread that is
our United Nations today.
Although regional representation is not specifically
addressed in the United Nations Charter, we join all
other Africans in asserting that the time has come
to make that happen. We have to ensure equitable
geographic representation in the Security Council in
both the permanent and non-permanent categories.
Africa remains the only region not represented in the
Council in the permanent category. That must change.
The Charter bequeathed us a tool to facilitate the
prevention of war. It recommends that solutions to any
dispute be made, first and foremost, through negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration and judicial
settlement, among others. Inspired by that ethos, Kenya
has distilled and seeks to capture the letter and spirit of
the Charter and the aspirations of the United Nations in
a 10-point agenda for its Security Council campaign.
The agenda underscores the critical nexus between
peace, security and development and its first plank is
building bridges. Kenya is dedicated and committed to
building bridges and to working closely together with
the entire United Nations membership to advance our
aspirations in an inclusive, responsive and consultative
manner so that the Council can work for all.
We seek to enhance the peacekeeping and
support operations plank in our agenda. In our close
to six-decade existence, Kenya has contributed

20-0067631/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

more than 40,000 troops in over 40 countries. We
will continue to work with the United Nations and
other Member States to enhance the capacity of the
Nairobi-based International Peace Support Training
Centre, a humanitarian peace support school. Eminent
innovations to deal with asymmetric and emerging
threats, such as the Counter Improvised Explosive
Devices Centre of Excellence, are acceptable ways of
building capacity and ensuring excellence.
Our challenge is to find an efficient workable
balance between the pacific settlement of disputes
and provisions relating to actions in support of peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression, and the
involvement of regional arrangements and agencies.
That balance will ensure that peacekeeping mandates
also involve and provide for a transition to peacebuilding,
including efforts to ensure the sustainability of peace
and development, thus addressing threats to regional
and international peace and security. The Peacebuilding
Commission is an important intergovernmental
instrument that can support that objective.
As delineated in the Charter of the United Nations,
the Council carries the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We have witnessed the implications and effects
of dissonance within the Council on important
international peace and security questions and actions.
We have also witnessed the evolution of new weapons
of war and threats to peace, including violent extremism
and terrorism.
We listened with great anguish today as the Niger
spoke about challenges in the Sahel and the problems that
Nigeria and other African countries confront in the face
of this terrible phenomenon called terrorism. We will
continue to work with others to leverage our wealth of
experience in preventive diplomacy, conflict resolution,
building appropriate linkages for collaboration and
harmonized action within the Council.
The Charter calls on the General Assembly to work
in complementarity with the Security Council. Kenya
therefore welcomes a strengthened Security CouncilGeneral Assembly partnership and the cooperation
between the United Nations system and regional
organizations, including the African Union (AU), to
achieve peaceful settlements of disputes and maintain
international peace and security. The SecretaryGeneral’s specific mention of a scaled-up relationship
with the AU needs to be fast-tracked, and we anticipate
32/65

09/01/2020

that the three African members of the Security Council,
Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, will provide additional
traction for the achievement of that important objective.
The Trusteeship Council was set up in a specific
historical context to promote and protect the wellbeing and just treatment of colonized people. There are
still some non-self-governing territories. It will take
political will, trust, courage, the embrace of differences
and a change of mindset to ensure that we all respect
the principles of international law, equal rights and
self-determination of peoples, as well as the principles
of sovereignty, territorial integrity and the political
independence of all States Members, as laid out in the
United Nations Charter.
Kenya upholds and cherishes an ethos based on
the rule of law in managing our domestic affairs. We
leverage that ethos in our engagement in regional and
international relations. We remain true to processes
agreed in advance and uphold the integrity of our
subregional, regional and international organizations.
As Africa’s candidate for a Security Council seat
for the period 2021-2022, we congratulate the current
and immediate past African members of the Council.
The Organization and its membership can count on
Kenya’s integrity, dependability and cooperation to
deliver the best for humankind. More work still needs
to be done. The United Nations can count on Africa,
and the United Nations shall succeed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mrs. Kanchanalak (Thailand): I would like to
commend Viet Nam for holding this open debate,
which has come at a very timely moment when our
world is facing immensely sobering security challenges
everywhere, and most recently in the Middle East.
At the outset, Thailand wishes to associate itself
with the statements to be made by the representatives
of the Philippines, on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, and of Azerbaijan, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.
Today, the world’s security landscape bears no
resemblance to that of 1945, which was different from
that of 1920, when the League of Nations was created
after the First World War. What remains a constant is
us, the peoples, whose nature barely changes. That is
why, in order to move forward with our exercise, it is
important that we step back and understand history.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

As George Santayana wisely said, “Those who cannot
remember the past are condemned to repeat it”.
There are at least seven factors we should
keep in mind as we ponder the future relevance and
effectiveness of the Charter of the United Nations for
international peace and security. I shall be brief.

S/PV. 8699

with other United Nations bodies such as the Economic
and Social Council and its specialized agencies. This
engagement will make the Security Council’s efforts
and undertakings more relatable to those specific issues.

First, great Powers always write the rules and then
break them. They resort to multilateralism only when
it serves their first interest, which may or may not be
their best interest. And unilateralism seems to answer
to the first interest and the schadenfreude mindset
faster, unless there are consequences.

Thailand believes that a peaceful solution to any
conflict is not just the best option; it is the only option.
Let us join hands to uphold multilateral diplomacy and
use it to its best capacity. Through our firm commitment
to multilateral diplomacy and the agile application of
the United Nations Charter, this principle will continue
to guide us through this turbulent world and ensure that
it is not only the dead who have seen the end of war.

Second, when one nation is pushed against the
wall disproportionately, it will resort to any means, no
matter how short-sighted and dangerous, to get out of
the jam.

The President: There are still a number of speakers
remaining on my list for this meeting. I intend, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, to suspend
the meeting until 3 p.m.

Third, violence begets violence and good sense
gives way to fanaticism. It constitutes the race to the
bottom, where there is no winner.

The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m. and
resumed at 3.05 p.m.

Fourth, despite all the technological advancements
in communication tools brought to us by the fourth
industrial revolution, nothing can replace diplomacy
and dialogue, most importantly face-to-face.
Fifth, as wars become less conventional and
global conflicts have become multifaceted, preventive
measures and crisis management tools will have
to be recalibrated to be more adeptly effective
and consequential.
Sixth, the United Nations peace and security
endeavour will be greatly aided if it is carried out in
a concerted effort with regional cooperation. The
growth and expansion of regional organizations and
the proliferation of nuclear weapons have made such
collaboration a necessity.
Seventh, sanctions lead only to the suffering of
the people and rarely to regime change. It is therefore
an injustice to people who already suffer under a
given regime.
While the United Nations Charter remains
essential, we need to revitalize its tools in order to
effectively address the international peace and security
questions of the day. The tools at the disposal of the
Security Council are abundant, as outlined in Chapters
VI and VII of the Charter. Furthermore, given the
multidimensional nature of today’s challenges, it is
necessary for the Security Council to engage even more

The President: I propose that the Council invite the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to no more than four minutes in order to enable the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with longer statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to welcome
you, Mr. President, and congratulate Viet Nam on
commencing its term on the Security Council and for
assuming the presidency for this month.
At the outset, I would like to offer my condolences
to the families and friends of the victims of the tragic
aeroplane crash in Iran. I hope the circumstances of the
event are fully investigated.
The Charter of the United Nations continues to
provide an indispensable basis for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Seventy-five years
ago, the founders created a world body to prevent the
recurrence of devastating wars and establish a global
order for sustainable peace and prosperity based on the

20-0067633/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

principles and rules enshrined in the Charter. Those
aspirations remain relevant today, and upholding the
rules-based international order continues to be of
critical importance.
For the rules-based international order to be upheld,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance
with the rules, must be promoted and accepted. In that
context, Japan is following the recent escalation of
tensions in the Middle East with great concern. We urge
all parties to make their best efforts to peacefully settle
the issues. In coordination with relevant countries,
we will continue to pursue diplomatic efforts to ease
tensions and stabilize the situation in the Middle East
region. All unilateral attempt to change the status
quo by force or coercion should not be tolerated. As
a State surrounded by ocean, Japan is particularly
committed to upholding the rules-based maritime order
and the peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance
with international law, including the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
For the rules-based international order to be
upheld, agreed rules have to be observed. The States
Members of the United Nations confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Charter requires
that Member States accept and carry out the decisions
of the Council. It is therefore deeply regrettable that
some Member States fail to comply with Council
decisions. For instance, North Korea continues its
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, in violation
of many Security Council resolutions. I note that those
resolutions impose certain obligations on other Member
States as well. Japan calls upon all Member States to
fully implement the relevant resolutions.
For the rules-based international order to be upheld,
the international judicial system should be properly
developed and maintained. The Charter established the
International Court of Justice as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations. Being a proud advocate
of the Court, Japan has had the honour to contribute
to it by providing it highly qualified judges, as well as
financial support, and will continue to do so.
For the rules-based international order to be
upheld, due attention has to be paid to the evolution
of technology, such as in the cyber domain. In that
connection, Japan welcomes General Assembly
resolutions that call upon all Member States to be
guided by the reports of the Group of Governmental
34/65

09/01/2020

Experts, confirming the applicability of existing
international law, including the Charter in its entirety,
to this new domain.
For the rules-based international order to be
upheld, the world governing body must maintain its
effectiveness and legitimacy. The world has changed
dramatically during the past 75 years, and the United
Nations system must keep pace. The Security Council
must be reformed to better reflect the realities of the
contemporary world, where more Member States have
the willingness and capacity to contribute to maintaining
and restoring peace. Japan looks forward to tangible
progress in the long-overdue reform of the Council and
calls for the launch of text-based negotiations during
this session. I would also like to recall that certain
provisions of the Charter have already been declared
as obsolete by the General Assembly and should be
removed at the earliest opportunity.
For the rules-based international order to be
sustainable and effective in face of the increasingly
complex challenges of our time, it must reflect our
collective faith in the dignity and worth of the human
person, as enshrined in the Charter. We need to utilize a
human security lens that emphasizes the protection and
empowerment of every individual. As a long-standing
advocate of the human security concept, Japan renews
its determination to promote this approach, with the
aim of upholding the values inscribed in the Charter.
In conclusion, Japan reaffirms its unwavering
commitment to playing an important role in ensuring
that the world envisaged in the Charter is achieved and
the rule of law is observed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Ms. Plepytė (Lithuania): Let me begin by
expressing our condolences in connection with the
tragic loss of life in the Ukraine International Airlines
crash. At this difficult time, our thoughts go out to the
friends and families of the victims.
I, too, should like to commend Viet Nam for having
convened this important high-level debate. I further
wish to express our gratitude to the briefers for their
valued contributions. My delegation aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union.
The upcoming seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations provides us an opportune occasion
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8699

to renew our dedication to the Charter of the United
Nations, as well as to reflect on its importance to
international peace and security and to reaffirm its
fundamental importance to multilateralism.

prevention involves putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice for all. The strong voice of the Security
Council and its action in support of international law,
accountability and justice is of the utmost significance.

As Lithuania marks the thirtieth anniversary of
the restoration of its independence this year, we would
recall that one of the main aspects that enabled us to
foster our revived statehood was our commitment to the
rules-based international order. Our national experience
is an important factor encouraging and motivating us
to defend and adhere to the principles of the United
Nations Charter. It is with a deep sense of commitment
to the founding principles of the United Nations, as
enshrined in the Charter, that we take responsibility
to deliver on the promise of peace and reaffirm our
dedication to multilateralism. We must also seek a
new generation of approaches capable of responding
to emerging challenges, including those pertaining to
climate change, cybersecurity and hybrid threats.

We cannot further risk the Security Council losing
its relevance. Inaction on the part of the Security
Council and the international community, directly or
indirectly, encourages aggression and the use of force
and threatens the entire multilateral system, based on
international law. Restraining the use of the veto, inter
alia, would make the Council’s responses to ongoing
crises more coherent and reliable. Lithuania therefore
strongly supports the initiative to limit the use of the
veto in cases involving mass atrocities, genocide, war
crimes or crimes against humanity. Justice cannot be
vetoed. It must surpass political manipulation.

The integrity of the rules-based international
system is indispensable to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Unfortunately, as
ongoing conflicts continue to devastate many regions
around the globe, some Governments are taking steps to
turn their contested claims into faits accomplis through
violations of international law and of the principles of
the Charter. In Europe, we are also seeing a protracted
conflict in Moldova, which has continued for more
than two decades. The violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Georgia has entered its twelfth
year. For almost six years now, we have witnessed the
ongoing occupation and annexation of Crimea by the
Russian Federation and its military actions in eastern
Ukraine. These blatant and systemic breaches of the
Charter of the United Nations constitute a threat to
international peace, security and stability. Lithuania,
as a strong supporter of the principles enshrined in the
Charter, will continue to advocate for accountability
for violations of international law, including the illegal
use of force in international relations.
It is crucial for the United Nations and the
international community to develop the capacity for a
swift and effective response. The Secretary-General’s
efforts and contribution to conflict resolution,
preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and sustaining
peace are therefore of the highest importance.
Preventive diplomacy, as well as early action and
mediation, are vital measures in preventing conflicts
and mass atrocities. A decisive element of conflict

Finally, international peace, security and justice
are not possible without adherence to international law.
Ending impunity and ensuring justice is an absolute
must in order to reinforce trust in the United Nations,
secure the credibility of the multilateral system
and ensure its ability to carry out the contemporary
stewardship of peace. The resilient and visionary
Charter points the way with its enunciation of universal
values, its grounding in peace, development, human
rights and the rule of law, and its vision of our shared
fate and future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, we would like to congratulate
your friendly country on its membership in the Security
Council and on having assumed the presidency of the
Council for this month.
My delegation has read attentively the concept
note for this meeting (S/2020/1, annex) and notes
that its contents highlight the commitments of all
Governments of the world under the Charter of the
United Nations, without distinction or selectivity and
free from double standards.
My delegation deplores the fact that the Government
of the United States of America refused to give an entry
visa to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Islamic
republic of Iran so that he could take part in this
meeting. The host country is preventing the Council
from hearing the point of view of an essential party
that is involved in the maintenance of international

20-0067635/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

peace and security in our region. This behaviour by
the host country undermines its commitments under
the host country agreement and the provisions of the
Charter that stress the equal rights and obligations of
Member States.
No one can deny that we are living in a world that
suffers from increased polarization because some
Governments think that their political, military and
economic might gives them the right to decide the fate
of others. But what is more dangerous today is that
the credibility and the status of the United Nations are
suffering, which means that the Organization could
meet the same fate as the League of Nations, which
collapsed when it succumbed to the pressure exerted
by major European colonial Powers aimed at giving
legitimacy to occupation and aggression, even though
it was supposed at the time to defend security, stability
and peace in the world.
What is stated in the concept note is important, as
global circumstances have been constantly changing.
However, the Charter and the multilateral system
established as a result have encountered severe tests.
We firmly believe that this meeting should come up with
recommendations based on transparency, self-criticism
and defining mistakes, so that specific threats can be
dealt with seriously, at the forefront of which are the
rise of international terrorism; the spread of practices
and measures that are outside the scope of international
legitimacy; the increased manufacturing of weapons
and their proliferation; violations of international
conventions on the proliferation of weapons; the
imposition of an economic blockade on a number of
States; and the misuse of the Charter, particularly its
Article 51, with a view to justifying aggression against
countries, including my country Syria.
The Government of Syria, along with its partners,
has scored victories in the war against terrorism, which
will have important effects in terms of decreasing the
threat of terrorism worldwide. However, while the
Syrian people have paid a high price, irresponsible
practices continue on the part of certain Governments,
some of which hold permanent seats on the Council.
Those Governments have done everything in their
power to overthrow the legitimate Government in
my country, using terrorism and United Nations
mechanisms to achieve this goal by any means, even by
falsifying facts, as they did in Iraq, Libya, Venezuela
and other countries.
36/65

09/01/2020

I would ask all present to reflect and to come up with
honest answers to the following questions, which are
raised earnestly by the Syrian people and many peoples
of the free world. Of course, the answers will clarify
the real factors and reasons for the non-implementation
of the provisions of the Charter on the maintenance of
international peace and security.
The questions are as follows. Why do Palestinians
and Syrians continue to suffer under Israeli occupation?
Why does the Security Council remain silent as certain
permanent Council members continue to legitimize
settlements and acknowledge the Israeli occupation’s
fake right to sovereignty over Jerusalem and the
occupied Syrian Golan? Why does the Council fail to
implement its own relevant resolutions on combating
terrorism and to hold accountable Governments
that continue to fund and support activities of the
terrorist Al-Nusra Front in Syria? How is it that the
Council remains silent on the United States criminal
assassination of Iranian and Iraqi leaders who were
combating the terrorist Da’esh and Al-Nusra Front in
Syria and Iraq? How is it that the Council continues to
be held hostage to the will of certain Governments that
try to obstruct the operations of the Syrian army and
its allies against the Al-Nusra Front, which has been
designated by the Council as a terrorist entity, as it
occupies Idlib and its environs in order to make them a
centre for terrorism and extremism?
Why do many Governments, mainly in the
European Union, ignore the need to repatriate their
national foreign terrorist fighters, who have wreaked
havoc and committed murder in Iraq and Syria, and
their families? There are 300,000 foreign terrorists and
their family members in Idlib. How is that the Council
remains silent with regard to aggression and military
occupation carried out by forces of the United States,
Turkey, France, Britain and other countries against the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
my country? How is it that the Council remains silent
in the face of the aggression of the Turkish regime on
Libyan territory and of its transfer of terrorists from
Idlib to Libya as it seeks to fuel the conflict in that
fraternal country? How is it that some in the Secretariat
even praise the Turkish regime as it continues its socalled humanitarian work in the northern part of Syria,
whereas, in fact, Turkish forces have occupied parts
of that region and displaced hundreds of thousands of
people there?
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

The answers to these legitimate questions are
very clear. As we speak of consolidating the Charter
for ensuring international peace and security on the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding the United
Nations, we have only one solution to that end.
The Charter should be for all and above all, without
consideration or immunity for any political, economic
and military Power.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): We thank Viet Nam for
convening today’s timely debate. In its seventy-fifth
year, the Charter of the United Nations remains the
centrepiece for multilateralism and the international
rules-based order. Upholding its purposes and principles
is indispensable for the maintenance of international
peace and security. A clear renewed commitment on
the part of the membership to that end is needed in the
light of the ongoing erosion of certain key provisions of
the Charter, including those governing the use of force,
in particular given current tensions with the potential
of further escalation.
In joining the United Nations, we all accepted that
the use of force is illegal, except when authorized by
the Security Council or carried out in self-defence.
When invoking Article 51 preventively, States owe
the international community a thorough justification,
including evidence of the imminence of an external
threat and the proportionality of measures to be taken
in response. Excessively expansive and unchecked
interpretations of Article 51 are a threat to the
international rules-based order and an obstacle to the
promotion of international peace and security.
On the World Day for International Justice in 2018,
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) over the crime of aggression went into effect,
marking for the first time in history a permanent
international court’s authority to hold individuals
accountable for that crime. That also equipped the
Security Council with an important new tool — the
ability to refer situations involving acts of aggression
to the ICC. If applied in a meaningful way, that new
tool can assist the Security Council in the prevention
of conflicts, reinforcing its role under the Charter to
maintain international peace and security, and it is
ever more relevant given the proliferation of grave
cyberattacks — acts over which the ICC also has
jurisdiction if requisite thresholds are met.

S/PV. 8699

In too many instances, we have seen political
divisions prevent the Security Council from taking the
action necessary to address some of the worst crises
of our times, with enormous costs in terms of human
suffering. Over the past decade, the use of veto has
significantly increased, most significantly with respect
to the situation in Syria. In addition, the use of veto has
had a paralysing effect on anticipatory obedience, with
negative consequences on the ability of the Council to
perform its tasks.
As the Security Council acts on behalf of the entire
membership, the General Assembly has a responsibility
to hold the Security Council accountable in such cases.
That is why Liechtenstein supports the automatic
convening of the General Assembly whenever a veto is
cast in the Security Council to discuss the matter. Such
a discussion would take place without prejudice to any
possible outcome and irrespective of the substance of
the draft resolution that was subject to a veto.
The situation in Myanmar is one example of how
the Council has failed to carry out its responsibilities
owing to the mere threat of the use of veto. While that is
deeply concerning, we are encouraged that alternative
tracks to address the situation in Myanmar have been
found. Recent proceedings at the International Court
of Justice, under the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, and efforts to
ensure individual criminal responsibility under way at
the ICC and the Independent Investigative Mechanism
for Myanmar are acting in complementarity to bring
justice to the victims of Myanmar’s atrocity crimes.
Those are positive steps.
At the same time, we continue to expect the
Council to carry out its duties as envisioned under
the Charter. The proceedings before the International
Court of Justice should be yet another reason to do so.
Liechtenstein continues to promote the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, now supported by 121 States, including twothirds of the current Security Council membership, for
timely and decisive Security Council action to prevent
and end mass atrocity crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I express my sincere congratulations to
Viet Nam, Estonia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
the Niger and Tunisia on having begun their work in

20-0067637/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

the Security Council. I also join other countries in
expressing appreciation for the work of Peru, Poland,
Equatorial Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire and Kuwait during the
term that just ended. I am also grateful for the excellent
organization of this open debate and Viet Nam’s efforts
to ensure an open and inclusive Security Council
during its presidency, and I also congratulate Viet Nam
on assuming the presidency during the first month of
the decade of implementation.
Seventy-five years ago, the world was emerging
from one of the most brutal wars in history. The
United Nations was built upon those fragile ashes. It
is we, the peoples of the world, who strengthen those
foundations year after year. After three-quarters of
a century, the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations remain intact, but in the face of destructive
narratives inveighing against multilateralism, the
threat of a resurgence in nationalism and an increase
in violent extremism, today’s debate represents a fresh
opportunity to renew our commitment to the Charter of
the United Nations.
Ecuador is a country of peace and is especially proud
not only as a founding Member of the Organization,
but also for having presided over one of the committees
responsible for drafting the text of the Charter
pertaining precisely to this area. Likewise, Ecuador held
the first rapporteurship of the First Committee, dealing
with disarmament and international security issues,
and consequently had the honour of presenting to the
General Assembly the first draft resolution which that
organ adopted on the establishment of a commission to
address the problems raised by the discovery of atomic
energy (General Assembly resolution 1 (I)).
This year, 2020, when we will celebrate the
seventy-fifth anniversary the Organization, will be
key to determining the future of international peace
and security for the new decade and beyond. This year
will see the convening of the Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We must be more ambitious and
move towards the universalization of the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. This year will also
provide us with the opportunity to improve the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture and, consequently,
that of the entire world.
We have 10 years left to achieve Goal 16 of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is focused
on achieving peace, justice and strong institutions, as
38/65

09/01/2020

well as the other Goals, taking into account that peace
and development are mutually reinforcing and that both
are predicated upon just and inclusive societies.
The subject of this open debate is exceptionally
timely in that, in addition to its action-oriented approach,
it is forward-looking. We have just experienced difficult
times of great uncertainty, while geopolitical tensions
are at their highest level this century, as SecretaryGeneral António Guterres said in his statement of
6 January, where he urged us not to forget the terrible
human suffering caused by war (SG/SM/19929). In that
connection, I would like to recall Pope Francis’ appeal
that all parties
“avoid an escalation of the conflict and keep alive
the flame of dialogue and self-restraint, in full
respect of international law”.
While one of the great achievements of our
Organization has been to avoid a third world war,
conflicts nevertheless continue to rage in several
regions. The year 2020 offers us an opportunity to
put an end to those conflicts, but others might still
arise. It is up to us and us alone, as Member States,
to choose the path to take. Without political will, the
Security Council and our own institutions are reduced
to empty shells.
More specifically, we must endeavour to ensure
that this new decade is not remembered as one of
unilateral action, but rather as the decade of collective
effort. We will broaden the scope of our efforts to
advance the Organization’s work, as well to tackle
our common challenges and to increase awareness
and understanding of the value of the Charter of the
United Nations. We will therefore be able to promote
the defence of its founding principles; indeed, the
guardians of the Charter are our peoples.
Finally, while the General Assembly strives to reach
a comprehensive decision on the reform of the Security
Council, the Council’s permanent and non-permanent
members alike must broaden open activities, such as
this debate, and use the most transparent and inclusive
working methods during their presidencies. We will
defend the Charter of the United Nations by listening
more to one another, fostering dialogue and resolving
disputes exclusively through peaceful means. Let us
practice tolerance and coexist as good neighbours.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): I want to thank the
Vietnamese presidency for organizing this meeting on
such an important topic, namely, upholding the Charter
of the United Nations to maintain international peace
and security.
We believe this to be a timely meeting, considering
that we are on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the adoption of the Charter. Back then, the community
of nations came together to end decades of conflict and
destruction, creating an international framework to
maintain peace and security around the world. Today,
in a world that continues to suffer from the havoc
caused by conflict and the evolving threat of terrorism,
it is time to recommit to the values of the Charter and
revitalize the role of the United Nations in achieving
that challenging endeavour.
With the rise of violence and terrorist threats
around the world, we must emphasize the work that the
Secretary-General has put into enhancing the focus of
the United Nations on prevention. We must continue to
work on the implementation reform and revitalization
efforts that emphasize economic cooperation over
conflict in a more proactive approach that seeks to
avoid polarization. We have been doing so in our
region by promoting various initiatives, including
under the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process, which have fomented economic growth and
connectivity in our region, as well as tackling the
economic vulnerabilities that lead to conflict by giving
people jobs and ways to ensure their livelihoods.
In terms of other ongoing reform processes within
the Organization, Afghanistan continues to call for
an effective and substantive approach to the reform
of the Security Council. Having previously chaired
the intergovernmental negotiations on the matter,
we understand both the difficulty of the task and the
importance of attaining a solution that can strengthen
the Council’s faculties and mandate for safeguarding
international peace and security. We believe that a
successful reform of the Council will enhance not only
the organ’s representation, but also its working methods
in order to ensure that it adjusts to the threats of conflict,
terrorism and violent extremism and operates in a more
transparent and efficient matter.
In addition, the Council must continue to work in
ensuring the effective implementation of all Security
Council resolutions by all Member States — Council

S/PV. 8699

members and non-Council members alike. Throughout
the years, the Council has adopted a series of resolutions
to target major threats to peace and security, such as the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters and the financing
of international terrorism. The lack of implementation
of, or disregard for, those important documents by
various countries does not only deter our efforts in
the fight for international peace and security, but also
leads to the weakening of the political mandate of the
Council. That needs to be avoided.
Finally, the Security Council should further
evaluate ways to make its many tools to counter threats
to international peace and security more effective.
Sanctions regimes and efforts to tackle the financing
and movement of terrorist groups must be strengthened
and thoroughly implemented to ensure that all countries
comply with their obligations and such regimes. No
financial havens or other sanctuaries must be allowed
to permit the continued operation of those groups.
The United Nations has launched a global
conversation on the role of global cooperation in
building a better future for us all. We must heed this
conversation as States and provide further inputs on
ways through which we can continue to revitalize and
reform this Organization, transforming it into a United
Nations that is reflective of our modern reality and
that can more effectively tackle the plethora of new
challenges to peace and security. As a country that
has seen and continues to suffer from the effects of
conflict, terrorism and violent extremism, Afghanistan
will continue playing a proactive role by proposing
ideas and sharing its experience on ways in which
the United Nations and the Council can approach
our Organization’s seventy-fifth anniversary with
a stronger mandate that reaffirms the values of our
Charter and our important mandate to uphold peace and
security for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): I would like to begin by
congratulating the five newly elected non-permanent
members of the Security Council, namely, Estonia,
Viet Nam, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines. Latvia wishes them every success in
their duties.
Let me also express our deep condolences to the
families and friends of the victims of the Ukraine
International Airlines flight that crashed en route from

20-0067639/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

Iran to Kyiv yesterday. There must be an independent
and transparent investigation of the accident.
I thank the Vietnamese presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this timely debate. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the Chair of The Elders for
their briefings.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Effective multilateralism and the rules-based
international system have been long-standing priorities
for Latvia. This year’s seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations is the right time to revisit and
reconfirm our commitment to principles that alleviated
the sufferings of the past century and promised a
better future for the next generations. They constitute
indispensable principles of international cooperation,
the peaceful settlement of disputes, human rights and
the rule of law, as well as the only viable way to achieve
lasting global peace and security.
We are deeply concerned about the latest flare-up of
violent confrontations in the Middle East. For the sake
of preserving regional and global security and stability,
it is essential to halt further escalation and create
space for diplomacy. That is the only way forward to
achieve a regional political solution and lasting peace
while upholding international law and the role of the
United Nations in the process. The credibility of the
entire international system depends on our ability to
effectively prevent grave violations of international law
and respond to the multitude of new challenges. Here,
the Security Council carries a special responsibility
as the gatekeeper of international peace and security.
However, the Security Council has not always lived up
to the challenge, as indicated by escalating humanitarian
crises and erupting conflicts. Furthermore, the use
of the veto should never be acceptable in situations
involving mass atrocities.
The Security Council should speak with one voice
in rejecting impunity regarding the human suffering
and mass atrocities that have taken place in Syria,
Myanmar and Yemen. While we welcome the adoption
of the Secretary-General’s funding proposal for the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, the rigorous implementation
of all parts of its mandate to ensure accountability
40/65

09/01/2020

for the most serious crimes committed in Syria is
crucial. We also express our support for the Syrian
Constitutional Committee. At this stage, it is essential
that all international and regional players support it so
that a genuine political transition can be achieved.
Similarly, Russia’s annexation of Ukrainian
Crimea, as well as its covert and overt actions in
Eastern Ukraine, violate the fundamental principle
of the Charter of the United Nations of territorial
integrity. Latvia welcomes the commitment reached at
the Normandy format summit to stabilize the situation
in the Russia-Ukraine conflict area, as well as the
recent exchange of detainees. In that regard, we call on
Russia to implement the Minsk agreements in full and
restore Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Moreover, other so-called frozen conflicts in
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Transnistria and Nagorno
Karabakh should be resolved by peaceful means
and based on generally recognized principles of
international law, sovereignty and territorial integrity.
In conclusion, we should not stop striving for
universal respect for the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, as those
are essential for maintaining international peace and
security against a backdrop of serious threats and
growing turmoil in many regions of the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me seize
this opportunity to offer our deepest condolences to
the families and loved ones of the victims of the plane
crash outside Tehran. We hope that all circumstances of
that tragic event will be fully investigated.
Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President,
both on your assumption of the Security Council
presidency this month and on the commencement of
your Council membership. We have full confidence
that Viet Nam will contribute greatly to international
peace and security over the next two years. I also thank
you, Sir, for giving us this opportunity to discuss the
relevance of the Charter of the United Nations, which is
now more relevant than ever.
The upcoming seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations is indeed an opportune moment to
deliberate on how to uphold and ensure adherence to
the Charter of the United Nations — the cornerstone
of the international rules-based order — and how to
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

contribute to achieving its unavoidably linked and
mutually reinforcing aims — peace and security,
respect for human rights, justice and international law,
social progress and the expansion of freedom.
But discussions are not enough. What is necessary
is determined action towards achieving those goals.
Given the time restraints, let me provide just a few
action-oriented examples that are limited to the focus
area of our meeting, that is, what we, the peoples of the
United Nations, Member States, the Security Council
and the United Nations as a whole could do.
First, we must respect and promote respect for
international law, including the very basic principles
enshrined in the Charter, which many of my colleagues
have already highlighted. Therefore, we must react
to any violation of those principles, in particular
the gravest ones, such as the Russian Federation’s
illegal annexation of Ukrainian Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol. Russia’s claims of sovereignty
over territory seized by force in contravention of
international law — including the Charter, which
obliges States to refrain from the use of force against
the territorial integrity of any State — should not and
cannot be recognized. Acting in line with the Charter
of the United Nations and General Assembly resolution
68/262, the States Members of the United Nations
should reaffirm their commitment to the sovereignty,
political independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
Secondly, we must take steps in order to prevent and
punish atrocity crimes, including by joining the relevant
international legal instruments and implementing
them. We must promote our work on a convention on
crimes against humanity, ensure that relevant laws
and human rights are upheld at all times, and report
on genuine, measurable change at the domestic level
to prevent atrocity crimes. A number of further,
practically-oriented ideas in that regard are contained
in documents S/2018/560 and S/2019/48, which are
the respective takeaways from the Council’s debate
on upholding international law within the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
convened by Poland during our presidency on 17 May
2018 (see S/PV.8262), and the Arria Formula meeting on
raising the effectiveness of atrocity crimes prevention,
convened by Poland, Belgium, Côte d’Ivoire, Germany,
Kuwait and Peru on 10 December 2018.

S/PV. 8699

Thirdly, we must fully implement Security Council
resolutions, as highlighted by the Secretary-General,
including those on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, such as resolution 2475 (2019), on persons
with disabilities. We must therefore take measures
in accordance with our obligations under applicable
international law to protect civilians, including those
with disabilities; to prevent violence and abuses against
civilians in armed conflict, including killing, maiming,
abduction and torture; and to prevent rape and other
forms of sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations. Another issue that is of utmost importance to
us is ensuring full respect for international humanitarian
law. It is deeply regrettable that, recently, we have
once again witnessed the systematic violation of those
laws. Here, I wish to recall S/PRST/2019/8, adopted
in connection with the seventieth anniversary of the
adoption of the universally ratified Geneva Conventions
of 1949. Allow me to stress that compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law, is not a matter of choice. It is both our legal and
moral obligation.
Finally, notwithstanding the recent conclusion of
Poland’s 2018-2019 term on the Security Council, the
organ that bears the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, we
will continue to contribute towards that goal, including
by upholding the Charter of the United Nations,
fulfilling in good faith the obligations assumed under
it, and bringing the aims of the United Nations closer
to realization. We call on others to do the same.
Solidarity, responsibility and commitment — both
within and outside of the Council — are needed and
expected by the peoples of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): At the outset,
I would like to express our deep condolences following
the tragic accident of the Ukrainian aeroplane crash.
I commend your initiative, Mr. President, to
convene today’s open debate on this timely and
important topic. I take this opportunity to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson
for their enlightening briefings.
Seventy-five years ago, the founders of our
Organization came together to sign the Charter of the
United Nations, which enshrines the strong collective
commitment to save future generations from the

20-0067641/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

scourge of war, protect human rights and dignity,
respect international law and promote social progress
and better standards of living. The Republic of Korea is
a country whose very existence is a living testament to
the relevance of the United Nations Charter. It was the
United Nations that helped Korea overcome the horrors
of war. Had it not been for the help of the United Nations
in post-war reconstruction, the Republic of Korea as it
stands today would not exist.
At the General Assembly in September last year,
President Moon Jae-in declared the three principles of
peace on the Korean peninsula: zero tolerance for war, a
mutual security guarantee and co-prosperity (see A/74/
PV.3). Based on those guiding principles, he proposed
transforming the demilitarized zone that cuts across the
middle of the Korean peninsula into an international
peace zone. As we continue our journey towards
establishing permanent peace on the Korean peninsula,
we hope to receive the vital support of the international
community through concerted action and unity.
Despite the significant achievements made over
the past 75 years, the Charter still faces daunting
challenges. Protracted armed conflicts, large-scale
human rights abuses and complex transnational issues,
such as terrorism and human trafficking, are just a
few of the challenges we face today. Amid the slow
progress of the international community on such issues,
multilateralism and the United Nations are being viewed
with increasing scepticism. In this difficult context, we
need to once again renew our overarching commitment
to international cooperation and the principles of the
Charter. That is because all of the challenges that we
face today are global ones that call for global solutions.
How can we enhance our collective efforts to that end?
First, we need the Security Council to play a
central role in exemplifying the value of international
cooperation and bringing the Charter to life. The
Charter bestows upon the Security Council the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. The Council must do more to overcome
divisions, embrace the prevention and peacebuilding
agendas and make greater use of mediation and other
tools set out in Chapter VI of the Charter. It is also vital
to realize a consensual reform of the Council to ensure
that it becomes more democratic, transparent, inclusive,
effective and with equitable geographical distribution,
as contained in Article 23 of the Charter.
42/65

09/01/2020

Secondly, we need to strengthen coordination within
the United Nations system to address international
peace and security issues. The United Nations is the
only organization with both the legitimacy and the
capacity to bring the knowledge and resources of the
international community together to tackle global
challenges. In order to enhance the effectiveness of
the Organization, we must break down silos between
the main organs, continue to pursue reform under
the leadership of the Secretary-General and foster
mutually reinforcing and coordinated efforts among the
main organs.
Carrying a sense of responsibility commensurate
with the progress it has made, Korea is ready to do its
part. We strongly support the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative led by the Secretary-General. The initiative
enjoys broad support because its key goal is to bring
together all partners and stakeholders in supporting
United Nations peacekeeping operations and we believe
that it will contribute to a more effective implementation
of the Charter. In support of that goal, we look forward
to hosting the next Peacekeeping Ministerial in Korea
next year.
In Article 55 of the Charter, the United Nations
resolves to promote higher standards of living and
conditions of economic and social progress and
development. Today, one of the biggest challenges to
realizing that goal is our deepening climate crisis.
To strengthen global solidarity for implementation
of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the
Sustainable Development Goals, Korea will host the
second round of the Partnering for Green Growth and
the Global Goals 2030 summit later this year.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
Charter of the United Nations, we greatly look forward
to its reinforcement and full implementation. The
Republic of Korea reaffirms its strong commitment to
playing its part in realizing the goals of peace, human
rights and sustainable development, as envisioned by
the founders of this Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): At the outset, I wish to
express my sincere condolences to the many countries
and families who lost loved ones on Ukrainian
International Airlines flight 752. To echo the words of
Australia’s Foreign Minister, Senator Payne, we know
what it feels like to be a country that is searching for
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

lost loved ones at this time. In that vein, I also wish
to take the opportunity to thank my colleagues in this
Chamber and their Governments for their concern
and support during our current bushfire challenge
in Australia.
I warmly congratulate Viet Nam on taking up its
position on the Security Council and on holding the
first presidency of 2020. I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate on maintaining international
peace and security. As we commemorate the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, Australia
recognizes the ongoing importance of the Charter of
the United Nations in terms of peace and collective
security, development and human rights in what is an
ever-changing and ever more complex world.
The Charter forms a central foundation of the
international legal framework that Member States enjoy
the benefits of today. However, we cannot look at the
Charter in isolation. The international rules we have
today are built on the Charter and the current moment
is one where States and civil society need to use their
voices to support multilateralism and the rules-based
order. From freedom of navigation to chemical weapons
to accountability for serious international crimes, we
need to ensure that the norms we have built on the
Charter’s foundations are upheld on land, at sea and
in cyberspace.
Built in the shadows of the Second World War,
the Organization’s central tenets and responsibilities
for Member States, as articulated in the Preamble, are
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of
war, to practice tolerance and live together in peace
and to unite our strength to maintain international
peace and security. However, in recent years, the
strain upon the international rules-based order has
continued to intensify. This is a collective problem
that requires a collective solution. We need to ensure
that the fundamental norms reflected in the Charter
are protected — for all States Members of the United
Nations and for the millions of individuals who look
to the United Nations to protect their lives and their
human rights. The credibility of the United Nations
system depends on its willingness and capacity to do
so. That, in turn, is dependent on Member States.
Upon seeing the warning signs, the United Nations
must use its political authority and the preventive tools
at its disposal to address potential conflicts and seek
de-escalation. The political will of Member States is

S/PV. 8699

central to enabling that. Members should be alert to
these signs and should be able to flag them in order
to ensure that fundamental norms are respected for the
benefit of all. Australia continues to advocate for the
implementation of the principles of the responsibility
to protect across the United Nations and encourages
current and future members of the Security Council to
recall it during the Council’s deliberations.
As we consider the contribution of the United
Nations Charter and the frameworks and norms that
have flowed from it, we renew our call for greater
cooperation within and outside the United Nations,
for increased focus on effectiveness at the field level
and for the use of preventive tools. And from Member
States, we need a recommitment to collective security
that can enable the system to adapt to new challenges.
Against that backdrop, Australia welcomes and urges
the fullest possible implementation of the ongoing
system-wide United Nations reforms to improve
the Organization’s effectiveness in contributing to
sustaining development and sustaining peace. In that
way, we can demonstrate our practical commitment to
the Charter in the world today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We are grateful to the
Vietnamese presidency for convening this timely
debate on international peace and security.
The world order established 75 years ago on the
basis of the fundamental principles of the Charter of
the United Nations is rapidly eroding today. Pakistan
has a vital stake in the preservation and promotion of
this order and in the building of a structure of world
peace and cooperation on the foundations of the United
Nations Charter.
Pakistan hopes that, in Afghanistan, the United
States-Taliban talks, which we have facilitated, will soon
result in an agreement that enables the withdrawal of
foreign forces, a cessation of violence, a comprehensive
intra-Afghan dialogue and the elimination of terrorism
from Afghanistan.
Prime Minister Imran Khan has also deployed
personal efforts to reduce the tensions in the Gulf
region. Pakistan will not become party to any regional
conflict. We will always be a partner for peace. Recent
events have amplified the multiple and complex threats
to peace and security in the Middle East — the denial

20-0067643/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/01/2020

of self-determination to the Palestinian people and the
disruption of the sovereignty and stability of Iraq, Syria
and Yemen.

Jammu and Kashmir, and to enable the Kashmiri people
to exercise the right to self-determination promised to
them in the resolutions of the Council.

It is now over 150 days that 8 million people in the
Kashmir Valley have been kept under a cruel curfew
and a communication blackout by an Indian occupation
force of 900,000 troops. All Kashmiri leaders remain in
jails across India. Thousands of young boys have been
abducted, arbitrarily detained, tortured and maimed;
women subjected to sexual harassment, humiliation and
intimidation; and all protest violently suppressed. My
delegation has circulated a dossier of reports filed by
independent journalists and observers, which vividly
illustrate the climate of fear and the reign of terror that
India has imposed on the Kashmiri people.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.

The signals from India of aggressive intent towards
Pakistan are also unmistakable. India has issued new
political maps that lay claim not only to Indian occupied
Jammu and Kashmir, but also to Pakistan-administered
Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan. India’s Foreign
Minister has boasted that they will one day take
physical control of that territory as well.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements to
be made by the representatives of Azerbaijan and the
Philippines on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), respectively.

India committed over 3,000 ceasefire violations
along the Line of Control last year. It has now cut the
fencing along the Line of Control in five places and
deployed Israeli Spike anti-tank and BrahMos cruise
missiles along the Line. The incoming Indian Army
Chief has claimed the right to launch a pre-emptive attack
against Pakistan. India could stage another false-flag
terror incident to create a casus belli for an attack.
India’s military doctrine envisages fighting a “limited
war (with Pakistan) under the nuclear overhang”. It has
built the capacity for a so-called cold-start — that is,
surprise — strike across the Pakistan-India border. On
18 August 2019, the Indian Defence Minister held out a
thinly disguised threat of a pre-emptive nuclear strike
against Pakistan.
Pakistan does not want war with India, but, as we
demonstrated last February, if attacked Pakistan will
respond resolutely and effectively. The February aerial
exchanges were contained due to Prime Minister Imran
Khan’s gesture to unilaterally return the Indian pilot
we captured after shooting down two Indian fighter
aircraft. We may not be so fortunate next time.
Pakistan requests the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to act decisively to prevent a
disastrous war between Pakistan and India, to call for
an end to the grave human rights violations in occupied
44/65

Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): At the outset, allow me
to convey our deepest condolences and heartfelt
sympathies to the bereaved family members of victims
of the tragic accident involving Ukrainian International
Airlines flight 752 in Iran.
I would now like to congratulate you, Sir, on Viet
Nam’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January, as well as to commend
the convening of this timely and important open debate.

Today’s debate is being held against the backdrop
of increasing hatred and mistrust, the growing
threat of extremism and terrorism and the continued
proliferation and possession of weapons of mass
destruction. As those security threats are shared, so too
must be their solutions. A few days ago we were highly
alarmed by the geopolitical tension in the Middle East.
Malaysia has always believed that every effort should
be undertaken to resolve disputes and conflicts through
peaceful means in accordance with the principles of
international law, without resorting to the use or threat
of use of force. We join others in calling for all parties
concerned to avoid further provocation, exercise
maximum restraint and de-escalate tensions.
Malaysia continues to believe that multilateralism
is nothing other than responding to the aspirations of
the peoples and the needs of humankind as a whole.
The Preamble of the United Nations Charter — “We the
peoples” — serves as a constant reminder of our resolve
to serve humankind collectively through peaceful
means. It is therefore fundamental for us to reaffirm
our faith in multilateralism, with the United Nations at
its core, by upholding the Charter of the United Nations
and advancing its three pillars of peace and security,
human rights and development.
In our view, multilateralism does not in any sense
represent a threat to nation States. Instead, we see it as a
platform and means to address the complex challenges
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

that no country can overcome on its own. Our strong
commitment to multilateralism, in particular in
international cooperation on peace and security, is well
demonstrated and articulated, as it was particularly
during our membership on the Security Council and
has been by the participation of our peacekeepers in
peacekeeping operations around the world.
As a member of ASEAN, Malaysia will remain
steadfast in contributing to regional and global peace
and security. ASEAN’s strong commitment to this
important agenda is also demonstrated through the
membership of two ASEAN countries in the Council
today. We stand ready to enhance existing ASEANUnited Nations collaboration in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding through training programmes and
exchanges involving policies and best practices.
There is high expectation for the Security Council
to deliver stability, peace and security to the world.
At the same time, there is a growing demand for the
Council to adapt to new political realities. In that
regard, Malaysia continues to call for collective efforts
to reform the Security Council and improve its working
methods. Malaysia also wishes to stress the importance
of the prompt, effective and full implementation of
Security Council resolutions.
The survival of humankind depends upon
us working together. We need cooperation, not
confrontation. Malaysia has been, and will continue
to be, a strong supporter of multilateralism and an
advocate for the use of diplomacy for peace. To that
end, we remain committed to upholding the rule of law
and the rules-based international order and supporting
international cooperation.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations, Malaysia calls on all parties to
renew and intensify efforts in upholding the Charter,
to engage in frank and productive dialogue and to
strengthen multilateral action for a more peaceful,
secure and sustainable world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
open debate.
At the outset, we express our deep condolences to
the families of those who lost their lives in the aeroplane

S/PV. 8699

crash in Iran. A thorough investigation into the incident
is under way.
I am here today to deliver a statement on behalf
of His Excellency Mr. Javad Zarif, whose visa was
denied by the United States in contravention of the
Headquarters Agreement. His statement is as follows.
“We are meeting today to discuss a momentous
imperative with which we are all confronted.
The world is at a crossroads. With the end of
monopolies on power, one unhinged regime is
frantically clamouring to turn back time. That has
meant more damaging American unilateralism in
defiance of international norms and law, including
most recently a dastardly targeted assassination of
the heroes who were the nightmare of such groups
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. But since
the regime’s inauguration, there have been more
and more threats and attacks against the people of
Iran and other sovereign nations in utter disregard
of the Charter of the United Nations. It now
even seeks to emulate the war crimes of Da’esh,
menacing the cultural heritage of the millenniumsold civilization of Iran.
“Our action on 8 January against an air base
in Iraq from which the cowardly armed attack
against the martyr Soleimani was launched
was a measured and proportionate response to
a terrorist attack in the exercise of our inherent
right to self-defence in accordance with Article
51 of the Charter. The rogue United States regime
has withdrawn from several landmark accords,
including the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and,
not least, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA). That — in an open affront to the Security
Council — has involved the unprecedented and
unlawful punishment by the United States of anyone
who attempts to comply with resolution 2231
(2015), which unequivocally endorses the JCPOA.
“It has also adopted mob tactics to expand
or gain market share in the face of the increasing
diversification of the sources of power. In the
case of my own country, United States economic
terrorism has involved the strangulation of access
by ordinary Iranians to food and medicine, as
well as the use of illegal unilateral sanctions to
give American oil a foothold in Asia. No one is
spared from that malign behaviour, as evidenced

20-0067645/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

by how the United States approaches global trade,
including its targeting of European infrastructure
to force the entry of its own natural gas.
“The question raised by such rogue behaviour
is how to protect the United Nations Charter. For if
other States become passive unilateralists, succumb
to unilateralism in their bilateral relationships
or compromise Charter principles for the sake of
short-term gains or the avoidance of immediate
harm, they will inadvertently encourage the lawless
unilateralist to bully them.
“In order to protect multilateralism, we must
never appease unilateralist regimes. We need
political will, as well as an instrument that will
safeguard the values, principles and multilateralism
enshrined in the Charter. Such an instrument should
include a renewed commitment to the Charter,
particularly non-intervention in the internal
and external affairs of other countries and the
prohibition of the threat or use of force; the rejection
of all coercive unilateral measures, including
sanctions, as unlawful, entailing international
responsibility, including financial responsibility to
compensate for damages imposed on the target and
third countries; assigning international criminal
responsibility for obstructing humanitarian trade
in any way, shape or form; and the prohibition of
depriving individuals of their freedoms and their
extradition upon judicial requests made on the
basis of, or related to, unilateral coercive measures,
including sanctions.
“Iran is dedicated to multilateralism and
committed to the Charter and its principles. Our
commitment to the JCPOA, as well as our most
recent inclusive initiative to promote peace and
security in the Persian Gulf region — the Hormuz
Peace Endeavour (HOPE) — demonstrate our
strategic approach. With the engagement of other
littoral States of the Persian Gulf, the objectives
of HOPE can be realized. In that endeavour, we
welcome the assistance of the United Nations,
including by acting as an umbrella.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Allow me to begin by
thanking Viet Nam for convening this important debate
on upholding the Charter of the United Nations.
46/65

09/01/2020

Let me join others in congratulating the newly
elected members of the Security Council and wishing
them success during their tenure. We thank the
outgoing members, including two of the three African
members of the Council — Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea — as well as Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their
important contributions to the work of the Council.
The topic that you have chosen, Mr. President,
could not be more relevant in the context of the current
state of affairs in the international arena and the role
that the United Nations and the Security Council play
in that regard. In 1945, Ethiopia was one of the only four
African States to sign the Charter of the United Nations
to establish a new world order based on international law
and cooperation. It has indeed been an indispensable
multilateral forum for advancing collective security
and promoting sustainable development.
Nearly 75 years later, the grand principles laid
down by its founders — sovereign equality, territorial
integrity, political independence, non-intervention and
the peaceful settlement of disputes — remain pertinent
and immutable. Its primary purposes, as defined in
Article 1 of the Charter, also remain as relevant today
as they were in 1945.
In the intervening decades, the United Nations has
recorded remarkable advances and progress in fostering
peace, security and international cooperation. It has
had its share of challenges and shortcomings. However,
in spite of those challenges — or maybe even because
of them — it remains the only truly global multilateral
body dedicated to safeguarding international peace
and security, promoting respect for human rights and
ensuring sustainable development for all.
In peacekeeping, the United Nations continues
to make enormous contributions. As a leading troopcontributing country, my country has, over the years,
deployed more than 90,000 troops in more than 11
United Nations and African Union (AU) missions to
safeguard international peace and security. Currently,
there are more than 8,000 Ethiopian troops and police
officers serving in a number of missions.
There has, of course, been a groundswell of change
in the global geopolitical landscape since the founding of
the United Nations. Today, we are facing unprecedented
challenges and threats, ranging from terrorism and
violent extremism to transnational organized crime,
unilateralism, protectionism and the weaponization of
digital technology, including the use of social media for
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

nefarious purposes. The rise of poverty and inequality,
the spread of pandemic diseases, the impact of climate
change and other socioeconomic challenges continue to
have serious ramifications for our collective security.
The need for revitalized multilateralism has never
been greater. However, to remain effective, functional
and relevant in the face of highly dynamic global events,
the post-war international system must continually
reform and evolve. That is why we need a renewed
commitment to the multilateral system and the efficacy
of the United Nations system. The question then is how
we make this premier multilateral Organization fit for
purpose in the twenty-first century.
We believe that bolstering partnerships at all levels
is critical to revitalize the United Nations system.
Member States must show serious commitment to
the reform of the United Nations. We should use the
occasion of the seventy-fifth anniversary to develop and
strengthen partnership and cooperation, particularly
with regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, the United Nations-AU strategic partnership
has shown promising potential, including in the context
of the implementation of the African Union’s goal of
silencing the guns by 2020.
Partnership forms the foundational basis for a
more resilient global and regional security architecture
that will enable the United Nations to respond to the
aspirations of “We, the peoples”. While we need to
deepen and institutionalize cooperation between the
United Nations and AU, we must also be willing to go
beyond the current focus on peace and security and
pursue robust collaboration in other areas. As the primary
organ entrusted by the Charter with the responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security,
the Security Council must embrace the changing global
dynamics and recommit to pursuing robust political
solutions through meaningful partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations.
The Charter attaches great importance to
prevention. In our contemporary context, that entails
addressing the root causes of conflicts, which increase
the vulnerability of States. Such causes include
political, economic and social exclusion, particularly of
young people, women and marginalized groups; high
rates of unemployment; rapid urbanization; deficits in
governance; the mismanagement of diversity; and the
competition for increasingly scarce natural resources.

S/PV. 8699

Those challenges are further exacerbated by weak
State institutions and the lack of capacity to deliver for
a population that increasingly demands its rights and
the efficient delivery of public services. The complex
and protracted nature of today’s conflicts means that
domestic crises are often not contained within national
borders and the resulting spillover may take the form of
mass migration or a refugee crisis.
In the Horn of Africa, sweeping political reforms
and the region-wide rapprochement initiated by my
country has rekindled hopes for lasting stability and a
new era of regional cooperation. There is now positive
momentum and a range of possibilities for progress
towards regional economic integration. The Security
Council has recognized those positive developments.
That recognition must be followed by concrete support
as the countries of the region strive to advance peace and
prosperity. Countries in the region must be encouraged
to deepen and institutionalize the political and economic
reforms that they have initiated, including through the
lifting of unilateral embargoes and by de-securitizing
the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
To conclude, the global concerns and realities of
our time require us to reaffirm, with one voice, our
solemn commitment to the purposes and principles of
the United Nations Charter. The ban on inter-State war
in the United Nations Charter has so far contributed to
forestalling another world war. In these trying times,
we must once again resolve to maintain that trajectory.
It will not be easy, but we must show greater wisdom
and not be deterred by temporary waves of populism
and unilateral tendencies that could undermine the
multilateral system and the international law that it is
based on. Let me take this opportunity to underline
Ethiopia’s unwavering commitment to the enduring
tenets of the United Nations Charter and to playing its
part fully, as it has done for more than seven decades.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing
this open debate. As 2020 begins, it is very important for
all of us States Members of the United Nations to uphold
the Charter of the United Nations, which is celebrating
its seventy-fifth anniversary. Despite its age, it remains
wholly relevant. Its role has not diminished, rather
quite the contrary. The number of crises and conflicts
in the world is of great concern. It is estimated that

20-0067647/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

168 million people will need humanitarian assistance
this year. The world needs our action.
While the Charter is neither a magic wand nor
a panacea, it remains a powerful tool for conflict
prevention and peacekeeping, provided that Member
States implement it in its entirety. Peace and security are
also dependent on development and respect for human
rights. It would be wrong to disregard them for security
reasons. For the security and prosperity of small and
medium-sized States, including Switzerland and the
vast majority of Member States, an effective rulesbased multilateral system remains essential. Respect
for international law, including the prohibition of the
use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes, is
of vital importance to prevent escalations.
The similarities between the Charter and
Switzerland’s Federal Constitution are striking. Both
promote shared prosperity, sustainable development and
respect for human rights. Switzerland is a young State
Member of the United Nations, fully engaged in the
search for and implementation of multilateral solutions.
Today more than ever, young people inspire us to
assume our responsibility to resolve crises peacefully
and to protect natural resources for future generations.
But what kind of United Nations will young people
need? We welcome the Secretary-General’s reflections
on that question. It is crucial that all segments of society
express their views and it is our duty to listen to them.
In Geneva and elsewhere in Switzerland, activities
will take place this year to raise awareness about the
Charter, anchor it more firmly in people’s daily lives
and remind us of the Charter’s political relevance in the
twenty-first century.
The Charter also provides the basis for action by
the Security Council, including its obligations to the
General Assembly, in particular the duty to ensure
adequate interaction between the Security Council and
the General Assembly under Article 24 of the Charter.
That is a fact often recalled by the interregional
Accountability,
Coherence
and
Transparency
group, coordinated by Switzerland, which promotes
accountability, coherence and transparency in
the Council.
What unites us is more important than what
divides us. The Charter remains the common
denominator — our starting point for strengthening
multilateralism in the spirit of inclusion and dialogue.
At a time when the Secretary-General stresses
48/65

09/01/2020

that geopolitical tensions are at their highest level,
Switzerland supports his call for resuming dialogue
and renewing international cooperation.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the United
Nations and its Charter is an opportunity to recall that
multilateral bodies and international law, including
human rights law and international humanitarian
law, are essential to ensuring international peace and
security. It is more crucial than ever for the Security
Council to fully assume the responsibilities bestowed
upon it by the Charter.
The President: I thank the representative of
Switzerland for keeping to the time limit and I wish to
remind all speakers to limit their statements to no more
than four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania): We thank Viet Nam for
choosing such an important and timely topic for
today’s open debate, as we start the year that will
mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the existence of
United Nations.
Upholding the Charter of the United Nations and
strengthening the multilateral system are crucial in
effectively addressing the global crises the world faces
today. Those challenges have significantly evolved,
while new threats have emerged. No country can
address alone the current complex challenges, such as
climate change, mass migration, rising inequalities,
new technologies, international terrorism and
organized crime, all of which have a direct impact
on the international security architecture. Under such
circumstances, the United Nations needs to adapt its
tools and rapidly adjust to new realities.
I would like to mention three interrelated elements,
which we believe are crucial in upholding the United
Nations Charter. First, we should make conflict
prevention a reality. As the Secretary-General has
emphasized since the beginning of his mandate,
prevention must be at the centre of all efforts. We
must collectively mobilize in order to prevent the
deterioration of situations by addressing root causes
long before conflict escalates into violence. In so doing,
we must recognize the power of women’s participation,
which makes peace agreements stronger and societies
more resilient.
Prevention
also
depends
on
sustainable
development. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

Development offers a framework for addressing the
economic and social drivers of conflict and building
stable inclusive societies. Albania strongly supports
the Secretary-General’s reform agenda, which aims
to put conflict prevention, sustaining peace and
sustainable development at the centre of the work of the
United Nations.
Secondly, we need a more responsive and effective
Security Council, the body in charge of preventing
crises and maintaining international peace and security.
When the Security Council has managed to overcome
its divisions and take united action, it has successfully
achieved the Charter’s purposes. Regrettably, the
Council has also quite often been unable to act in a
timely manner, failing to find common ground in order
to resolve conflicts and ease human suffering.
It should be underlined that membership in the
Security Council is a responsibility, not a privilege, and
implies the exercise of that responsibility on behalf of
all Members of the United Nations, in the light of the
purposes and principles of the Charter. That is why the
use of the veto to protect narrow national interests, in
situations of mass atrocities, is unacceptable.
Thirdly, the maintenance of international peace and
security cannot be understood without respecting and
protecting human rights and international humanitarian
law. Here I would like to emphasize that Albania
believes that human rights are the Security Council’s
business — not only because the United Nations
Charter calls on all Members to respect them but also
because violations of human rights inevitably lead to
instability, thereby threatening peace and security.
Former Secretary-General Kofi Annan said that we
will not enjoy development without security or security
without development, but we will not enjoy either
development or security without universal respect for
human rights.
I would like to conclude by stressing the commitment
of my country to defend and strengthen the rulesbased global order, international law and multilateral
institutions. As a candidate for a non-permanent seat in
the Security Council for the term 2022-2023, Albania
pledges to engage actively in all efforts to strengthen
the role of the Security Council, with a focus on its
efficiency, credibility and accountability.
As the Secretary-General said today, international
cooperation is at a crossroads. Indeed, the global
challenges that we face today will test the Charter

S/PV. 8699

and multilateralism, as well as our capacity to secure
a better world for all of humankind, as we strive to
deliver for “We, the peoples”. Let us remember that
upholding the Charter’s values, which remain as
relevant as ever, is both our shared responsibility and
in our common interest.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mrs. Zappia (Italy): I wish to thank the
Vietnamese presidency for organizing today’s very
important debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their insightful briefings.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union.
The Charter of the United Nations is the main
pillar of the legal and political architecture built in the
immediate aftermath of the Second World War. In the
preamble of the Charter, the pledge to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war is unequivocal.
That pledge is all the more imperative today, with new
tensions arising in the world and the proliferation of
regional crises. The current threats to global peace
and security also make it more pressing than ever to
recommit to and revitalize the multilateral disarmament
and non-proliferation normative framework.
It is true that the United Nations and the multilateral
system based on the Charter face growing criticism.
The Security Council struggles to offer solutions
to major current political crises. Nevertheless, the
underlying principles of the Charter are as compelling
today as they were in 1945 and so are the objectives
that they are supposed to serve — the global aspiration
for peace and the well-being of all our citizens. The
answer to the pushback that we are witnessing today is
not less multilateralism but rather much more, with a
more sophisticated approach that is designed to tackle
today’s more complex crises.
Italy knows that well. As a Mediterranean country
on the front lines of an area afflicted by major
instability and multidimensional repercussions that
transcend the region itself, we are deeply aware of
the need for a holistic approach. Only by combining
security, development, the rule of law and human
rights, as well as environmental protection and the
fight against climate change, will we be able to create
conditions conducive to sustainable peace and a future
of prosperity for the generations to come.

20-0067649/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

As the Secretary-General said earlier, international
cooperation is at a crossroads and, indeed, we need to do
better to uphold the values of the Charter. As far as Italy
is concerned, we strongly believe the ongoing reform
processes started by the Secretary-General are crucial
to improving the effectiveness of the United Nations
and its capacity to achieve that goal. Italy reaffirms
its steadfast support for conflict prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding and recalls the prerogatives of the
Secretary-General under Article 99 of the Charter. As
the top troop contributor among Western countries,
Italy champions the Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations.
A reformed United Nations must continue to operate
in a logic of shared responsibility among Members
States and in partnership with regional organizations,
such as the European Union and the African Union.
That crucial notion is also reflected in our commitment
to a reform of the Security Council to make it more
representative, accountable, democratic, transparent
and effective.
A final word on discrimination and inclusion: in
its Preamble the Charter reaffirms faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person, in the equal rights of men and women. Let me
stress the importance of gender equality. Women must
be given the opportunity to participate meaningfully
in decision-making processes. By the same token, we
must give voice and space to young people. As President
Mary Robinson said this morning,
“[i]f women had equal power ... we would have a
very different problem-solving way of dealing with
the challenges we face”.
Indeed, we must continue to work relentlessly to achieve
gender parity for the sake of peace and prosperity for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, and the Chair
of The Elders, Mrs. Mary Robinson, for their briefings.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation
to Viet Nam for the wise choice of topic for today’s
open debate.
At the outset, allow me to recall the words of
President Jair Bolsonaro during the general debate of
the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session (see
50/65

09/01/2020

A/74/PV.3). In accordance with the Preamble of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Organization was
created to promote peace among sovereign nations. It
was not created to suppress nationalities, but to promote
a world where sovereign nations respect each other and
national Governments honour their own citizens. That
is the only viable basis for a real and enduring peace.
After 75 years, we can honestly assess that the United
Nations has lived up to its goal of becoming a podium
to voice hopes and concerns from all over the world,
a platform for fostering cooperation and partnerships
and a tool that allows us to use diplomacy and dialogue
as remedies for differences and grievances. The United
Nations has also been successful in achieving what was
perhaps its highest aspiration, namely, to avoid another
systemic war among the world’s greatest Powers. To a
large extent, the value of the United Nations derives
from its ability to frame the core of international
relations, substituting power politics with shared
commitments and ideas that have been guiding our
actions since 1945.
We owe much of that success to the establishment
in the United Nations Charter of the principle of the
peaceful settlement of disputes as the modus operandi
for inter-State relations. Going hand in hand with the
prohibition of the use of force, Article 33 of the Charter
crystalizes the duty of parties to seek peaceful solutions
to their disputes. It also offers a variety of tools to
address disputes that could endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security. As with all other
Chapter VI provisions, Article 33 is instrumental for
conflict prevention.
With regard to the use of force authorized under
Chapter VII, the Charter reminds us that the Security
Council acts on behalf of all Member States. Hence,
all States have a legitimate interest in ensuring
adherence to the mandate established in a Security
Council resolution authorizing coercive measures.
Moreover, the authorization must be limited in its legal,
operational and temporal dimensions. Finally, when
considering military action, the Council must demand
adequate reporting and establish panels of experts to
monitor implementation.
As we recognize our successes, we must also
acknowledge that the time has come to renew our
overall approach to peace and security and to reform
the structure of the Security Council. An expansion of
the organ in both categories is key to making it more
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

transparent, legitimate, representative and effective by
bringing to the table those actors capable of making
meaningful contributions to international peace and
security. We must also address the fact that Africa still
lacks permanent representation in the Security Council.
Almost 15 years have passed since the 2005 World
Summit, where Heads of State and Government called
for an early reform of the Security Council. Yet we
remain far from having achieved that goal. This year
should mark not only the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the founding of the United Nations, but also the
beginning of a new chapter in which our adherence to
the purposes and principles of the Charter is reaffirmed
through our commitment to a reform of the United
Nations, including the Security Council.

S/PV. 8699

Singapore is deeply concerned by recent developments.
There is an urgent need for all parties to exercise
maximum restraint, de-escalate tensions and return to
dialogue and diplomacy to resolve their differences.
We fully endorse the call by the Secretary-General for
parties to stop escalation and re-start dialogue in order
to renew international cooperation.
In the context of recent developments, the debate
today takes on particular significance. There is no doubt
that the Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, all Member States can, and indeed must,
contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security. In that regard, please allow me to make
a few points.

As much as we have spoken of conflicts and disputes,
it is important that we also speak of peace not merely
as the absence of aggression but also as the pursuit of
justice, inclusiveness and freedom. As we have seen
time and again in the Council, when peace processes
are not inclusive, they tend to fail. In that sense, it is
paramount to recall that the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights recognizes the inherent dignity and
the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the
human family as the foundation not only of peace but
also of freedom and justice. Bearing that in mind,
Brazil reaffirms its uncompromising dedication to the
highest standards of human rights and to the defence of
democracy and the freedoms of speech, religion and the
press. Such a commitment by all nations is imperative
in order to attain lasting peace.

First, we have to strengthen respect for the Charter
of the United Nations, not only through our words but,
more important, through our actions. Every Member
of the United Nations, in particular the permanent
members of the Security Council, have a responsibility
to uphold international law and the principles of the
United Nations Charter. The rules-based multilateral
system requires respect for international law by all
States at all times. If there is a selective approach to
implementing international law or if there are unilateral
actions that ignore international law, we will encourage
a culture of non-compliance. Over time, repeated
non-compliance will have the effect of weakening and
undermining our rules-based multilateral system. It is
therefore important for all members to guard against
unilateral actions and selective multilateralism.

As we approach the seventy-fifth anniversary of
the United Nations Charter, we must not forget that
the future of humankind is embedded in each nation’s
exercise of its own identity and sovereignty. The United
Nations must be the stage where we come together and
work side by side for the benefit of our peoples.

Secondly, we have to place greater emphasis on
preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement of
disputes in accordance with international law, and we
need to support the role of the Secretary-General in the
settlement of disputes, in accordance with Article 99 of
the United Nations Charter. Preventive diplomacy may
be time-consuming, but it is an effective way to enhance
the prospects for peace and reconciliation. We applaud
the Secretary-General’s pledge to make prevention a
priority of the priorities, as he put it. The International
Court of Justice is an important mechanism for dispute
settlement, and it is vital that all Member States support
the work of the Court and respect its decisions.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I join previous speakers
in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
open debate on this important topic. I also thank the
Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson for their
very pertinent remarks earlier today.
The new year has been marked by rising geopolitical
tensions in the Middle East. As a small State strongly
committed to the multilateral rules-based system,

Thirdly, the Security Council must work harder to
be cohesive and united on the key issues of our day.
We know that this is not always possible. However,
it is important for members of the Security Council,

20-0067651/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

especially the permanent members, to work harder
to build understanding and find common ground on
key international issues. That is our expectation. And
when common positions are adopted, it is incumbent
on all Member States to respect and implement the
Council’s decisions in full. We cannot allow countries
to selectively implement or selectively ignore Council
decisions. When we disrespect a decision of the Council,
we undermine the credibility of the entire Council
and weaken its ability to maintain international peace
and security.
To be effective, it is important for the Council
to work and coordinate closely with the General
Assembly, the Peacebuilding Commission and regional
organizations. Notably, regional and subregional
organizations have played an increasingly important
role in maintaining peace and security in recent years.
Their efforts can complement the actions of the Security
Council, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. We welcome the increasing number of
meetings the Security Council has had with regional
organizations in the past few months, and we look
forward to the meeting on Association of Southeast
Asian Nations-United Nations cooperation later this
month, under your presidency, Sir. We also welcome the
regular meetings between the President of the Security
Council and the President of the General Assembly.
The Security Council is at the forefront of the
efforts of the United Nations to maintain peace and
security, and members of the Council, especially the
permanent members, must lead by example. At the
same time, all of us here, as Members of the United
Nations, have a responsibility to uphold the principles
of the United Nations Charter, not only through our
words but also through our actions.

09/01/2020

the Charter as well as the Council’s record, as well as
on the United Nations system as a whole.
We need, of course, to remind ourselves that
the Security Council remains a sui generis body
legitimized to some extent by history and power
relations at the international level, but more so by its
capacity to uphold international peace and security.
Such a teleological approach to legitimacy comes with
a number of caveats and entails full accountability
vis-à-vis all stakeholders, be they Member States or
other bodies or organizations. The Council needs
to constantly demonstrate its relevance, and, in that
context, we need to integrate the ongoing debates on
its working methods, enlargement and representativity,
the constantly broadening definition of threats to
international peace and security, and the effectiveness
of its decisions and actions.
The world has moved on since 1945. Adaptation
is normal and welcome. The number of conflicts
has steadily risen, and the nature of the belligerents
has changed. The climate crisis is bound to increase
conflict and displacement. Development, human
rights and issues related to the legitimacy of political
and social structures have become major challenges,
including in the context of conflict prevention and
resolution. The Council is compelled to adopt a more
comprehensive approach to security and take account
of conflict indicators without diverting its primary
attention from hard security. It also must adjust its tools
and instruments to our constantly changing world.

Mr. Mavroyiannis (Cyprus): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this extremely
topical debate and to wish Viet Nam a successful tenure
on the Council.

We all know that the way the system operates today
is very far from the action contemplated under Chapter
VII of the Charter. Given the evolving challenges
facing effective multilateralism and the concurrent
yet diametrically opposed trends of globalization and
fragmentation, the United Nations has managed overall
to find the tools to deal with this more complex security
environment. The world order has advanced, in large
part due to the fact that the rules governing it have
become more comprehensive and prescriptive and hold
States to a higher standard.

While reaffirming the Charter as the foundation
of the system of collective security and the Security
Council as the organ entrusted with the main
responsibility for the maintenance and/or restoration
of international peace and security, it is important that
this debate go well beyond that. We need in particular
to reassess the Council’s evolution, since it reflects on

Only greater synergy, complementarity and
additionality among the Security Council and other
bodies and among States and international institutions
in a dialectical relationship can contribute to the needed
prevalence of a more comprehensive and integrated
approach. Working together and not in competition
would enhance the effectiveness of our collective

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.

52/65

20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

action. The Security Council, being at the epicentre
of the system, would stand to gain from this double
redefinition, on the one hand of the scope and the
content of its mission, and, on the other hand, of the
tools and actions available to it.
Through all this, the Charter will further consolidate
its central role as, in essence, the Constitution of the
international community and will serve as our guide
for the generations to come.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate Viet Nam, Estonia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, the Niger and Tunisia on assuming
membership of the Security Council and to wish them
success in conducting their mission, which is of the
utmost importance and the highest responsibility.
Armenia commends the presidency of Viet Nam
for the choice of topic for today’s debate, on upholding
the United Nations Charter to maintain international
peace and security. I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Chair of The Elders Mary Robinson for
their remarks earlier today highlighting the central role
of the Charter as the cornerstone of the international
law and multilateralism.
The anniversary of the establishment of the United
Nations is an opportunity to reiterate the full adherence
of Member States to the Charter and to reaffirm the
commitment to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and uphold fundamental human rights
and faith in the dignity and worth of the human being.
The seventy-fifth anniversary of the Organization is
also an occasion to remember and pay tribute to all
those who became victims of the atrocities perpetrated
during the First and Second World Wars and gave their
lives in the struggle for the peaceful future of the world.
The Armenian people made a significant contribution
to victory in the Second World War, which paved the
way for the creation of the United Nations. Almost
600,000 Armenians participated in the war, and more
than half of them did not return from the battlefields.
The Charter rests upon the objective of developing
friendly relations among nations, based on respect for
the principles of equal rights and the self-determination
of peoples. The right to self-determination is a
fundamental principle that has led to a significant
increase in the membership of the United Nations since

S/PV. 8699

its foundation. The right of people to freely define their
future is anchored in the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In that context, the inalienable right of the people
of Nagorno Karabakh to self-determination through
the legally binding free expression of their will
represents a fundamental principle and basic premise
for the peaceful resolution of the conflict, which is
recognized by the co-chairmanship of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk
Group — the only internationally mandated mediation
format dealing with the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Armenia greatly values the support of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General for the efforts of
the OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship towards the
peaceful resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.
Today’s discussion is all the more relevant in the
light of the current developments in Iraq and the wider
Middle East. Armenia has expressed its concern about
the ongoing situation and the risk of destabilization
in its immediate neighbourhood and beyond. We have
appealed for the de-escalation of the situation, and
we hope that it can be addressed exclusively through
dialogue and peaceful means. We believe that the
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida, which perpetrated atrocities in Syria
and Iraq, should continue to unite the international
community and serve as a basis for consolidating
regional peace and security.
Despite the major achievements of the United
Nations in promoting peace and security in the past 75
years, we continue to face armed conflicts, pervasive
poverty, increasing inequality, shrinking democratic
space and violence against women and girls, as outlined
in the report of the Secretary-General’s on the work of
the Organization (A/74/1). Violations of human rights
and fundamental freedoms, which include the right
to self-determination, often represent the root causes
of conflicts as we continue to witness discrimination,
xenophobia, exclusion, State-led policies of hatred and
the glorification of hate crimes.
As demonstrated many times before, intolerance
and the cultivation of hate speech against ethnic and
religious groups, if not addressed properly, can lead
to mass atrocities and genocide. Armenia has been
consistent in supporting multilateral efforts aimed at
the prevention of genocide and strengthening the earlywarning capacities of the United Nations. Multilateral

20-0067653/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

cooperation, as ever, remains important in terms
of providing platforms for dialogue and action on
global challenges.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia’s
firm commitment to effective multilateralism, in line
with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Ahmed (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me congratulate the newly elected members
of the Security Council and wish them every success.
In particular, I congratulate Viet Nam on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month. We are
confident that it will lead the work of the Council
wisely and competently. I would like also to convey the
greetings of the Foreign Minister of Egypt, Mr. Sameh
Shokry, to his Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet
Nam. We thank him for his kind invitation to let us
participate in this important discussion. Our Minister
was unable to attend this meeting owing to an urgent
prior engagement.
This meeting comes at a critical time, as we
commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations and the adoption of the
Charter. We are proud that Egypt was one of the States
that contributed to the drafting of the Charter. This
critical moment requires us to scrutinize the successes
of and the challenges facing the Charter, while seeking
the means to ensure that the United Nations and the
Charter meet present and future needs. We should like
to address those points in this statement.
With regard to successes, Egypt believes that the
Charter is well established due to its principles, which
represent firm international rules of coexistence that
cannot be undone or questioned. The Charter stresses
the principles of sovereignty, non-interference in the
internal affairs of others, good-neighbourliness, the
non-use of force and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
all of which serve as the foundations for stable relations
among States. Without them, international systems
cannot function properly, as evidenced by the many
crises that are plaguing our world owing to non-respect
for the principles of the Charter.
Concerning the challenges, there are internal
ones emanating from the Charter and obstructing
its implementation, and there are external emerging
54/65

09/01/2020

challenges, owing to the fact that it was adopted 75
years ago. With regard to the emerging challenges, the
Charter faces a new and different reality from that of the
time of its adoption in the aftermath of the Second World
War. Our world today faces challenges of terrorism and
extremism that do not differentiate between religions
and races while supported and financed by certain
States for political purposes. We are also faced by other
challenges as some work to dismantle State institutions
and plunge others into a morass of identity conflicts.
Regrettably, the situation in the Middle East is a case in
point reflecting these two challenges, and in particular
the situations in Syria, Libya and Yemen.
We also face challenges related to climate
change, water scarcity and cooperation on the use of
transboundary water resources. Addressing such issues
requires cooperation and coordination among all States,
as they have serious negative repercussions on various
regions and must be dealt with. In that context, we are
currently working to reach an agreement on the rules
of operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam,
and we appreciate the role of the United States and the
World Bank in negotiations to that end.
With regard to the internal challenges facing the
Charter, we can encapsulate them in the following
related and overlapping points.
The first relates to the commitment of States
to implementing the Charter, its principles and the
international resolutions of the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the International Court of
Justice. Egypt has had an excellent track record of
commitment to such resolutions over 75 years, which
demonstrates that we uphold our obligations under the
Charter. That is not, however, the case for everyone.
In the Middle East, we see the systematic violation by
some of internationally recognized resolutions. The
most recent example involves the two memorandums
of understanding signed between the Government of
Turkey and the Head of the Government of National
Accord in Tripoli on 27 November 2019. That is
an obvious violation of internationally recognized
resolutions, in particular resolution 1970 (2011).
Secondly, the use of double standards prevails
inside the Organization, in particular with regard to the
Palestinian question. Egypt stresses that this question
is at the root of all the turbulence in the Middle East.
Finding a just and lasting settlement to the Palestinian
question, based on international resolutions, would
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV. 8699

address the main reasons underlying instability in the
Middle East.

in that regard, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

Thirdly, the Security Council rushes to use Chapter
VII instead of Chapter VI of the Charter, which calls
for taking pre-emptive and preventive diplomatic steps
and for activating the role of the International Court of
Justice, in accordance with paragraph 3 of Article 36,
on the referral of disputes of a legal nature to the Court,
in addition to Article 96, on requesting an advisory
opinion from the Court.

Fourthly, serious steps should be taken to achieve
sustainable development and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The capabilities of developing
countries have to be boosted in order to access funds
from the private sector. Underdevelopment remains the
main driver of conflicts. Addressing disputes requires
an approach to manage different stages of conflict,
from peacebuilding to sustaining peace. Serious steps
must be taken to prevent proliferation and achieve
nuclear disarmament.

Fourthly, there is a contradiction in the use of the
Charter. On the one hand, it stresses the principle of
equality among all States, while on the other hand
it affords only five States the right of veto, thereby
creating a fundamental imbalance in the effectiveness
and credibility of the Council and the United Nations in
many situations.
Fifthly, we need to review the effectiveness
of certain weak implementation tools, particularly
those pertaining to sustainable development and
the comprehensive concepts of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, while respecting the sovereignty
of States.
In the light of all those challenges, in order to
prevent the United Nations from serving as “a crisis
baby-sitter”, in the words of the Secretary-General
during the debate on this issue in February 2018
(S/PV.8185, p. 3), Egypt stresses the following.
First, the Security Council and other United Nations
entities need to shoulder their responsibilities, stand
firmly against violations of international resolutions
and refuse to tolerate States that sponsor terrorism and
violate international resolutions. We cannot continue to
stand idly by and watch events of external intervention
unfold in Libya and Syria without taking action. In that
regard, I underscore what the Secretary-General said
earlier in his statement with regard to the commitments
of States under Article 25 of the Charter.
Secondly, States should cooperate in accordance
with the principles of the Charter pertaining to good
neighbourliness, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
mediation with sincere intentions and mediation
encouraged by the international community in
various disputes.
Thirdly, international coordination must be
enhanced through United Nations frameworks in the
fight against terrorism, as well as intelligence-sharing

Fifthly, relations between the Security Council
and regional organizations must be strengthened in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter. In that
regard, during its current presidency of the African
Union, Egypt has worked to enhance the relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations
regarding peace and security while building on the
comparative advantages of each of them.
Sixthly, a genuine reform of the Security Council
cannot be based on piecemeal or phased solutions;
rather, it should work to end the historic injustice against
the African continent. Egypt adheres to the Ezulwini
Consensus, which calls for the abolishment of the veto
or bestowing that right on new permanent members of
the Council to address the structural imbalance in the
work of the Council.
In conclusion, Egypt understands that the United
Nations and its Charter are at a critical crossroads.
Hence, we emphasize the importance of taking practical
steps to ensure that the role played by our Organization
continues to be effective and to keep the Organization
as a collective forum for the maintenance of peace and
security for humankind while meeting the needs of our
people for a decent life.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Lam Padilla (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for convening
this open debate, which is of particular importance
given that this year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the Charter of the United Nations, the founding treaty
of this Organization, which includes the purposes and
principles that unite all the nations represented here.
Guatemala, as a founding country of the Charter of
the United Nations, firmly believes in this Organization

20-0067655/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

and in the essential role of the Security Council in the
maintenance and upholding of international peace
and security, the observance of human rights and the
sustainable development of peoples.
This is a landmark year. Seventy-five years after
its founding, given the global circumstances we face,
we must turn our attention now more than ever to the
founding principles of the Organization and to upholding
the Charter to preserve international peace and security
and fulfil the foundational and institutional existence
of the United Nations.
Given the importance of this debate, I would like
to contribute by referring to three established priorities
that uphold the United Nations Charter: the first
paragraph of the Preamble, the purpose set out in Article
1, paragraph 1, and General Assembly resolution 1 (I).
I will proceed in that order.
The first paragraph of the Preamble specifies that
the mission of the United Nations is to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. In that regard, we
must pool efforts among nations to peacefully settle
conflicts. The Organization was established to create
mechanisms of peace and prevent future wars — we
must do everything possible to avoid their outbreak.
The purpose set out in Article 1, paragraph 1, is
to maintain international peace and security, and to
that end to take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and
for the suppression of acts of aggression, and to bring
about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the
principles of justice and international law, adjustment or
settlement of disputes. To that end, the Security Council
must shoulder its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security through the peaceful
settlement of disputes by discharging its duties in
accordance with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Lastly, based on the Charter, General Assembly
resolution 1 (I) was formulated in response to the way
the Second World War ended and underscored the
importance of eliminating atomic weapons of mass
destruction. In that regard, 75 years after the Charter
and in view of the imminent, devastating and tragic risk
of another world war, it is now more necessary than
ever to recall and fulfil the obligations to which we
as States have committed ourselves in order to ensure
international peace and security.
56/65

09/01/2020

Guatemala underlines the trust that Member States
place in the organs of this Organization, including the
International Court of Justice, by bringing before its
consideration disputes that have arisen among them,
as well as the commitment of countries to maintaining
and promoting the rule of law throughout the world.
Guatemala recognizes the important work of the
International Court of Justice, since its judgements
provide certainty and due compliance with the norms of
international law. Allow me to convey our recognition
and support for the work of the Court and its judges.
I reiterate the importance that Guatemala attaches to
the Security Council and its functions under Chapter VI
of the Charter with regard to the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Guatemala reaffirms its commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter and to assisting
the Security Council in fulfilling those efforts by
prioritizing the preventive approach to the maintenance
and consolidation of world peace.
I wish to conclude my statement to the Security
Council with these words of Pope Francis contained
in his message to the United Nations Conference to
Negotiate a Legally Binding Instrument to Prohibit
Nuclear Weapons, Leading Towards their Total
Elimination, held in March 2017:
“An ethics and a law based on the threat of
mutual destruction — and possibly the destruction
of all humankind — are contradictory to the very
spirit of the United Nations.”
We must do something about that. It is our responsibility.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia.
Mr. Sukhee (Mongolia): At the outset, let me
congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and express my gratitude for the convening of this
open debate.
I take this opportunity to warmly welcome all the
elected new members of the Security Council — Estonia,
the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia
and Viet Nam — and express our full confidence in their
leadership and commitment in addressing world peace
and security. Our appreciation also goes to the outgoing
members — Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait,
Peru and Poland — for their important contribution to
the work of the Security Council.
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

The founding fathers of the United Nations
established
the
Organization
around
three
pillars — peace and security, development and human
rights — to prevent war by binding us in a rulesbased international order. Seventy-five years after
the establishment of the United Nations, we are still
tackling enormous challenges, including protracted
conflicts, persistent poverty and hunger, terrorism and
violent extremism, human rights abuses, financial and
economic crises and a fast-changing climate. Respect
for international norms and institutions is weakening.
Multilateralism is being challenged more often.
The challenges of the contemporary world in the
areas of peace and security, economic development and
social progress, human rights and the rule of law urge
the international community to renew its commitment
to upholding and defending the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law. In
order to maintain international peace and security,
States Members of the United Nations must pursue the
principles of the Charter in good faith. In particular, all
Members should fulfil the obligation to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence
of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with
the purposes of the United Nations.
I take this opportunity to reassure those present
of Mongolia’s firm commitment to upholding and
promoting the purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter and the principles of international
law. I therefore wish to reiterate Mongolia’s principled
position and commitment to promoting the settlement
of international disputes by peaceful means, in such a
manner that international peace, security and justice
are not endangered.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in
2020 presents an opportunity for the international
community to reaffirm its collective commitment
to upholding the United Nations Charter in order to
maintain international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I am honoured
to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

S/PV. 8699

We congratulate Viet Nam — represented
today by His Excellency the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Pham Binh
Minh — for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. We welcome the presence of ASEAN member
States Indonesia and Viet Nam as non-permanent
members of the Council, as we look forward to the
further strengthening of the ASEAN-United Nations
comprehensive partnership and cooperation.
The relationship between ASEAN and the United
Nations finds its roots in their respective Charters. On
one hand, article 2 of the ASEAN Charter commits
ASEAN and its member States to upholding the
United Nations Charter and international law. On the
other hand, Article 52 of the United Nations Charter
cites the role of regional arrangements or agencies in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Cooperation to promote regional and international
peace and security is a key feature of the ASEAN-United
Nations comprehensive partnership and cooperation.
ASEAN
believes
that
regionalism
and
multilateralism are important principles and
frameworks of cooperation, and that their strength
and value lie in their inclusivity, rules-based nature
and emphasis on mutual benefit and respect. We have
a shared commitment to maintaining and promoting
peace, security and stability in the region, as well as
to the peaceful resolution of disputes, including full
respect for legal and diplomatic processes, without
resorting to the threat or use of force, in accordance with
the universally recognized principles of international
law, including the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea.
We promote sustainable security in the region by
reinforcing strategic trust and mutual confidence within
ASEAN and in the wider Asia-Pacific region, helped by
reaffirming the principles of the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia, as well as its application
to the wider region, and on the basis of upholding the
United Nations Charter and international law.
We acknowledge the continued contribution of
the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting (ADMM)
and the ADMM-Plus in maintaining regional peace
and stability. We welcome the defence sectoral body’s
theme last year on sustainable security, with the
aim of strengthening, consolidating and optimizing
defence cooperation and supporting cross-pillar
activities. We are pleased to note further progress in

20-0067657/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

the area of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief,
maritime security, peacekeeping operations, counterterrorism, military medicine, humanitarian mine action
and cybersecurity.
Peacekeeping remains the flagship programme of
the United Nations enterprise. ASEAN-United Nations
collaboration in peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding, with activities conducted through
ASEAN member States’ national focal points and the
ASEAN Peacekeeping Centres Network, continues
to be strengthened. As of July 2019, ASEAN member
States had contributed approximately 5,500 military
and police personnel, as well as technical expertise, to
United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We have intensified efforts to advance the women
and peace and security agenda, including through the
provision of a growing number of women peacekeepers
and the establishment of the ASEAN Women for
Peace Registry, to which the Secretary-General
reiterated the United Nations commitment to providing
technical support.
ASEAN cooperation has intensified efforts
on matters related to international terrorism and
non-traditional threats, including transnational crime.
Representatives of ASEAN member States and the
ASEAN secretariat have participated in United Nationssponsored regional workshops and conferences on
issues such as counter-terrorism and foreign terrorist
fighters, cybercrime, environmental crime, illicit drugs
and human trafficking.
ASEAN looks forward to further bolstering its
partnership with the United Nations in our shared
aspiration to maintain and enhance peace, security and
stability and further strengthen peace-oriented values
in the region and around the world.
In my national capacity, I wish to highlight the
following points.
First, as a proud founding Member of the United
Nations, the Philippines is firmly committed to
international law, as it is an indispensable foundation in
our efforts to build a more peaceful, prosperous and just
world, with the States Members of the United Nations
enjoying territorial integrity and political independence.
In promoting respect for international law, all disputes
must be settled peacefully, in accordance with Article
2 and Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter. The
1982 Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
58/65

09/01/2020

International Disputes is the authoritative articulation
of our collective duty, under the United Nations Charter,
to peacefully resolve disputes in the international arena.
Secondly, terrorism, with its links to drug
trafficking and organized crime, is a most serious
threat to international peace and security. The
Philippines supports efforts mandated by the United
Nations Charter on effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to peace. We support
the legal instruments we have developed throughout the
years, along with Security Council resolutions and their
effective implementation, to fight and end terrorism.
Thirdly, we uphold the primacy of sovereignty and,
as enshrined in the United Nations Charter, the principle
of the sovereign equality of all its Members. The United
Nations stands on the foundation of the aggregated
sovereignty of its Members. It harnesses sovereignty not
for some against others, but for the common purposes
of peace and productive cooperation. It is also our view
that today’s conflicts equally require trust and respect
for sovereignty, not a plain assertion of the multilateral
over sovereign States. Working against sovereignty
undermines the international order, as we have seen
when States are made to fail by multilateral action.
I conclude by reaffirming the commitment of the
Philippines to upholding the letter and spirit of the
United Nations Charter as we address with fortitude the
persistent threats to world peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama.
Ms. Quiel Murcia (Panama): Allow me to begin by
thanking the Government of Viet Nam for convening
today’s timely debate, which seeks to reaffirm the
inestimable value and commitment of the international
community to upholding the Charter of the United
Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security. We also welcome the important briefings made
by the Secretary-General and Mrs. Mary Robinson,
which underscored the crucial issues of today’s debate.
As a founding Member of the United Nations,
Panama has promoted the purposes and principles of
the Charter and upheld multilateralism as a mechanism
par excellence for effectively addressing issues on the
international agenda and as the ideal framework for
cooperation in promoting a more just and equitable
peaceful order for all. At a particularly sensitive time
in today’s world, where collective efforts for peace are
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

imminent, it is important to renew the commitment that
the international community made seven decades ago
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war,
by creating the conditions in which it could maintain
justice and respect for obligations under treaties and
other sources of international law. Renewed commitment
is essential to ensuring a climate of coexistence, trust
and tolerance for all.
We must urgently reflect on a world of that
kind — one based on respect for fundamental
human rights and the promotion of values that foster
humankind’s progress, with a global order of justice
and freedom that values human beings, following the
pain and suffering inflicted by two world wars.
The challenges and tensions on the global agenda
are increasingly complex. The growing threats posed
by conflicts, inequality, the scourge of terrorism,
extremism, xenophobia, hate speech and humanitarian
crises aggravated by the devastating effects of
climate change challenge every day the effectiveness
of this Organization and, above all, of the Security
Council, which bears the greatest responsibility for
preserving peace.
As we have pointed out before, the effectiveness of
the United Nations requires determination and political
will to face those challenges. We cannot continue to
issue documents and declarations while the cost of
the inability to take collective action is measured in
human lives lost the world over. The United Nations
is called upon to be an advocate for the collective
good and a builder of peace, and to do so it needs to
move from words to concrete action. As a country that
favours constructive dialogue, Panama is aware that the
Organization will be only as capable and relevant to the
people as the States that are here are willing to be.
We need to return to the essence that gave life
to our Organization. We need to genuinely empower
ourselves with a strong and renewed culture of peace
that preserves the vision of the original signatories
of the United Nations Charter. The defence of the
principles and values that emanate from it must be
the commitment that unites us, as well as our legacy
to future generations who, today as never before, are
demanding it because they deserve to be safeguarded
from the scourge of war.
Throughout its history, Panama has been part of,
and witness to, the resolution of conflicts between
countries in our region. Panama is a State party to

S/PV. 8699

treaties that call for disarmament with a view to
building a world free of nuclear weapons. We have
full confidence in the work of the International Court
of Justice to develop its methods for the peaceful
settlement of international disputes.
With this vision and in a particularly significant
year where we are preparing to commemorate the
seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, Panama
reaffirms its determined and unwavering commitment
to the consolidation of a strengthened multilateral
system based on the purposes and principles that gave
life to the United Nations, whose core was, is and must
continue to be the preservation of international peace
and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): Romania aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union. I will now make a few remarks in my
national capacity.
Romania believes that the United Nations remains
the most appropriate platform to collectively tackle
threats to international peace and security. The Charter
of the United Nations is fundamental to that aim. My
country’s commitment to multilateralism goes back
long before the establishment of the United Nations.
Romania is the only country to have provided a diplomat
who was elected twice to head the League of Nations.
His name was Nicolae Titulescu.
In line with the ambitious objective set out in the
Preamble of the Charter to establish conditions under
which justice and respect for the obligations arising
from treaties and other sources of international law
can be maintained, the United Nations is the main
global cooperation framework for States and a pillar of
international law and justice.
Today the role of the United Nations is much
debated. Yet we can all agree that, 75 years after its
inception, the United Nations has helped our societies
to develop through dialogue, negotiation and shared
responsibility. The Charter has proven to be a living
and visionary document that contains, or allows for the
creation of, tools to address challenges to international
peace and security. It is our duty to improve those tools.
Romania commends and supports the efforts of the
Secretary-General to pursue the reform of the United

20-0067659/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

09/01/2020

Nations system so that it can better respond to current
global challenges.

its tools is a matter of consideration and decision,
trusting its principles and values remains axiomatic.

We recognize the role of Chapter VI of the Charter
in supporting the peaceful settlement of disputes and
call for an increased use of conflict prevention and
political settlement of disputes through early warning,
mediation, coordination and strategic communication.
In the current volatile international environment,
following the political path to de-escalation is needed
more than ever. Recent developments in the Middle
East and North Africa confirm that the international
community has a responsibility to create openings for
political solutions in support of lasting peace. There is
no other viable option for us to take.

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.

Chapter VIII of the Charter provides the basis
for the involvement of regional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Allow
me to recall that, in 2005, Romania, as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, promoted the very
first resolution on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. Furthermore, when
Romania chaired the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
in 2018, cooperation between the PBC and the African
Union was institutionalized for the first time. In the
same vein, the Romanian Ministry for Foreign Affairs,
with the support of the African Union, organized a
training programme for African experts on stabilization
and post-conflict reconstruction, held in Addis Ababa
in November 2019.
Although the establishment of peacekeeping
operations is not explicitly mentioned in the Charter,
it is in the spirit of the Charter that United Nations
peacekeeping is implemented. Dag Hammarskjöld
famously considered peacekeeping operations as
“Chapter Six and a Half of the Charter”, projecting them
between the peaceful settlement of disputes mentioned
in Chapter VI and the more coercive methods stipulated
in Chapter VII. Thus, the United Nations gradually
took its place as the leading organization in the field of
peacekeeping, and Romania has been a steady supporter
of that approach. For instance, my country participated
in 10 United Nations missions and operations in 2019.
As we embark on a new year in which we must try
to find solutions to the most pressing global challenges,
allow me to reaffirm Romania’s commitment to the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and its core
values. The Charter calls for the protection of the
dignity and worth of human beings. While improving
60/65

Mr. Skoog: I have the honour to speak on the
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Turkey, Montenegro, North Macedonia,
Serbia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ukraine
and the Republic of Moldova align themselves with
this statement.
Out of respect for all the subsequent speakers this
afternoon and possibly tomorrow, I have abbreviated
my statement considerably. The full version is
available online.
I want to start by conveying our sincere condolences
to the families who lost loved ones in the tragic plane
crash outside Tehran yesterday morning.
Congratulations to you, Sir, and to Viet Nam for
assuming the presidency of the Security Council.
The EU welcomes your choice of topic for today’s
open debate.
For almost three quarters of a century, the Charter
of the United Nations has not only served as the legal
basis of this Organization but has also stood as an
enduring symbol of multilateral cooperation and the
rules-based international order. Written at the end
of the darkest days in the history of humankind, the
Charter represented new hope for the peoples of the
world. The United Nations Charter is as relevant and
important today as it was when first signed. Upholding
agreed rules and norms is the only starting point we
have for handling increasingly complex challenges.
The Charter and the multilateral cooperation that it
has established have been a remarkable success. There
has been a clear decline in violence and in the type of
inter-State conflicts that the Charter was designed to
handle. It works for all of us — countries that have
military might and economic dominance and those that
do not. We all benefit. The Charter serves us all.
At the same time, we must recognize that new
types of threats are on the rise, including hybrid
warfare, foreign interference and violent extremism.
Fundamental global developments, climate change,
changing demography and disruptive technology will
continue producing new kinds of challenges to peace
and security. We have to continue finding ways to
prevent and handle these challenges by developing,
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

strengthening and reforming the multilateral system.
Our only point of departure for tackling complex,
interconnected, global challenges is multilateral
cooperation that binds us all. The United Nations
Charter is at the very core of that.
While we live in an era of unprecedented quantity
and range of multilateral structures, the multilateral
system is also increasingly being challenged. New
competition and tensions are undermining the system.
Widely accepted treaties and agreements seem to be put
into question. It has been argued that this is the result
of a shift of power, and the seemingly powerlessness of
multilateralism in the face of modern challenges; that
the legitimacy of the multilateral system is vanishing
and that the ideals it represents are out of date.
But let us base our discussion here today on facts.
Sidelining the multilateral system and returning to
the rules that predate the United Nations Charter
would bring us back to something that we, not least us
Europeans, know all too well — chaos and violence.
Power is not a zero-sum game, and respect for the
international, rules-based system, is in everybody’s
best interests.
The unfolding escalation in the Middle East is an
extremely serious case in point. It could jeopardize
regional security and strengthen global terrorism.
The EU is deeply concerned about the latest increase
in violent confrontations in Iraq and underlines the
need for de-escalation and dialogue and for respecting
Iraqi sovereignty. The only way forward is a regional
political solution in line with international law. In
this context, the EU attaches great importance to
preserving the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and
to its full implementation. It is a fundamental element
of the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture and
crucial to the security of the region and of the world.
At the same time, in a fractured world it is essential
that all Member States allow the United Nations to play
its role as a platform for dialogue. The message of the
new leadership of the European Union is clear. The EU
is and will continue to be a guardian of multilateralism,
standing up for the rules-based international order,
including the protection of human rights, with the
United Nations and its Charter at its core. The EU will
continue to support the institutions that have served
us so well and the rules and norms that have laid the
foundation for the progress we have seen and benefitted
from over the past 75 years.

S/PV. 8699

To uphold the multilateral system and respect for
the United Nations Charter is not only in the interest
of all member states; it is also the responsibility
of all Member States. The EU and its members are
will consistently put cooperation over confrontation
and multilateralism over isolationism, stick to our
commitments and willingly help others stick to theirs.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and
the Socialist Republic of Vietnam for the invitation to
participate this open debate. I also welcome the new
non-permanent members of the Security Council and
wish them good luck.
Our participation is part of Argentina’s firm
commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and
to full respect for international law. The theme chosen
by Viet Nam could not have been more topical. This
debate takes place in a context of particular sensitivity
for the international community. This week’s crisis
in the Middle East requires us to understand that full
compliance with the responsibility of the Security
Council and respect for the Charter are more
indispensable than ever. It is imperative today to use
the tools of the Charter with full determination because
international peace and security are currently in a
situation of precarious equilibrium that in recent days
has become even more unstable.
It is in this context that the Argentine Republic
issued a statement on 4 January, stating:
“The Argentine Republic expresses its concern
over the recent events in the Middle East. Violent
acts in a global and hyperconnected world have the
potential to have direct consequences worldwide.
The Argentine people can testify to this, having
suffered international terrorist acts at least twice
in our recent past.
“In the face of this reality and based on our
own experience, the Argentine Government urges
the conflicting parties to take steps to ease tensions
and to work towards a peaceful and negotiated
solution to prevent an escalation that may jeopardize
international security.
“The Argentine Republic, as always, endorses
negotiation and diplomacy as the pathway to settle
disputes. Accordingly, Argentina calls on the

20-0067661/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

international community to play a constructive role
and urges multilateral organizations to assume the
responsibilities conferred upon them, especially
with regard to peace and international security.”
Argentina, as a founding Member of the United
Nations, has always maintained that there is an
imperative need to preserve dialogue and build
consensus to resolve any conflict. We support the role
of the Charter as an instrument for the prohibition of
war in the policies of States. The collective security
system gives the Council the primary responsibility
for maintaining peace and security, and it is the organ
that we have legitimized through the Charter for that
purpose, in accordance with which the Member States
duly agree to accept and comply with Council decisions.
The Charter provides for a delicate balance in
authorizing the use of force, and in that regard the
members of the Security Council have a fundamental
responsibility that the other Member States have
entrusted to them. Argentina has contributed from
the very beginning of the life of the United Nations in
efforts to improve the decision-making process in the
Council. This position is a natural reflection of the fact
that the actions of this organ have been frustrated on
many very serious occasions. Reality has highlighted
the need for the Security Council to be more
democratic, transparent, efficient, representative and
accountable to the international community in order to
fulfil its mission. Its performance is essential, as the
events of this week prove. In that context, the debate
on the reform process is a critical element, aimed at
responding to sudden and unpredictable events that
occur in a globalized and volatile world.
Today, more than ever, consolidating multilateralism
is essential and the articulation of a global framework
that channels these tensions is not feasible without a
Council able to respond to the international community.
Among the peaceful means available to the Organization
and its Member States, the Charter favours negotiation,
investigation, mediation, conciliation, arbitration,
judicial settlement, recourse to regional arrangements
or agreements or other peaceful means of its choosing.
In reaffirming its commitment to the Charter, Argentina
reiterates the cardinal importance of the principle of the
peaceful resolution of international disputes and argues
that any method of peaceful settlement is equally valid
for resolving conflicts and achieving fair solutions.
62/65

09/01/2020

Negotiation is the primary and fundamental means
for the resolution of disputes, and the parties must fulfil
in good faith calls to negotiate that have been made by
the organs of the Organization, including the General
Assembly. The parties have the obligation to behave
in such a way that the negotiations have meaning
and to refrain from behaviour that could frustrate the
negotiation. States outside a dispute must in turn refrain
from acting in any way that may thwart efforts to find
a peaceful solution.
In the context of the decolonization process, the
obligation to negotiate is strengthened by the duty to
end colonialism, as established in resolutions 1514
(XV) and 2625 (XXV) of the General Assembly. The
end of colonialism, the international system for the
promotion and protection of human rights, progress
on environmental issues, women’s rights and the 2030
Agenda represent progressive developments arising
from the Charter that together contribute to achieving
the fundamental objectives of the Organization,
reinforcing the ultimate goal of contributing to and
maintaining international peace and security.
In sum, in the face of this week’s events, the
defence of the purposes and principles of the Charter
is more today more critical than ever. We encourage
the States Members of the United Nations to actively
trust and support the path of negotiation and diplomacy.
This multilateral Organization par excellence and the
Security Council in particular must act to fulfil the
responsibilities assigned to them by the Charter. This
is required by international peace and security, and the
forthcoming debate of the Security Council, scheduled
for 21 January, will be another opportunity to issue a
clear signal in this process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. Arrocha Olabuenaga (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico thanks you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate, which takes place
in an international political environment in which
the defence of the Charter of the United Nations is
essential. As the Secretary-General said recently, we
are living in dangerous times. It is precisely in these
circumstances that we must return to the most basic
premise, namely, the need to observe and defend the
Charter of the United Nations.
In signing the Charter of the United Nations 75
years ago, the international community took a decision
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

that would define a new international order. The express
prohibition on the threat or use of force in international
relations marks a before and an after in the history of
diplomacy and international law. Virtually the entire
potential of the United Nations to consolidate a world
of development, harmony and social equality, in the
exercise of all its powers and resources, depends upon
respecting that fragile and imperative principle.
The Security Council, being the depositary of the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security, plays a fundamental role in that
regard. Beyond being a body that reacts to crises, the
Council must finally consolidate itself as the preventive
body par excellence, while actively facilitating that all
States fulfil their obligation to resolve their disputes by
peaceful means.
In matters involving international peace and
security, States must act in a manner consistent with
the Charter and general international law. If the law
is ignored, it is undermined. When States fail in that
obligation, it is even more important that the Security
Council be up to the occasion to defend and enforce the
Charter, in strict accordance with its powers and in full
exercise of its responsibility. Not only is the legitimacy
of the Council at stake in cases of crisis; it is the life,
dignity and value of the human person that are at risk.
In that context, Mexico once again calls on all States
that have not yet done so, in particular the permanent
members of the Council, to join the Franco-Mexican
initiative on limiting the use of the veto in cases of
mass atrocities. As mentioned by the representative
of France this morning, the initiative has already been
endorsed by 105 Member States. In our times, it is
unacceptable that the protection of civilians, the fight
against impunity and the granting of humanitarian
assistance be held hostage to the political differences
that lead to the inaction of the Council.
Likewise, Mexico reiterates to the Council its
concern about the continuing invoking of Article 51
of the Charter by some States to address threats to
international peace and security by military means,
especially against non-State actors. It is very worrisome
that that practice runs the risk of de facto broadening
the exceptions to the general prohibition on the use of
force irregularly. Given the importance and seriousness
of the issues addressed in the notes that are sent to the
Council under Article 51 and the lack of transparency
with which they are processed, it is necessary for the

S/PV. 8699

Council to review and modify its working methods in
order to ensure full compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations, especially when the immanent right of
self-defence is invoked.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Sweden and my own country, Norway.
We thank Viet Nam for organizing this debate. The
Nordic countries are staunch supporters of the rulesbased international order. The United Nations, with the
Charter at its core, remains as important today as ever.
We speak with one voice in support of multilateralism,
the peaceful resolution of conflicts, the fight against
poverty, and respect for human rights. Let me highlight
three achievements that we the peoples of the United
Nations have accomplished under the framework of
the Charter.
Special political missions and envoys have played
a crucial role in reducing tension. In many instances,
through creative and persistent diplomacy, they
have prevented and shown the way out of conflict.
Peacekeeping operations have proved critical in halting
violence and creating an enabling environment for
peace. Close coordination and cooperation with national
and regional actors in the field will continue to be vital.
Regional organizations such as the African Union
and subregional organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States are instrumental
in both preventing and removing threats to peace.
And the Security Council still has unique legitimacy
and powers in upholding respect for international law.
When its members are united, its role is unrivalled.
The international architecture of organizations and
norms that we have built together since 1945 constitutes
an unparalleled success. However, today we see a
worrisome tendency that the multilateral system is
under pressure, as are the rules and norms that underpin
it. The recent dramatic escalation in the Middle East is
deeply concerning to us all. It is of crucial importance
that all parties exercise maximum restraint, restart
dialogue and engage in peaceful means to resolve
their differences. The international community must
make every effort to contribute to a long-term political
solution to the current situation.

20-0067663/65

S/PV.8699

Maintenance of international peace and security

More broadly, we are facing major global
challenges — climate change, irregular migration,
terrorism, humanitarian crises and conflicts that no
State can solve alone. As we embark upon the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations, the Nordic
countries call for a renewed mobilization in support of
multilateralism. The celebration of the United Nations
this year is an important opportunity to reconfirm the
benefits of international cooperation and what it means
to people in our everyday life. That will continue to be
at the core of the Nordic countries’ multilateral efforts.
Our work as Members of the United Nations is not
only about halting conflicts, but also about sustaining
peace and creating conditions for sustainable
development. We know that, when women participate
and shape peace and reconciliation processes, we are
more likely to achieve sustainable peace. We fully
support efforts to reform the United Nations system to
allow for a more holistic approach to peace and security,
development and human rights.
The Nordic countries will continue to advocate for
investing in a strong, effective and accountable United
Nations. We remain consistent partners in our common
effort to uphold the rules-based international order,
which brings predictability and creates the necessary
conditions for tackling the most pressing global issues
of today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council in the very first month of Viet
Nam’s current term as a member. I also thank you for
convening this debate at the start of the year in which
we observe seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of
the United Nations.
The values of the Charter have served us well. The
purposes and principles of the Charter have become
the foundation of international law. They have played
their part in the journey of many Member States
towards peace, security and international cooperation.
Reiterating support for those values is therefore timely
However, in a world constantly in flux, the reality is
that the challenges to international peace and security
are a step ahead of the systems designed to tackle
them. It is now evident that there are fires all across the
horizon. To undertake a fair evaluation of the available
mechanisms without belittling their importance, we
64/65

09/01/2020

need to ask ourselves whether they are still fit for the
purpose of implementing the fundamental principles of
the Charter.
The central premise of the Charter in terms of
peace and security is ensuring world peace subject
to law, for which collective security was the formula
proposed. Alas, that goal has been elusive. Hence the
instruments for implementing the primary objective
have, over time, been engaged in other pursuits. As the
quest for international cooperation in matters of peace
and security has grown, improvisations have come to
the fore. Many have been listed before.
The genius of the Charter was to recognize that,
instead of constraining the abilities of sovereign States,
Charter institutions magnified them. Hence there is a
case to be made for innovations that enlarge the vision
of global rule of law. It is possible that, just as generals
often re-fight the last war, the drafters of the Charter
responded to the factors and forces that led to the
Second World War, without anticipating what we are
now faced with. Notwithstanding all its imperfections,
the United Nations Charter is still the main incarnation
of the global spirit. Constancy to its principles promotes
the common good. Moving away from a formal system
that is well understood to one that is based on untested
interpretations might have unexpected consequences.
Justice dispensed on the fly might come to be resented.
It is increasingly acknowledged that the Council
faces crises of identity and legitimacy, as well as
relevance and performance. The globalization of terror
networks, the weaponization of new technologies and
the inability to counter those resorting to subversive
statecraft are showing up the shortcomings of
the Council.
One delegation that epitomizes the dark arts yet
again displayed its wares by peddling falsehoods
earlier today, which we dismiss with disdain. My
simple response to that delegation — the delegation of
Pakistan — is: even though it is late, neighbour, heal
thyself of your malaise — there are no takers here for
your malware.
We need the Council, as part of the political tool
kit, to address ongoing and future threats to global
peace and security. The answer to the crises the
Council faces lies in invoking and working through the
Charter provisions that provide for reform and change.
We need a Council that is representative of current
realities, credible and legitimate, rather than one that
20-00676

09/01/2020

Maintenance of international peace and security

rests merely on the claim that it existed at the inception.
The Council needs to be fit for purpose for the twentyfirst century.
As Mahatma Gandhi once said, “one must care about
the world one will not see”. Resilient organizations are
those that are not resistant to change — or else current
emergencies can turn into catastrophes, even while
we continue our endless prevarication. It is said that

S/PV. 8699

humankind progresses when it collectively rises to its
responsibility to the future. The time to act is now.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers on my list for this meeting. Given the lateness
of the hour, with the concurrence of the members of the
Council, I intend to suspend this meeting until 10 a.m.
tomorrow, 10 January.
The meeting was suspended at 6.05 p.m.

20-0067665/65
