S/PV.7237

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7237th meeting

Thursday, 7 August 2014, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Simmonds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Naber
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Adamu
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2014/450)

14-49801 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1449801*

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 9.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2014/450)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other representatives present in the
Security Council Chamber. Their participation is an
affirmation of the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Africa and Uganda to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Mary
Robinson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region of Africa, to participate in this
meeting.
I would like to recognize the presence in the Council
Chamber of Mr. Said Djinnit, incoming Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/450, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kobler.

2/34

07/08/2014

Mr. Kobler: First of all, let me take this opportunity
to congratulate the United Kingdom on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of August. I would also like to express my gratitude to
the United Kingdom as Council President for drawing
the attention of the international community to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It is nearly five months since I last addressed the
Council (see S/PV.7137), and one year since I took up
the mantle of Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Much has changed over those 12 months. Developments
have taken place that seemed hard to imagine in August
2013. Those developments were achieved not only by
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
or the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone. They
are the result of a team effort that was led by a master
stateswoman, Special Envoy Mary Robinson. Without
her, truly, I could not sit before members today with
a positive balance sheet. Working hand-in-glove with
this special “Special Envoy” over the past year has been
a professional and personal privilege. I deeply regret
losing her as my partner in our joint endeavour to see
lasting peace in the Great Lakes region. But I equally
look forward to working with her successor, Said
Djinnit, a man well-versed in the intricacies of African
politics.
In August 2013, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
was knocking on the gates of Goma. There were daily
reports of killings, rapes and displacement, which were
causing suffering among the population. The Council
had just condemned the bloody attacks by the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) on Congolese citizens, which
forced 66,000 Congolese to flee their homes. Activities
by the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
were on the rise, with reports of attacks on Rwandan
territory as well.
Today, through the joint efforts of Congolese
military forces and the United Nations force, the M-23
is no more. Today, the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), at great cost to its
troops, has reduced the ADF to a shadow of its former
self. Today, almost 4,000 combatants from a variety
of Congolese armed groups have surrendered. Today,
the FDLR appears to be starting to voluntarily disarm,
while almost 500,000 internally displaced persons have
returned to their homes.

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

In August 2013, we could merely imagine an end
to the M-23 conflict, let alone the agreement to disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate fighters. But today, thanks
to the declarations signed in Nairobi last December,
that process is well under way. I applaud the efforts
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to fulfil its Nairobi commitments by enacting
the amnesty law and by providing former M-23
combatants in Uganda and Rwanda an opportunity to
apply for it. However, the implementation of the Nairobi
declarations remains too slow. Ex-combatants and
their families continue to live in camps under difficult
circumstances. The Nairobi declarations clearly
stipulate reintegration on an individual basis under the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
scheme. We therefore pay great attention to reports of
the return of former M-23 elements across the borders
outside the DDR process. I welcome and continue to
encourage cooperation among the three Governments
to bring this episode to a definite close.
Cooperation between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda is crucial to a sustainable
peace. The clashes on 11 and 2 June near Kibumba, in
which five FARDC soldiers died, highlight the dangers
of unclear borders. I salute the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda for revitalizing their joint
border commission, which should lay out a viable road
map to delineate that contentious border, which was
unfortunately put on ice with the emergence of the
M-23.
There can be no doubt that the security situation
has vastly improved since this time last year. However,
conflict persists. The situation is still fragile and not
irreversible. Early-warning mechanisms are in place.
Still, when a massacre of 33 people occurs, such as in
Mutarule on 3 June, we are often slow to react. It is true
the National Police and army were close to the place of
the massacre and failed to intervene. But MONUSCO
troops were also a mere nine kilometres away, but did
not leave the base. There must be accountability for
inaction. I am joined today by the Force Commander,
General Dos Santos Cruz. We share the same vision
and personal friendship. The Force Commander and I
visited Mutarule, and I publicly took responsibility and
apologized to the communities. At the same time the
United Nations commander of the base in Sange, who
failed to act, has been relieved of his duties while an
internal investigation is under way.

S/PV.7237

The incident brought to light the need for a paradigm
shift in thought and action on the part of United Nations
forces — from reaction to prevention, from static to
mobile and from a mindset of protection-by-presence to
one of protection-by-action. Both the Force Commander
and I have instructed our teams, military and civilian
alike, to follow one simple rule when lives are in
danger: “Don’t ask, act.” I call on all troop-contributing
countries to join in that robust peacekeeping approach
and in this instruction to actively protect civilians.
The first priority of the Mission has been to put
an end to the FDLR. Since 2002, over 11,000 FDLR
combatants in the Democratic Republic of Congo were
successfully disarmed, demobilized, repatriated and
reintegrated into Rwandan society. The Democratic
Republic of the Congo estimates that some 1,500
combatants remain in the country. That is all — 1,500
combatants and their dependents. We are now at the
endgame. It is time for those 1,500 to stop the fight.
It is time for those sought by justice to be put before
the appropriate tribunals. It is time for those who can
go back to Rwanda to do so. I do welcome Rwanda’s
readiness to accept those who go through the DDR
process, as it has done with thousands of ex-FDLR
combatants before.
In January, I told the Council that military pressure
would be necessary to lead to disarmament — it has.
The FDLR declared its commitment to disarm, but let
us admit that it has done so many times before. It is
the declared intention of the Congolese Government
for the remnants of the FDLR to be resettled outside
the Democratic Republic of Congo. On 27 May, the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
presented a plan for voluntary disarmament within a
period of 22 days and requested MONUSCO’s logistical
support. The plan envisages the regroupment of FDLR
combatants in two camps, in North and South Kivu,
followed by a quick relocation to a provisional camp in
Kisangani — outside the Kivus — until a final solution
is found. I made it the Mission’s first priority. Overnight,
my team mobilized flights, trucks, food, tents, water,
mattresses and blankets and prepared the camps in
North and South Kivu. Since then, 186 combatants and
430 dependents have voluntarily disarmed. To date, we
have provided security, together with the FARDC, as
well as medical services, almost 46 special flights and
more than 20 tons of food.
A joint ministerial meeting of the South African
Development Community (SADC) and the International

14-498013/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) held
on 2 July in Luanda extended the timeline from 22 days
to six months, starting on 2 July. The FDLR interpreted
that decision as a call to stall the process. In addition,
the perceived absence of military pressure has thrown
the process into a freezer. Since 2 July, there has been
no movement to the provisional camp in Kisangani,
according to the plan of the Government. It is telling
that the week after the Luanda decision, the FDLR
cancelled three meetings. Since then, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, SADC and MONUSCO have
undertaken many missions to convince the FDLR to
move forward. Their leadership largely ignored those
delegations. It refuses to give the order to transfer the
first groups out of the preliminary camps, preventing
any further disarmament. That is a serious signal of
non-cooperation. Standing still means we are moving
backwards. Experience, however, has shown that only
a combination of political and military pressure has
led to disarmament and demobilization. I am therefore
grateful for the consensus among the SADC and ICGLR
members States, including the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, that the military option remains firmly on
the table should the process continue to stall.
I am furthermore concerned about the security of
those residing in the camps. The FARDC and MONUSCO
do their best to provide a secure environment. However,
the smaller the number of ex-combatants and their
dependents in those regroupment camps and the faster
they move to more secure areas, the better.
The SADC-ICGLR community calls for a
three-month review in October. That must be the
moment for a serious assessment of the credibility of
the disarmament process. It must also be the moment to
decide whether to proceed further. I applaud Minister
Tshibanda N’Tungamulongo for setting up coordination
meetings, bringing together the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, SADC, the ICGLR
and MONUSCO. I am confident that the mini-summit
in Luanda next week will bring about the necessary
decisions to move the process ahead.
I am also extremely grateful for the close cooperation
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with us, bringing about a peaceful solution. I
am also very grateful for the commitment of President
Kabila Kabange to resort to joint military action should
peaceful means fail. Together we must agree on criteria
to assess the credibility of the current disarmament

4/34

07/08/2014

process and converge on a common course of action if
it is deemed insufficient.
I suggest the following criteria: the number and
quality of surrendering combatants and their weapons;
the handover to international courts of those who are
indicted; the restoration of Government authority
over vacated areas; the immediate cessation of human
rights violations in the area; the disengagement from
illicit economic activities; and the cessation of new
recruitment.
Meanwhile, I suggest joint military action against
those FDLR factions not willing to disarm and to act
against those who continue to commit human rights
violations. The end of the FDLR will be a turning point
that will fundamentally alter the security situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. If we get that right, the gains will be
evident: peace, stability and prosperity in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the benefit of the
population, which has suffered so much. But if we get
it wrong, the conflict will drag on. We must all commit
all we have to making this work.
My messages to the various groups are the
following.
To the FDLR, it must seize this last opportunity
and move forward with the process. All combatants,
including leaders, must disarm now. All human rights
violations must stop now. Those who are indicted must
face justice in international courts.
To the Congolese Government, this is also their
process. We are there to support them every step
of the way. But we look to them to bring all those
involved — regional and international partners and the
FDLR alike — into agreement on the way ahead.
To the SADC and the ICGLR, I want to express
my deepest appreciation and support. Success depends
on their sustained engagement and support. They must
do all they can to jointly pressure the FDLR to engage;
the three-month review must seriously assess the
credibility of the disarmament process.
To regional actors, they should use the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
the good offices of Angolan President dos Santos as
Chair of ICGLR to find sustainable compromises on the
competing interests that have brought instability to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for decades.

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Finally, to the international community, I ask
that they open their doors to offer a final destination
for ex-combatants unable or unwilling to return to
Rwanda — offer a peaceful future for their children and
the children of the region.
We have rapidly climbed a steep slope towards
stabilization in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I welcome the national disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan, finalized in July,
as a critical step in stabilizing the east. As it becomes
operational, more and more combatants may trade their
swords for ploughshares. But reintegration programmes
for ex-combatants have a price tag. I cannot emphasize
enough how important it is that donors quickly support
the Government’s plan.
With the expulsions of various armed groups from
areas in North Kivu, islands of stability have begun
to emerge from a sea of volatility. State authority is
gradually returning. Nearly 1,000 national police have
either returned or were deployed for the first time. And
with them has come an improvement of security in
some areas and a return of the displaced. I encourage
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to prioritize the return of Congolese police and
civil servants to consolidate those gains.
In the markets, as travel throughout the province
has become easier, goods such as clothes, shoes, books
and medicines are increasingly available. Similarly,
farmers are able to safely work in their fields, traders
bring more goods to market, and prices of foodstuffs
have fallen 20 per cent, 30 per cent and as much as
50 per cent. A mother in Kiwanja Rutshuru buying
staples for her family would see her bill drop 25 per
cent.
However, gains remain fragile. Splinter groups and
remnant armed groups continue to harass the civilian
populations and remain involved in criminal activities,
including the illicit exploitation of natural resources,
smuggling and illegal taxation.
At the national level, elections dominate the
political discourse. Through good offices, I have
aimed to reconcile differences. Only through inclusive
dialogue can we hope to set the foundation for a free,
fair and credible electoral process, the outcome of
which will contribute to more, not less, stability.
It is important that the opposition be given space to
express itself. The MONUSCO electoral incidents task

S/PV.7237

force is closely monitoring the situation, in particular
with regard to the recent arrest of Member of Parliament
Ewanga.
It is important that electoral decisions be based on
the Congolese Constitution, which aims at creating a
durable foundation for a new republic and to prevent
a return to the undemocratic practices of the past.
The publication in May of an electoral calendar for
local elections is a good first step. I understand the
Government’s budgetary and legislative constraints
to publishing a global calendar. But donors clearly
understand that a road map through 2016, with adequate
financial commitment by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, is a prerequisite for their support.
Security sector reform has gotten a bad rap in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But behind
that imposing name lies a simple aim — to make
people feel safe to live their lives; to go to school, to
work or to market; to raise their families without fear;
and to trust that their police and military are there
to protect them. The reform of the security sector is
also the precondition for an exit of MONUSCO from
the country. Only an efficient rapid-reaction force can
replace the MONUSCO Force Intervention Brigade.
Progress is still slow. Nonetheless, I welcome the
recent Government participation in the security sector
reform task force and its readiness to work together to
define standards and to develop a road map for moving
forward. I have confidence that MONUSCO’s newly
reinforced security sector reform unit will build on
those developments.
(spoke in French)
I have been in this post for a year. I am pleased
to see some tangible progress. A sizable number of
armed groups has been relegated to the history books.
Others will follow them. Moreover, a growing number
of Congolese women and men are able to envisage a
better future. Nonetheless, those positive developments
are but the beginning of the establishment of a lasting
peace in the Great Lakes region.
Together, we continue to work on that each day.
Allow me to add that this progress is, among other
things, the result of daily commitment and unwavering
determination on the part of all United Nations
personnel in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I would like particularly to recognize and highlight
the importance of the delicate, often invisible work

14-498015/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of the community liaison assistants. Those national
colleagues are the organic link between MONUSCO’s
forces and the people they protect.
I also thank the President and my colleagues on the
Security Council, whose firm, decisive support gives
us heart and allows us to advance with confidence and
energy towards the fulfilment of our mandate.
The President: I thank Mr. Kobler for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Robinson.
Mrs. Robinson: I am honoured to address the
Council in my last appearance as Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region on
Africa. I must confess that I am actually suffering
withdrawal pains, and I am sure that they will become
even more severe over the coming weeks. I would like
to echo what Martin Kobler said and express my deep
appreciation for the close working relationship I have
with him and his colleagues in the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I would also like
to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General for the
privilege of serving in this capacity, as well as to the
Council members, for the resolute support extended to
me during the past 18 months. I am pleased to note, as
evidenced from this meeting and the related discussions
this afternoon, that the Council’s commitment to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains unwavering.
I would also take this opportunity to thank the
United Kingdom presidency for organizing this special
meeting at a critical moment for peace and stability
in the Great Lakes region, just before the Regional
Oversight Mechanism meets in New York in September
to take stock of the progress made in the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
Despite the tremendous human and material
resources found in the Great Lakes region, decades of
war and deep mistrust had caused great damage and
misery at the time I assumed duty, about 18 months ago.
Nevertheless, hope was not lost. The Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes Region offered a unique
opportunity for comprehensive solutions at national,
regional and international levels, with the inclusive and
active participation of civil society, including women
and youth, in order to bring durable peace with security
and development to the Democratic Republic of the
6/34

07/08/2014

Congo and the region. While efforts to implement the
Framework have met with anticipated challenges, I
remain encouraged by the prospects and opportunities
generated by the Framework and by the significant
achievements recorded so far.
Implementing the provisions of the Framework has
provided a significant forum, the Technical Support
Committee, comprised of principal representatives of
Heads of State and Government, under my auspices
together with the African Union, to deliberate and offer
advice on the actualization of the regional commitments.
These periodic high-level interactions, supported by
my office in Nairobi, have significantly improved
communication flow and mutual understanding, and
have heightened the sense of urgency for collective
actions, as reflected in the formulation of the regional
action plan setting out priority actions, as well as
a monitoring and evaluation mechanism for the
implementation of the commitments of member States.
Those have indeed been significant preliminary steps
for a region known to have gone to war not too long ago
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Implementing the Framework in the last 18 months has
resulted in a strengthening of collective governance
and ownership in the region. My efforts have greatly
benefited from the proven determination by the
leadership in the region to take ownership and
responsibility for finding solutions for peace, security
and development. Evidence of that is the mini-summit
of Heads of State to be convened next week by President
dos Santos, as Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), to address the
current issues. I therefore wish to take this opportunity
to thank, in particular, Presidents Eduardo dos Santos,
Yoweri Museveni, Joseph Kabila, Paul Kagame,
Uhuru Kenyatta, Jakaya Kikwete and Jacob Zuma for
their untiring efforts to ensure the actualization of
the goals of the Framework. Indeed, I thank all other
Heads of State and Government of signatory countries,
and the secretariats of the ICGLR and the Southern
African Development Community for the emerging
collaboration and synergy, which I have appreciated
as vital in order to support the implementation of the
Framework.
International support by key partners remains
crucial, now and in the immediate future. I would like
to thank my colleagues, members of the international
team of envoys, the International Contact Group, the
African Union Commission, the World Bank, the

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Africa Development Bank, MONUSCO and the United
Nations country teams in the region, to name only a
few, for the useful collaboration and support provided
to me in the implementation of my mandate, and for
the evolving understanding of the critical need to align
respective programmes and policies in the region in
support of the Framework.
Equally central to the success of the Framework
is the full participation of civil society, particularly
women and youth, who are too often left out in critical
decision making processes, despite their significant
proportional stake in the affairs of the region. I have
worked with civil society in the region to establish a
women’s platform for the Framework, not as a separate
mechanism but as a reinforcing platform to support all
regional and national efforts aimed at giving voice to
women and facilitating their active involvement in the
implementation of the Framework.
National and regional planning workshops are
currently ongoing with the support of my office,
MONUSCO and the United Nations country teams,
for the establishment of a civil society coalition in
the region, in order to ensure that Governments are
held accountable for their commitments under the
Framework. I am indeed gratified to see the emerging
galvanization of those critical segments of society
towards the achievement of the objectives set forth in
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.
My last field assignment, a short time ago, was
to attend the extraordinary summit of the ICGLR on
the fight against youth unemployment in the Great
Lakes region, a project supported by the trust fund
I established in the Office of the Special Envoy to
support the implementation of the Framework. I am
encouraged by the determination of Governments in the
region to address the looming danger of a fast-growing
youth population with stagnant, if not dwindling,
opportunities across the region.
Fast-tracking
the
implementation
of
the
development pillar of the Framework remains a key
priority of my efforts. When people have livelihoods
and the economy grows, the clouds of violence and
insecurity inevitably lift. To that end, I have worked
with the current Chair of the ICGLR, President dos
Santos and the ICGLR secretariat to ensure progress
is achieved on the planned private sector investment
conference for the Great Lakes region, endorsed by
the Regional Oversight Mechanism. On 11 June, in
conjunction with the United Nations Global Compact, I

S/PV.7237

convened a round table on responsible investment in the
Great Lakes region in Addis Ababa, which drew over
100 participants from the private and public sectors,
signatory countries, development partners and regional
and international development finance institutions. In
September, Angola will host a ministerial-level regional
consultation that will bring together the Framework
signatory countries, private sector representatives and
international development partners in order to endorse
an investment opportunity brief for the region and
finalize discussions for the investment conference.
While some progress has been achieved thus
far, much more work is required in the days ahead,
and serious challenges confront the attainment of
irreversible peace, as my friend and colleague Martin
Kobler has already indicated. If the issues are not
immediately and effectively addressed, the challenges
have the potential to undo the progress achieved and
ultimately undermine peace and security.
Those challenges include the slow implementation
of the provisions of the Nairobi declarations that
followed the conclusion of the Kampala dialogue,
the humanitarian situation, including the state of
human rights, persisting impunity, the ongoing plight
of refugees and internally displaced persons, the
restoration of State authority in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the acceleration of security
sector reform and the voluntary disarmament process
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR). In addition, the region faces political tensions
and general anxiety generated by transitional politics
and electoral calendars in several signatory countries
in the next couple of years, along with the prevailing
mistrust in the region.
I call on the parties, with the support of the ICGLR
Chair, to follow-up rapidly on the recent technical
visits to Uganda and Rwanda by a delegation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to begin
the process of repatriation of eligible former members
of the Mouvement du 23 mars and to implement
other provisions of the Nairobi declarations. There
should be a timetable and careful monitoring of the
implementation of that process. I take note of the recent
progress made by the National Oversight Mechanism
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in concluding
benchmarks and indicators of progress on national
commitments. That should be followed up by concrete
actions in order to address root causes, as stipulated in
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. My

14-498017/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

office is currently engaged at the working level with the
relevant United Nations regional focal points in taking
stock of the refugee and IDP situation. The findings
should provide the necessary background for further
engagements at summit level in the region.
Council
members
will
recall
that
on
31 May I welcomed the announcement by the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda of their
voluntary surrender. However, the process has yet to
gain sufficient traction to show that it is credible, and
Martin Kobler has again shown the very worrying lack
of progress in recent weeks. If anything, the process
has created a worrying dynamic in the region and
beyond that must be carefully observed and handled
in order to preserve the earlier consensus-building on
illegal armed groups generated within the region, and
to remain focused on the relevant Security Council
resolutions on neutralizing the FDLR in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The positions taken
have been very clear that all negative forces must be
removed, and it is hoped that the forthcoming mini
summit will give a clear signal in that regard.
Concerning electoral calendars in the region,
I note the positive steps taken in Burundi, notably
those having to do with improvements in the electoral
framework and the adoption by consensus of the
electoral code. However, the Government must do much
more to curb politically motivated armed violence. It
will be critically important to work with the authorities,
not only in Burundi but in all the other countries in
the region where elections are scheduled over the next
few years, in order to ensure adequate political space,
including individual and group freedoms, necessary for
free and fair elections.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
offers solutions to cycles of conflicts that were decades
in the making. It would not be realistic to expect
solutions to arrive overnight. We must therefore take
a long-term view if we are to ensure tangible returns
on the commitments made in this historic plan for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. We
must continue to nurture the Framework and work with
the leadership in the region for as long as it takes, in
order to reap the necessary benefits for the peoples of
the region, who continue to bear the consequences of
conflict. I call on the Council to extend to my successor,
Mr. Said Djinnit, all the support he will need to carry
out his mandate as Special Envoy. He will lead a fine

8/34

07/08/2014

team in Nairobi, and will benefit, as I did, from the
support of the senior leadership at the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the Chef de
Cabinet of the Office of the Secretary-General, the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Field Support and my Special Adviser, Modibo Touré,
and staff members in Nairobi, as well as Martin Kobler
and his team in MONUSCO, for their tireless efforts
to support the implementation of my mandate. I firmly
believe that through working together with the region,
and with a common approach and political will, we
have a framework of hope that will ensure that we reach
that point in Seamus Heaney’s poem when “hope and
history rhyme”.
The President: I thank Mrs. Robinson for her
briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. João
Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, Minister of Defence
of Angola and representative of the Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Mr. Lourenço (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): We
appreciate the invitation to participate in this meeting
on the security situation in the Great Lakes region, and
to discuss our shared concerns about issues relating to
peace, stability and development in Africa.
This meeting is being held in a complex international
context that calls for special attention and serious
intervention on the part of the international community
if an effective solution is to be found to conflicts that
pose grave threats to international peace and security.
We commend the fact that resolving conflicts in Africa
is a focus both for the United Nations and for various
political institutions and entities dedicated to peace,
solidarity and the common good and united in their
efforts to eradicate such conflicts.
Such situations are caused by negative factors
that require our attention and intervention if we are
to change them and be able to build a better and safer
world for all. The Republic of Angola will continue
to contribute actively to efforts seeking to attain
and maintain stability worldwide by shouldering its
international responsibilities, in particular with regard
to Africa and within the regional framework in which it
operates, including the Southern African Development
Community, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region.
Although there have been some problems with
the stabilization process in the eastern Democratic
Republic of Congo, when it comes to achieving peace
in the Central African Republic and South Sudan
we believe there can be positive developments if the
international community can exert firm pressure and
intervene appropriately, and if all stakeholders take
the political negotiations seriously and fairly and
respect all agreements made. We believe that through
constructive dialogue and joint measures, we can take
into account the legitimate concerns and interests of
all parties involved and find just and lasting solutions.
In that regard, the Republic of Angola therefore
reiterates its support for the efforts being made in the
aforementioned countries to achieve peace, stability
and prosperity. They should receive urgent assistance,
particularly technical and humanitarian, designed to
contribute to effective resolution of their political and
social problems and support their plans for sustainable
development.
Since Angola assumed the rotating chairship
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, it has spared no effort to find durable solutions
to ending war in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo and finding consensus and convergence
in the Central African Republic and South Sudan.
However, we are concerned about the slow progress
of the voluntary surrender and disarmament, with
a view to repatriation, of the members of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda; the numbers
of those for whom this has been achieved are still far
fewer than the estimated force of about 1,500 armed
men and their families.
Under the initiative of His Excellency President
José Eduardo dos Santos, in his capacity as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
Angola has had the honour to host various summits of
Heads of State and Government to discuss issues of
peace in the central region of our continent generally
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular.
The Republic of Angola will continue to adhere to
and support the international community’s initiatives
and actions aimed at restoring and maintaining peace
and stability in Africa and the world in general and at
promoting enhanced understanding and cooperation
among nations in order to build a better world for
all. I am certain that this meeting dedicated to peace

S/PV.7237

and security in the Great Lakes region can contribute
substantially to achieving the noble goals of peaceful
coexistence, harmony, understanding, solidarity and
development.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
It is a huge honour to preside over a Security Council
meeting at a time when we have a unique opportunity
to bring peace and stability to the lives of so many. I
am grateful to the Special Representative and Special
Envoy for their words to the Council this morning. I
would like to pay particular tribute to Mary Robinson
for her determined and dedicated pursuit of peace in the
Great Lakes region. We are fortunate that we have such
an excellent replacement in Mr. Said Djinnit. I also
thank Martin Kobler for his tireless work to implement
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and I endorse his words on
the killings at Mutarule. The protection of civilians is
central to MONUSCO’s work and it is vital that United
Nations peacekeepers fulfil that responsibility.
We have all often said that there currently exists a
rare opportunity to break the cycle of violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. But
it is worth reminding ourselves why that moment of
opportunity exists.
In February 2013, in Addis Ababa, when the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region
was signed, few imagined the progress we see today:
progress against armed groups, where over 4,000
individuals have come forward for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; progress by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
towards implementing its commitments under the
Framework, including a national dialogue to build
broader engagement; and progress on preventing sexual
violence in conflict, with the implementation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo national action plan
led by the President’s personal representative. That
progress has been led by the region.
I want to be clear and to emphasize the importance
I attach to the region leading the work and my gratitude
for the progress that has been delivered thanks to the
commitment and energy within the region.
Today, because of the progress made so far and the
moment of opportunity we now have, we can imagine

14-498019/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

a position in two years time where all armed groups,
including the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), are no longer a threat and there is an
end to impunity; the completion of the electoral cycle
in accordance with a Constitution in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is achieved; and where
MONUSCO’s drawdown is a realistic proposition, with
the Congolese security forces taking an ever greater
responsibility for the country’s security.
But to seize the opportunity with the determination
and vigour it deserves and to make progress at the
speed it deserves, what we need to achieve by the end
of the year is clear: the full and swift implementation
of the Kampala dialogue — particularly the status
of repatriation of former Mouvement du 23 mars
combatants and the full and swift disarmament of the
FDLR. As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2014/450), they continue to pose a significant threat.
We have mandated MONUSCO to use unilateral force
to neutralize all armed groups. We should be prepared
to use it if the disarmament process fails to be swift
or credible, in the same way we have used it to secure
progress against other armed groups that pose an equal
threat to the protection of civilians. There should
also be the full and swift implementation of national
commitments, including the wider reforms needed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to consolidate
the progress made so far.
We will have lost this opportunity if in two years
time we cannot look back to further, real and tangible
progress. Despite the excellent progress achieved, the
report of the Secretary-General is clear that in many
instances progress is too slow and extremely fragile.
We must stay strong in pursuit of peace. Three
principles should underpin our work for the next two
years, so that the opportunity becomes reality: first,
support for the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as it undertakes a programme of reform
and implements its national commitments; secondly,
support for the regional processes as they cooperate
across borders; and, thirdly, support for MONUSCO as
it continues to transform and become more effective at
fulfilling its mandate.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the wider region and MONUSCO bear a
huge responsibility for progress upon their shoulders
as do, indeed, all members of the Council. Through
the interventions that will be made during the debate, I
hope they will know that they have the full support of
10/34

07/08/2014

the Security Council. When the Council next reviews
progress, I hope that it will be to hear how progress has
been full and swift.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I
would like, at the outset, to thank you, Sir, for your
presence among us today, which bears witness to your
commitment to the Great Lakes region and especially
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. I also thank
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, and
Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, as well as the Ministers who have honoured the
Council by participating in the meeting.
The path undertaken in just over 18 months in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is remarkable. In
November 2012, Goma — the main city in the eastern
part of the country — fell into the hands of a rebel group
in less than 24 hours, and almost all of the Kivus was
controlled by various armed groups that competed in
carrying out violent, barbaric attacks against civilians.
Today, the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has
been defeated and a number of armed groups have
surrendered their weapons. The Congolese Government,
thanks to its armed forces and with the support of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
is gradually regaining control of a part of its territory
that has been out of reach for too long, while displaced
persons have started a timid return to their villages.
But enormous challenges remain, and together we
must work towards durable progress. The commitment
of the international community, notably the Council
and the deployment of the largest United Nations
peacekeeping operation, should help to put an end to the
spiral of violence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo in support of the Congolese Government,
whose action is clearly essential.
There are both short- and long-term challenges to
overcome. In the short term, as stated by the Special
Representative and the Special Envoy, the fight against
armed groups must continue in accordance with
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014).

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Although the M-23 has been militarily defeated it
has not disappeared. The demobilization of combatants
is incomplete and the prospects for the military
regrouping of the M-23 remains a significant threat.
It is crucial to ensure that the signatory parties to the
Nairobi declarations implement the relevant provisions
in that regard. On the one hand, we call upon the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to boost efforts to
operationalize the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme; on the other hand, we call
on Uganda and Rwanda to work together to ensure a
definitive end to the group’s actions.
The major offensive launched by the Forces armées
de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC)
with the support of MONUSCO against the Allied
Democratic Forces has dealt a blow to the group.
It resulted in heavy losses among the FARDC, and
we salute them for their courage during the difficult
combat.
We also cannot forget actions taken against various
Mai-Mai groups, including the Mai-Mai Cheka and
the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain, which have also spread terror among the
local population.
Finally, regarding the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR), the Council’s mandate
has for many years been exceedingly clear. Resolution
2147 (2014) requires the immediate and permanent
demobilization of the FDLR. We have taken note of
the decisions of the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region to extend the process for an
additional six months, with a meeting scheduled at the
end of three months. The time frame for the process, in
which regard the FDLR has shown no tangible sincere
commitment, seems inconsistent in view of the tensions
and abuses on the part of the FDLR for more than
20 years. Only the swift disarmament of that armed
group, and the other groups, will reduce tensions and
restore confidence in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in the region. Maximum pressure
must focus on the FDLR leadership to ensure its good
faith commitment. The military option must remain on
the table.
In the medium- and long-term, only the
implementation of the structural reforms set forth in
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region

S/PV.7237

in Addis Ababa will guarantee peace and lasting
security in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Security sector reform regarding the police and the
army, good governance, decentralization, judiciary
and local administration are not only slogans that the
international community likes to chant; they are also
conditions for a long-term solution for the country’s
development. There is no way out of the crisis without
effective capacity-building for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to guarantee the protection of its people
throughout the country and continue the fight against
corruption and trafficking. The good conduct of the
electoral process is an essential aspect of peace and
stability. This process must be conducted in accordance
with constitutional rules and in the spirit of the African
Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance,
to which the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a
signatory. In particular, a credible and legitimate
road map should be drawn up as quickly as possible,
including a timeframe and a specific budget for the
elections.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has a
key role to play in the implementation of all of those
reforms. MONUSCO is there to support and assist it,
but cannot act in its stead. We reiterate our full support
for Martin Kobler and his activities. We would like to
pay particular tribute to his efforts, along with those
of the Force Commander, to ensure that MONUSCO’s
protection-of-civilians mandate is implemented.
Mr. Kobler’s response following the Mutarule incident
was commendable, and he has our full support in his
dialogue with the troop-contributing countries for the
implementation of the mandate with which we have
entrusted him.
It is up to us all, in the Council and in the region,
as well as neighbours, donors and troop-contributing
countries, to provide Mr. Kobler with the means to
undertake his broad-reaching mission. The commitment
of the United Nations must be durable and determined
and live up to the hopes raised by the successes achieved
in recent months.
Finally, I, too, wish to pay tribute to Mary Robinson
for her commitment and her tireless efforts over the
past 18 months to build trust between the leaders of the
region and to implement the Addis Ababa Framework
Agreement, which we are convinced remains pivotal
to the sustainable settlement of the crisis in the Great
Lakes region. We wish every success in this endeavor
to his successor, Mr. Said Djinnit.

14-4980111/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
presiding over today’s debate. Your presence here today
is a clear reflection of your Government’s commitment
to peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kobler, Special Envoy
Robinson and Minister Lourenço for their briefings
and acknowledge Angola’s crucial role as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR). I wish also to acknowledge the presence
in the Chamber of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) Force Commander, General dos
Santos Cruz.
The participation of ministers from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region underlines the
importance of reinvigorating the momentum and
political will needed to definitively break the cycle of
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conflict’s staggering toll is a searing reminder
of the stakes involved: over 5 million lives lost, millions
displaced and horrific human rights abuses perpetrated
with impunity against men, women and children.
We have seen some promising signs of progress:
the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23); the
weakening of the Allied Democratic Forces; and
important strides made by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with the passage of the amnesty law, ongoing
police reforms and steps to re-establish State authority
in areas formerly controlled by armed groups.
But we know all too well that these gains are
fragile and reversible, as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kobler has reminded us this
morning. A myriad of armed groups still operate in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Civilians continue to face horrific acts of violence, as
the recent massacre in Mutarule and the instability in
Katanga testify, and the pace of key reforms is far too
slow.
I would like to focus on three areas where urgent
progress is crucial if the elusive goal of peace, stability
and development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is to be achieved. We must seize the current
window in advance of the upcoming electoral cycle.
First, with respect to the Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Rwanda (FDLR), no one underestimates
the destabilizing impact that the FDLR has had on the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
12/34

07/08/2014

and the region. The Council has been clear on the
imperative of ending this threat once and for all. We
welcome the first steps taken towards disarmament of
the FDLR, but the initial surrender of close to 200 lowranking FDLR combatants, while positive, falls well
short of our ultimate objective.
The agreement reached at the July ICGLR-Southern
African Development Community ministerial meeting
on a six-month period for the FDLR to voluntarily
surrender and disarm could potentially deliver a solution
to the FDLR issue that avoids further bloodshed. That
would be welcome, given how entrenched FDLR
combatants are in their local communities.
For the initiative to be effective, it is essential
that there be no ambiguity and no preconditions to the
disarmament. But the current signals of non-cooperation
are worrying. We must closely monitor and assess the
results achieved, including through the three-month
midterm review in October, and be clear in our definition
of success: that is, real and full disarmament, not
tactical deceit by the FDLR to regroup. The criteria set
out by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler seem appropriate and should be applied. We
must continue to apply pressure and maintain a credible
military option, as we have mandated in resolution 2147
(2014).
The process can be transformative; other armed
groups are watching closely. But the risk of failure, and
the destabilizing precedent this could set, are also real.
Secondly, regarding the implementation of the
Nairobi Declaration, we have seen the impact of
concerted military action by the Congolese armed
forces and the Intervention Brigade in defeating the
M-23, and the subsequent surrender of some 4,000
members of armed groups. A total of 250,000 people
have been able to return home in North Kivu and
500,000 in South Kivu.
We welcome the steps taken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to implement the provisions
contained in the Nairobi Declaration, including
on amnesty. It is crucial that M-23 elements be
repatriated from Rwanda and Uganda and that further
progress be made to operationalize the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.
Effective DDR would not only prevent the re-emergence
of another M-23-like rebellion, but would also provide
an important incentive to other armed elements to
abandon their predatory way of life.

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Finally, let me touch on accelerating the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.
The
Framework
included
clear
commitments from all relevant parties, for the first
time, to integrate political, security and development
efforts — an essential nexus to tackle the root causes
of violence. Eighteen months on, there has been some
progress, but key reforms are lagging, in particular
regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo
security sector and the establishment of a rapid-reaction
force, a vital component of MONUSCO’s exit strategy.
The Framework requires political will, together
with human and financial resources, to be successful.
MONUSCO and its Intervention Brigade have acted as
a circuit-breaker, creating the political space to pursue
the necessary reforms. The ground-breaking decision
by the Council to establish the Brigade was the right
one, but the opportunity it creates must be seized. We
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler for his reaffirmation today of the MONUSCO
leadership’s commitment to ensuring a robust approach
by the whole Mission to the protection of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s civilians, which is, as we all
know, the core of the Mission’s mandate.
The true litmus test of the Framework will be the
improvement it provides in the lives of civilians: the
provision of basic social services by the Government,
reform of State institutions, the strengthening of the
rule of law and effective accountability.
Let me end by paying tribute to outgoing Special
Envoy Mary Robinson for her efforts to deliver a
framework of hope and for her important work to
champion women’s participation in all aspects of the
peacebuilding process; these efforts must continue. We
wish her well in her new position, and we look forward
to working with Said Djinnit. His engagement with
regional leaders, civil society and other stakeholders
will be crucial to ensuring that the framework of hope
truly delivers on its promise.
Ms. Powers (United States of America): I wish to
thank Minister Simmonds of the United Kingdom for
having convened this important event. I should also
like to thank Angolan Defence Minister Gonçalves
Lourenço; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Tshibanda
N’tungamulongo; South African Defence Minister
Mapisa-Nqakula; and Ugandan State Minister Okello
for making the time to join us today at this critical
meeting. I also thank Special Representative Martin

S/PV.7237

Kobler, Special Envoy Mary Robinson and Force
Commander Dos Santos Cruz for all of their herculean
efforts to ensure that the people of the Great Lakes
finally once day get to live free from fear and free from
want.
A year and a half ago, leaders from across the
region came together to create an ambitious agreement
to break the horrific and long-running cycle of violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement that
they signed was predicated on the understanding that not
only the region but the entire international community
had a stake in forging a durable and lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, an understanding
reflected in the significant, unprecedented support that
the accord received from the African Union, the United
Nations, the World Bank and other partners.
In the time since, significant progress has been
made towards that collective goal. With strong support
from the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s
military defeated the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23),
which is currently being demobilized, as well as several
other armed groups. MONUSCO’S Force Intervention
Brigade has demonstrated that with a robust mandate,
peacekeepers can effectively protect civilians from
atrocities. They have performed with bravery and
competence, putting their lives on the line for people
from a country that is not their own.
We welcome MONUSCO’s commitment to
investigating any and all occasions when civilians
are massacred when United Nations peacekeepers are
nearby, as well as Special Representative Kobler’s call
today to shift from a mindset of protection by presence
to one of protection by action.
However, significant obstacles continue to stand
in the way of peace in the Great Lakes region, which
undermines the hard-won progress of our collective
effort. The greatest threat is posed by the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR), whose
members continue to carry out serious human rights
violations and sow fear across the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. For example, according to the report of
the Secretary-General, in April, the FDLR abducted at
least 60 civilians in the Walikale territory (S/2014/450,
para. 69). Their crime was refusing to carry out forced
labour. The FDLR also continued to forcibly recruit
children.

14-4980113/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Those abuses, in turn, fuel more intercommunal
violence, displacement and fear, and foster a climate
in which new armed groups are likely to emerge. The
longer FDLR militants remain at large, the greater the
risk to all that has been achieved up to now.
The FDLR leadership must be held accountable for
their crimes, beginning with Sylvestre Mudakumura,
who was charged by the International Criminal Court
on nine counts of war crimes, including murder,
mutilation, torture and rape. He should be immediately
handed over.
We have heard here today an alarming report from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The FDLR has interpreted the recent announcement
of a six-month timeline as a call to stall the process.
As Special Representative Kobler has put it, standing
still means we are moving backwards. We cannot move
backwards. Spoilers will re-enter the game. Yet we
hear that the FDLR is cancelling meetings and ignoring
international delegations. Any demobilization process
must lay out specific time-bound benchmarks.
In the 20 years since the genocide in Rwanda, the
FDLR has made many promises to disarm. Results are
all that matter, and military pressure is needed, we have
found, for results to be obtained. We have seen that with
the M-23, we have seen it with the Allied Democratic
Forces, and we will need to see it applied against any
and all FDLR holdouts.
The six-month timeline should not be treated as
a grace period during which military pressure on the
FDLR is suspended. Given the FLDR’s track record
of committing atrocities at the same time that it
claims to be demobilizing, that would put even more
innocent civilians at risk and undercut broader efforts
to establish peace and stability. Therefore, even as the
demobilization process is under way, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO must continue
to apply robust and persistent military pressure on the
FDLR, specifically against those parts of the FDLR that
have refused to engage in a process of demobilization.
Another obstacle is posed by members of the M-23
who remain in Rwanda and Uganda. Members eligible
for amnesty should be promptly repatriated, while
those who are not must be held accountable for their
crimes. We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with cooperation from Uganda
and Rwanda, to finalize implementation of the process.

14/34

07/08/2014

Beyond the urgent objective of ending the violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, countries
in the region can also advance peace, stability and
prosperity by continuing to shore up democracy and
good governance. In the next three years, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda will all hold
elections. While we all know that elections alone do not
make democracy, concrete steps may be taken today to
help lay the foundation for free, fair and participatory
processes in accordance with international standards.
To that end, it is critically important that electoral
calendars be determined promptly and that opposition
parties be guaranteed space for equal participation.
It is also crucial that countries across the region
continue to shore up what President Obama called
the ingredients of progress — the rule of law, open
Government, accountable and transparent institutions,
strong civil societies and respect for the universal
human rights of all people. As he made the case to
nearly 50 Heads of State from Africa this week in
Washington, D.C., while hosting the Africa Leaders
summit, those ingredients promote not only free
societies but also vibrant economies.
A year and a half ago, the commitments contained
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement were just that — commitments, words on
paper, aspirations. That, today, so much progress has
been made towards making them real is a result of
unprecedented regional leadership and cooperation,
robust peacekeeping and a two-track approach that
couples demobilization with significant military
pressure. That formula has worked so far, and if it is
applied to the FDLR and the remnants of other armed
groups, the end of one of the longest and deadliest
conflicts in the work is within reach. We must not stop
yet.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Special Representative Kobler, Special Envoy
Robinson and Angolan Minister of Defence Gonçalves
Lourenço for their briefings. We welcome the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Minister of Defence and
Military Veterans of South Africa and the Minister of
State for Foreign Affairs of Uganda at today’s meeting.
Since the beginning of the year, the situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has seen continuous improvement. The Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Republic of the Congo and the Region has gradually
been implemented. The international community,
including the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations such as the African Union
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, has made great efforts to that end, which China
greatly appreciates.
The Great Lakes region is at the centre of the
African continent. For historical and ethnic reasons,
countries in the region have frequent interactions.
Their destinies are inextricably interwoven. Right
now, the region has a good opportunity to put an end
to its long-term turmoil. The international community
should coordinate its efforts on three fronts so as to
push for the realization of lasting peace, stability and
development in the region.
First, with respect to common security, the
international community should advocate in favour of
the concept of common security, comprehensiveness,
cooperation and sustainable development, and
respect and guarantee every country’s security. In
the Great Lakes region, the international community
should encourage countries concerned to resolve
their differences and disputes through discussion
and consultations and increase mutual trust, resolve
divergences and promote security through dialogue.
Secondly, in the area of common development, the
Great Lakes region is endowed with rich resources and an
enormous potential for development. The international
community should concretely help countries in the
region realize development and address the root causes
of conflict, such as poverty. While pursuing their
own development, countries in the region should also
actively strive to achieve development for all so that
the fruits of development can bring more and greater
benefits to the people of every country.
Thirdly, with respect to win-win cooperation,
working together will make countries stronger, while
isolation will make them weak. Countries should abide
by the basic policy of win-win cooperation in handling
their international affairs. We hope that members from
the region will establish a new concept of win-win in
bilateral, multilateral and common endeavours and
through regional cooperation platforms, such as the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
and jointly promote regional peace, security and
development.

S/PV.7237

China attaches great importance to its ties with
Africa. I firmly support Africa in resolving African
issues in an African way, while we implement the
China-Africa Cooperative Partnership for Peace and
Security initiative in an in-depth manner and further
increase our support for the creation of a collective
security mechanism in Africa. In the meantime, we
will continue our cooperation with the rest of the
international community so as to jointly promote peace,
stability, prosperity and development in Africa.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to warmly welcome you, Under Secretary
Simmonds, and congratulate you and your delegation
on the United Kingdom’s presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to welcome the
other ministers present here today and the Special
Representative and Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. I thank His Excellency Mr. Gonçalves
Lourenço, Minister of Defence of Angola; Mr. Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
and Mrs. Mary Robinson, former Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General to the Great Lakes Region, for their
statements.
Chad welcomes the consensus achieved by
Congolese political leaders that enabled the Government
to implement certain commitments it had undertaken
vis-à-vis the international community, namely, the
establishment of an inclusive national political dialogue,
the establishment of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, the publication of a partial election
calendar and the application of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process.
We would also like to congratulate the Government
for the efforts it has made to implement the
decentralization policy requested by the United Nations.
The Administration now has a presence throughout
the eastern provinces of the country, which had long
been occupied by armed groups. The Administration’s
presence in the eastern provinces is not only tangible
proof of the effective restoration of State authority in
that part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but
has also brought about a climate of peace and trust with
positive results, in particular the voluntary and gradual
return of refugees and displaced persons in accordance
with international humanitarian law and international
refugee law. Its presence also serves to guarantee the

14-4980115/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

protection of civilians, the fight against sexual violence
and the strengthening of infrastructure development,
agricultural activities and rural access to electricity
to promote microindustry, microfinance, professional
training and regional integration.
However, we condemn the delays that can be seen
in terms of security-sector reform, even if significant
progress has been made in training and providing
equipment to the police. In that regard, we encourage the
Government to pursue the processes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security-sector
reform in order to ensure sustainable peace and security
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We welcome the cooperation between the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the
Government that enabled the weakening and elimination
of several armed groups, namely, the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23), the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF)
and the Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain (APCLS).
Furthermore, we are concerned by the activities
of certain armed elements, who continue to foster a
climate of insecurity in the eastern part of the country
and in Katanga. The threats against the headquarters
of the United Nations country team and MONUSCO in
North Kivu are a perfect example of that.
Chad welcomes the initiative by the Congolese
Government to uphold human dignity and justice
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in order to
fight effectively against impunity. In that vein, three
laws that would create specialized mixed chambers to
adjudicate cases relating to crimes of genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes are currently being
examined by the National Assembly. Dozens of court
registrars and judicial clerks have also been deployed
in the military and peace tribunals.
Chad is pleased by the progress made by
MONUSCO in implementing its mandate and with
respect to its own reconfiguration and the handover
of its tasks to the United Nations country team. We
welcome the contribution made by MONUSCO to the
release of 21 children, including four girls, from armed
groups and their return to their respective families.
Chad urges the United Nations, the African Union, the
countries of the Great Lakes region and other partners
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the

16/34

07/08/2014

Congolese Government in completing the process of
normalization and peacebuilding in that country.
To conclude, allow me to pay well-deserved tribute
to Mrs. Mary Robinson for the excellent work she
has carried out during her mission and to wish every
success to her successor, Mr. Said Djinnit.
Mr. Naber (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): We thank
you, Sir, for having convened this debate today and
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Allow me to begin by thanking
His Excellency the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler; the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region, Mrs. Mary Robinson; and His Excellency the
Minister of Defence of Angola and representative of
the Chair of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. João Gonçalves Lourenço, for their
very valuable briefings.
My delegation has taken due note of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2014/450), which describes
the most recent developments concerning the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). My
delegation would like to pay tribute to MONUSCO’s
achievements in ensuring stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the overall
improvement of the security situation as compared
to last year, in particular in terms of the defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars.
At the same time, we would like to express our
concern regarding the threat that armed groups
continue to pose to civilians, in particular in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, the Allied
Democratic Forces continue to be a threat in North
Kivu through their targeting of United Nations staff
and facilities. That is in addition to the threat posed
by the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR) and the tenuous security situation in southern
and central Katanga.
Here, we welcome the new configuration of
MONUSCO, which has helped stem the threat to
civilians through coordination with humanitarian
agencies and the promotion of prevention and earlywarning mechanisms.
Furthermore, the military situation has improved
overall with respect to the Congolese armed forces.

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We also welcome efforts to support reconciliation.
We should support MONUSCO in its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts, in particular
with respect to the FDLR.
As there have been reports of certain Government
officials being involved in acts of violence and
large-scale violations, we call upon MONUSCO to
undertake investigations regarding those allegations
and to continue its efforts to promote the protection
of civilians and facilitate dialogue while focusing on
prevention through military and civilian cooperation
and the strengthening of efforts to combat impunity, so
that perpetrators of human rights violations are held to
account.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region continues to play a key role in supporting the
peace and stability process of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in particular and of the region in general.
In that regard, we pay tribute to Mrs. Mary Robinson’s
efforts to build confidence and to promote cooperation
among the States of the region, as well as to strengthen
peace. In that context, my delegation calls for the
increased effectiveness of the revised International
Security and Stabilization Support Strategy.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to you, Sir, and the
presidency of the United Kingdom for having convened
this important debate today. We especially welcome the
presence of Minister for Africa Mark Simmonds. We are
also grateful for the briefings by Special Representative
Martin Kobler, Special Envoy Mary Robinson and
Minister of Defence Gonçalves Lourenço in Angola’s
capacity as Chair of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). We also appreciate
the presence of high-level ministers from Africa, which
is testimony to the importance of regional cooperation.
Emerging from a recurring cycle of conflict and
violence, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
made meaningful progress in a relatively short period
of time. Although there are still a number of daunting
challenges ahead, we believe that the positive steps
taken by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
along with the active engagement of international and
regional actors, provide a new window of opportunity
for future progress. To ensure that such momentum
continues, it is essential to address the threats posed
by armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Even after the defeat of the Mouvement du

S/PV.7237

23 mars, the increasing threats posed by other armed
groups, particularly the Allied Democratic Forces and
the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR), continue to be an obstacle to peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the stability
of the Great Lakes region as a whole.
In the light of that, we support the ongoing
successful military operations by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo. The
recent surrender of FDLR combatants is certainly
a welcome development that should lead to the
complete disarmament of the entire FDLR, including
its leadership. We also share the Secretary-General’s
view that the military option must remain open should
the voluntary process prove unsuccessful within the
envisaged time frame.
However, none of the military actions will be
sustainable if they are not accompanied by concerted
political efforts. Improving governance and restoring
State authority in the areas retaken from the armed
groups are of vital importance. As the Democratic
Republic of the Congo moves towards elections,
scheduled for 2015 and 2016, we support the Congolese
authorities in leading an inclusive and transparent
electoral process and expect MONUSCO’s good offices
to play an important role in that regard.
The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region is path towards the region’s brighter future
and gives us hope for durable peace and stability. As
we now enter the second year of the Framework, it is
essential to accelerate dialogue and to build trust among
the neighbouring States, thereby ending the cycles of
conflict in the region. In that regard, it is noteworthy
that regional dialogue, led by Angola’s chairmanship
of the ICGLR, provides a unique opportunity to resolve
regional conflict through the instruments of the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework.
Finally, we would like to thank Special Envoy Mary
Robinson for her leadership and dedication to peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region. We wish her
all the best in her new undertakings. We also welcome
the appointment of Mr. Said Djinnit as the new Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General and look forward to his
contribution to the peace and long-term stability of the
region.

14-4980117/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): Allow me to begin
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Martin Kobler, Special Envoy Mary Robinson,
Minister João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço and Force
Commander Dos Santos Cruz for all their dedicated
work aimed at advancing peace, stability and security
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and the region.
It has been heartening to listen to the briefings
earlier this morning. The recent developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo offer a window of
opportunity and a sense of a different future, from
improving economic growth and recovering markets
to progress in tackling armed groups, including the
defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and actions
against the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF). It is of
paramount importance that the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, together with regional and international
partners, continue its efforts to tackle the multiple
challenges in a determined manner and that the
momentum of implementing the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region be maintained. Continued
close cooperation among the countries of the Great
Lakes region and an increased sense of national and
regional ownership are key to sustaining progress.
We commend the efforts undertaken by regional
organizations, in particular the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the
African Union. Such efforts remain key, as the country
is entering an electoral cycle, leading up to the general
elections of 2016. It is essential to ensure that the
electoral processes are peaceful, transparent and fully
inclusive with a clear calendar and in accordance with
the relevant constitutional provisions. We recognize
the role of the good offices of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the preparation
of those elections.
Even as we welcome the encouraging signs of
progress in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
must bear in mind that the country continues to face
significant challenges. Its security situation continues
to be affected by the operation of some 40 armed
groups, especially in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with grave consequences for
local populations, including massive displacements.
While the overall number of internally displaced
persons (IDPs) has decreased, we remain concerned

18/34

07/08/2014

about the man-made humanitarian crisis in Katanga,
where the number of IDPs has seen an alarming
increase. We need to ensure that protection efforts and
humanitarian aid reach those in need in that part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as well.
We commend the efforts that led to the defeat of
M-23 and the important actions undertaken jointly by
MONUSCO and the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) over recent
months, including against the Allied Democratic
Forces — National Army for the Liberation of Uganda.
Those advances were achieved at a human cost to the
FARDC itself and offer a window of opportunity for
extending and strengthening State authority in the
areas freed from armed groups.
As other speakers have said, the unconditional and
voluntary disarmament of the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) remains key. It must
be credible and time-bound, carried out within the
shortest possible time frame, involving the FDLR
leadership, and include the formal handover of all
vacated territories. We stress the importance of the
continued involvement of the countries of the Great
Lakes region and SADC in those processes. As noted
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and others, should the voluntary process of FDLR
disarmament prove unsuccessful, military operations
against it remain an option.
My delegation stresses the importance of
accelerating the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as security
sector reform. The technical committee for army
reform, established in April this year, should draw up a
work plan and proceed with its implementation without
any delay. Broader reforms aimed at strengthening
public finance management, consolidating State
structure, a presence across the country, respect for
the rule of law, justice and accountability are required
in order to anchor the fragile progress achieved. My
delegation notes the concerns expressed in SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2014/450) with regard to the slow
implementation of the 100 priority recommendations.
Long-term stability inevitably hinges on addressing
the root causes of the conflict. The ownership and
management of land and natural resources are often at
the core of conflict. Transparency and accountability
for the extraction and management of natural resources
must be ensured. Combating illegal logging, the illegal
extraction of natural resources, poaching and the illicit
14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

ivory trade and disrupting the chains of illegal trade
in such resources must be tackled with resolve and
determination. We welcome the actions undertaken by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to increase the
transparency of the supply chains of natural resources,
as well as MONUSCO’s assistance to that end. We also
welcome the fact that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is now a full member of the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative.
Safeguarding peace and security requires
addressing the issues of justice and accountability. The
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
suffered badly and continue to suffer from persistent
human rights violations, including abductions, killings,
expulsions, child recruitment, sexual violence and rape.
MONUSCO’s determination to enhance the protection
of civilians through a more mobile, flexible and robust
approach and the Mission’s eastward reconfiguration
have already yielded results and remain key for ensuring
the effective protection of civilians. We welcome a
reinforced Mission-level presence in Goma and are
convinced that will be an effective deterrent against
would-be perpetrators of human rights abuses and
violations. At the same time, we note that putting an
end to impunity and ensuring accountability constitute
another element of deterrence.
We welcome the recent appointment by President
Kabila Kabange of a special representative on sexual
violence and child recruitment and hope her mandate
will be strong enough to effectively combat these
abhorrent crimes. A lot remains to be done in that
respect. As noted in Secretary-General’s report, so far
the military court has delivered two rape convictions.
Rape victims across the country remained countless,
though, and evidence supporting that is ample. We
therefore hope that the pursuit of justice for rape victims
will continue.
We welcome the steps taken by the Congolese
Government to implement the action plan to prevent
child recruitment and tackle other grave violations
against children. As the Secretary-General’s report
notes, five FARDC and one Congolese National Police
element were convicted by the Bukavu military court
of raping children. We encourage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo authorities to continue their
efforts in pursuing justice for child recruits and child
victims. We also stress the importance of an expeditious
implementation of the provisions on a children’s birth
registration system.

S/PV.7237

Ensuring accountability for gross human rights
violations, war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
paramount for restoring confidence in State institutions
and sustaining peace efforts.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Martin Kobler, Mrs. Mary Robinson and
Mr. João Gonçalves Lourenço, Minister of Defence of
Angola, for their briefings. We would like to welcome
Lieutenant General dos Santos Cruz and commend
him for his outstanding and dedicated work. We also
commend the staff of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) and the country team for their
work.
We wish every success to Mrs. Mary Robinson
in her new role, and we welcome the appointment of
Mr. Said Djinnit, which coincides with a crucial stage
marked by the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23). That defeat must be used to foster inclusive
dialogue, ensure funding for the country team’s electoral
tasks and mobilize political, governmental and regional
backing to support the sustainable implementation of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region,
including the participation of women and civil society.
MONUSCO must use all its capabilities to carry out
the effective disarmament of the Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Rwanda in line with the Nairobi
plan, to close the gap between demobilization and
reintegration, and to neutralize the Allied Democratic
Forces and other groups, in order to make progress
in the implementation of the third disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration plan and the action
plan to prevent child recruitment.
The number of internally displaced persons has
decreased to 2.6 million, but we are concerned about the
increase in the number of internally displaced persons
in Katanga province as a result of the attacks of the
Bakata Katanga, among others. That is why we must
examine and geographically refocus the humanitarian
and financial efforts to address the special needs of
women and girls, including survivors of sexual violence,
a struggle to which President Kabila is committed.
Although the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has made gradual progress in complying with the
six national commitments of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, signed more than a year

14-4980119/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

ago, key reforms in areas such as justice and security
have been slow. In that regard, we value the reform
and training of the police sector, but we reiterate our
concern over the delays in the deployment of the army
battalions that are to make up the rapid-reaction force.
MONUSCO and the country team must continue
to support structural reforms and decentralization,
including in the mining sector, which requires the
implementation of mechanisms to regulate and
supervise the supply chain, to prevent and avoid the
illicit trafficking of minerals, which finances armed
groups, many of which recruit and use children.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
protecting the civilian population and of continuing to
fight against impunity. In recognizing the sovereignty
of national institutions, we share the SecretaryGeneral’s disappointment over the verdicts delivered in
the trials for the killings and mass rapes in Minova, and
we hope that they will serve as an impetus to carry out
reforms to ensure the independence of the judiciary and
the court of appeals.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the international community’s
active efforts to normalize the situation in the Great
Lakes region, namely, in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That constructive commitment is demonstrated,
among other things, by the decisions taken at the July
summit of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Defence of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community and
the recent visit to the subregion of the group of envoys
led by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mrs. Robinson. We commend Mrs. Robinson for her
energetic efforts in this crucial role and wish every
success to her successor, Mr. Djinnit.
We call on all parties to fully uphold the agreements
undertaken in the Framework agreement, including
respect for territorial sovereignty, non-intervention in
one another’s internal affairs and the establishment
of confidence-building measures between countries
of the subregion. In that context, we are concerned by
the armed clashes on the Congolese/Rwandan border
in June. All sides must absolutely demonstrate full
restraint and take steps to de-escalate the situation,
including through drawing upon the Joint Verification
Mechanism and what is set out in the Framework
Agreement.

20/34

07/08/2014

We note significant progress in implementing the
military component of the Framework Agreement,
including the successful defeat of the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) and the Allied Democratic Forces.
There is a need to continue the operation to neutralize
other armed groups that are acting in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Of equal importance is amnesty for former fighters
who did not perpetrate serious crimes, as well as
their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We hope to see the successful implementation of the
national plan for 2014 to 2017, recently adopted by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which should
include the participation of 12,000 combatants. There is
also a need to ensure the repatriation of approximately
100 former M-23 fighters from Uganda and Rwanda.
We note the beginning of the voluntary disarmament
of the Forces Démocratiques de Libération du Rwanda,
which should be concluded by the end of this year. If
insurgents think of pretexts to draw out the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, then perhaps
pressure must be brought to bear on them, including
military pressure.
However, it is clear that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. There is a need for
comprehensive efforts to eradicate the root causes,
including by strengthening State institutions in the
liberated areas. Of particular importance is speeding
up the implementation of the recommendations of the
2013 National Dialogue, including the establishment of
a Government of national unity, security-sector reform
and the resolution of pressing social and economic
issues.
United Nations peacekeeping efforts play an
important role in ensuring stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We support efforts to focus
basic energies and resources on the east of the country,
where they are most relevant.
We note the successful joint operation between the
Congolese army and the Force Intervention Brigade of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to weed out armed groups. However, we believe that
the primary responsibility for combating armed groups
and stabilizing the situation lies with the Congolese. In
that connection, success will depend on, among other
things, the establishment of a rapid-reaction force.

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.7237

On a practical level, we suggest that, as the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo normalizes,
the issue of optimizing the troop level of MONUSCO,
which is at present the largest United Nations
peacekeeping mission in the world, be addressed. That
is all the more relevant if we take into account the
pressing need to deploy United Nations peacekeeping
presences in other flashpoints in Africa.

Democratic Republic of the Congo. The setting of a
time frame for the organization of local elections, the
Government’s increasing presence in areas cleared
of armed groups, including the islands of stability
supported by MONUSCO, military operations against
the Ugandan Allied Democratic Forces-National Army
for the Liberation of Uganda — these are all positive
and encouraging developments.

Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): Mr. President, let me begin
by thanking you and the entire delegation of the United
Kingdom for having convened this important debate on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. I would also like to thank The Honourable
João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, Minister of Defence
of Angola and Chair of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), as well as Martin
Kobler, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region of Africa, for their
respective briefings.

However, there is still much to be done, as we
have heard in the reports of extremely slow securitysector reform, the horrific crimes against civilians that
continue to be carried out by armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the pervasive
impunity that accompanies these crimes. It is true that
MONUSCO is on the ground protecting civilians, but
we should not forget that the primary responsibility
to protect the Congolese people lies, of course, with
the Government, which should redouble its efforts in
implementing and enforcing accountability and justice
mechanisms.

Before I start, allow me to also acknowledge
the presence among us of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo;
Her Excellency Ms. Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula,
Minister of Defence and Military Veterans of South
Africa; and the Ugandan Minister of State for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Henry Oryem Okello.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
Mrs. Robinson for her dedication to peace and
security in the Great Lakes region for the past
16 months — actually, I would say for over a decade,
since she was the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in Geneva; we both served there.
I thank her warmly for her dedication and personal
support for peace in the Great Lakes region. I would
also like to pay tribute to His Excellency José Eduardo
dos Santos, President of the Republic of Angola and
Chair of the ICGLR, for his wisdom and commitment
to peace and security in eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Rwanda was pleased to see that the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has achieved some progress on important fronts, as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2014/450),
including working towards ending gross human rights
violations and consolidating State authority in eastern

There is another area of extreme importance which,
unfortunately, has not seen progress: the neutralization
of the 1994 genocidal movement, namely the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR). This
is one of the oldest armed groups in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which settled in that area after
committing the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis in
Rwanda. Despite its claims of readiness to disarm,
the FDLR continues to recruit and train combatants,
including children. The genocidal organization FDLR’s
voluntary disarmament is the latest among the many
distractions that have stood in the way of a solution to
the FDLR problem for two decades.
General disarmament and surrenders have been
taking place under political and military pressure
for many years. As stated by Special Representative
Martin Kobler, more than 11,000 former FDLR
combatants have been successfully repatriated since
2002 through the Mutobo Demobilization Centre,
which the Council visited in October last year. Most
of those who surrendered, including top commanders,
have peacefully reintegrated into society. There is
a tendency to create a false dichotomy between the
military operation against the FDLR and voluntary
surrender. Yet this is not an either/or situation. On the
contrary, the two actually contribute to each other.
The main reason that more than 10,000 ex-FDLR have
disarmed and returned voluntarily to Rwanda over the
past 10 years is that political and military pressure, or

14-4980121/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the credible threat thereof, have consistently triggered
mass surrenders of demotivated genocidal forces,
namely FDLR combatants.
On the other hand, the example set by successful
repatriation and reintegration within Rwandan society
presented a strong incentive for further surrenders.
I wish here to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Kobler for sharing the statistics on
the repatriation of FDLR combatants since 2002, most
of whom repatriated owing to the pressure, I think, of
the joint Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) and Rwanda Defence Force military
operations of 2009, code named “Umoja wetu”.
It would have been good, in order to have a full
picture of the situation, if this graph were accompanied
by statistics on FDLR recruitment and on the atrocities
committed since 2002. Then we would better
understand the urgency of the matter. But even with
these statistics, it is clear that military pressure seems to
be the only viable option that can force the génocidaires
to repatriate.
Having said that, by entertaining the FDLR
genocidal forces’ diversionary manoeuvres that are
neither new nor credible, regional international actors
are further complicating and prolonging a conflict for
which the region has already paid a tragic cost. Even
more disturbing is the fact that such an attitude might
be setting the stage for further conflicts in the region,
as some actors driven by hidden agendas may take
advantage of the genocidal movement, the FDLR’s
presence. to pursue their own negative goals.
Rwanda knows first-hand what it takes to build a
nation from the ashes. We know that the focus should be
on national reforms, the reintegration of former rebels,
neutralizing remaining groups and establishinb State
authority. That is why we are committed to carrying out
all the tasks required of us as per the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework Agreement in order to
ensure that the region is moving towards peace and
stability throughout its borders. From 18 to 20 July, a
delegation from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government, assisted by officials from MONUSCO,
the ICGLR and the Office of the Special Envoy, carried
out the registration and initiation of the armies to
process the ex-Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) elements
interned in Rwanda.
When 453 ex-combatants, including all their
former leaders, were registered and filled out their

22/34

07/08/2014

application forms, the process generated some positive
expectations on the part of the ex-combatants. Some
of the junior members who were not present during
the exercise have expressed interest in joining the
process. Signatories to the Framework Agreement and
others should ensure that reasonable incentives are
put in place and maintained for the ex-combatants to
remain committed to the implementation process. As
an active member of the ICGLR, a committed signatory
to the Framework Agreement, and the Government
that has been carrying a heavy burden by receiving,
disarming, moving away from the border and managing
ex-M-23 combatants without any international support,
we are determined to support the implementation of the
Kampala dialogue declarations and have requested that
its application be extended to include the ex-FARDC
General Laurent Nkunda.
We firmly believe that the international community
should engage with signatories in general collaborative
terms. They should build on regional initiatives to
achieve sustainable peace by addressing the root causes
of crises in the Great Lakes region. Chief among those
causes in the past two decades are the active presence of
the genocidal forces, FDLR, in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The synchronization of
international and regional efforts is paramount to avoid
the progress achieved being diluted or reversed. For
example, the implementation of concrete resolutions
agreed upon unanimously during the ICGLR Summit
in Luanda in March was unfortunately diverted by
unrelated agendas, some of which only serve to worsen
existing problems.
The international community, through its special
envoys or other channels, should make greater use of
good offices to ensure that key actors in the region
continue to work in the spirit of confidence-building,
ownership and accountability.
I conclude by warmly welcoming Ambassador Said
Djinnit, the new Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I have no doubt that he is
expertise and extensive experience have prepared him
for the job. We have high hopes for the Ambassador
and the new team. We look forward to working with
them so that we may see all of our efforts bear fruit
for the benefit of the Congolese people, the Congolese
Government and for all the people of the region.
Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I welcome and thank
you, Sir, for taking the time to preside over this
important meeting. I would also like to thank Special
14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Representative of the Secretary-General Martin Kobler
and Special Envoy Mary Robinson for their briefings.
I wish to thank His Excellency Mr. João Gonçalves
Lourenço for his statement. I also acknowledge the
presence of other ministers who have set aside time to
participate in this discussion.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has made
remarkable progress in overcoming decades of violence
and instability. Recent developments further offer the
hope that enduring solutions will yield dividends in
the search for permanent peace in the country. The
sustained engagement of the international community
will be required to complete that process.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
demonstrated its firm commitment to the success of the
electoral process, which is critical to peace and stability
in the country. The internal processes, such as the
proposed amendments to the Constitution and reform
of the judiciary, will serve as confidence-building
measures to engender broad-based participation in the
process. Such reforms must therefore attract the support
of all the relevant stakeholders. Other proposed reforms
relating to adjudication on genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes against civilians should
be predicated not only on constitutional provisions
but should also be in consonance with the relevant
international instruments.
Security sector reform is increasingly being
recognized as an important vehicle for supporting the
security and safety of the State and its people. That is
why we applaud the robust efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in reforming
its police sector. We consider initiatives in that area
as essential to consolidating State authority and we
encourage the Government to mobilize adequate
resources in order to enable similar reforms of the defence
sector. We believe that once that is accomplished, the
process of establishing a rapid reaction force to assume
the functions of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) will be facilitated.
Nigeria shares the aspirations of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to assume full
responsibility for the stabilization and reconstruction
of liberated areas. The effective implementation of all
aspects of that initiative, including the establishment of
Government structures at all levels, is critical for the
consolidation of State authority.

S/PV.7237

The activities of armed groups continue to
constitute both security and humanitarian challenges
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We therefore welcome the attention of elements of
the Forces démocratiques de libération du RwandaForces Combattantes Abacunguzi to disarm and
embrace dialogue and negotiations. We encourage the
Government of Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in partnership with MONUSCO, to facilitate the
disarmament process. In the interim, we support the
joint discussion between the Congolese defence Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
the Uganda People’s Defence Force towards neutralizing
threats emanating from the Allied Democratic Forces
armed group in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We anticipate similar actions between the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other Governments of neighbouring countries in
order to completely eliminate threats posed by armed
groups in the region.
On the humanitarian dimension, we note the decline
in the number of internally displaced persons from
2.9 million to 2.6 million. More, however, remains to be
done to further reduce that figure and to ameliorate the
conditions of so many people who remain vulnerable
to various threats and human rights abuses. We
nevertheless take positive note of the initiatives of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Republic of the Congo in creating a mixed
commission to manage the humanitarian situation
caused by the movement of citizens of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from the Republic of the Congo.
We urge the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to continue to pursue mutual beneficial
arrangements with other regional actors in mitigating
any humanitarian concerns emanating from conflicts
in the region.
We remain supportive of the continued diplomatic
efforts in Kinshasa between the team of special envoys,
including those from the African Union, the European
Union, the United States, and the relevant stakeholders,
for the implementation of the key objectives of
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement. We also welcome the holding of the
seventh meeting of the Technical Support Committee
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism in Goma in May,
designed to assess progress on the implementation of
the regional action plan. Both initiatives are intended
to give impetus to the promotion of peace, security and

14-4980123/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region and they enjoy our full support.
Nigeria commends MONUSCO for its continued
logistical, political and technical support to the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is pertinent to point out that MONUSCO’s
reconfiguration process should not, by virtue of
pursuing efficiency in terms of resource deployment,
impede the implementation of resolution 2147 (2014). In
that regard, it is essential that the execution of Council
mandates be facilitated by adequate resource allocation.
Finally, Nigeria pays tribute to Special Envoy Mary
Robinson for her very active engagement in the peace
process in the Great Lakes region. Her efforts have led
to the present level of progress in the region, and we
wish her all the best in her future endeavours. We also
pledge our continued support to Special Envoy Said
Djinnit as he assumes the mantle of leadership of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to acknowledge your presence here today,
Secretary Simmonds, to preside over our debate,
inasmuch as it reflects the importance for the Security
Council of today’s topic. That importance has also been
highlighted by the delegation of the United Kingdom
under the leadership of Ambassador Sir Mark Lyall
Grant, to whom we express our renewed respect.
We appreciate the briefings made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
Mr. Martin Kobler; by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa, Mrs. Mary Robinson; and by the Minister
of Defence of Angola, Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves
Lourenço, participating in his capacity as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. I
would also like to take this opportunity to commend the
leadership and applaud the excellent work accomplished
by Mrs. Robinson and to wish her successor, Mr. Said
Djinnit, the utmost success as he assumes this new,
enormous responsibility. I would also like to welcome
the ministers joining us today from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Africa and Uganda.
We would recall that when Argentina joined the
Security Council in January 2013, the Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) had just launched its offensive against

24/34

07/08/2014

the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It had seized the city of Goma and controlled
a large part of the country, with a high number of
internally displaced persons, numerous casualties
as a result of the hostilities, and incessant ongoing
suffering in the refugee camps. There has been great
progress since. With the help of MONUSCO and its
international partners, especially the other countries
of the region, the M-23, as Mr. Kobler noted, has been
defeated. And the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has achieved important gains in the realms of security
and reconciliation and in rebuilding a State of law that
respects and promotes the rights of all.
With respect to the reporting period, we welcome the
progress achieved and the extension of State authority
into the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We note in particular the extension until
2017 of the stabilization and reconstruction programme
for areas emerging from armed conflict, which is
currently focused on restoring State authority in areas
previously controlled by armed groups, facilitating the
return of refugees and displaced persons, protecting
civilians, combating gender-based, sexual and sexist
violence, and promoting socioeconomic reconstruction
and developing the country’s infrastructure. Despite
that progress, the Allied Democratic Forces, the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and other armed
groups continue to pose a real threat to efforts to pacify
the country and, most urgently, bring the situation to an
end. For that reason, we call on MONUSCO to continue
its activities in support of the armed forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo while also working
to promote the disarmament and the demobilization of
rebel groups.
Argentina is concerned by the lack of progress
reported in reforming the security sector, in particular
with respect to the formation of a rapid-response force to
take over the responsibilities currently being shouldered
by MONUSCO’s Force Intervention Brigade. The
formation of such a force by the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is an obligation that emanates from
resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2147 (2014) to replace the
Force Intervention Brigade, which, Argentina would
like to remind the Council, was established as an
exception in response to the singular circumstances the
country faced.
With regard to the humanitarian situation and human
rights, the statistics showing progress, for example
in the percentage of the population that is internally

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV.7237

displaced, are of little comfort to the 2.6 million
people currently in that situation — a situation that
requires not a military but a political solution based on
dialogue and trust, the state of law and social inclusion.
For that reason, the decision by the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional
agreements are vital for sustainable development
policies in the economic, social and environmental
areas that will contribute to eradicating poverty and that
will guarantee social inclusion without discrimination.
To repeat, what is needed is not militarization but the
cooperation of the international community, especially
South-South cooperation, based on the principles of
solidarity, equality and national ownership without
conditions. Those are valuable and strategic paths that
need to be broadened without, of course, discounting
or disregarding the importance of triangular or NorthSouth cooperation.

In conclusion, so long as the threat of armed
groups persists, Argentina considers it a priority, in
the first place, that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should resolve the root causes
of the conflict by implementing the reforms set out
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Great Lakes Region. Secondly, all signatories must
fulfil their regional commitments, including respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of their
neighbouring countries. Thirdly, we, the Security
Council, must continue to support that process.
Argentina believes that in this particular case we
are working constructively and headed in the right
direction, ensuring that peace and security can be
rebuilt through the rule of law and regional cooperation
in the Great Lakes region and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

I see that the light is blinking. However, I cannot
refrain from mentioning that we are concerned, and
that we are prepared to contribute to the fight against
impunity.

I would like to apologize to the President for the
time I took with my statement even though the light
was flashing.

A theme that also concerns you, Mr. President, is
the issue of serious violations and abuses of human
rights, including rape and kidnapping, that are being
committed not only by armed groups but also by the
Congolese security forces. That must come to an
end. The multiple abductions in the past few days of
women and girls in the region of Okapi, in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for the purpose
of sexual slavery, accompanied by sexual torture and
sexual humiliation, cannot go unpunished and must be
eradicated. We urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to investigate those acts and
bring those responsible to justice while also reinforcing
policies of prevention and protection of the human
rights, especially those of women and children. We echo
the call of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, who on
21 July presented her fifth report on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We recognize that hundreds
of children have been freed, but that is not enough. To
free hundreds of children to be children, not soldiers,
requires that we too strengthen our cooperation to find
a solution to the more than 4,000 cases of boys and
girls being recruited and abused by armed groups and
security forces. That can come about only through the
effective exercise of their rights as children.

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing this
debate during its presidency of the Security Council,
and you, Mr. Simmonds, for your presence here today.
My thanks also go to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Martin Kobler, for his committed leadership
of the work of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (МONUSCO), and to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes, Mrs. Mary
Robinson, who has rekindled the flame of hope during
her tenure. I am also grateful to Mr. João Manuel
Gonçalves Lourenço, Minister of Defence of Angola,
for the regional perspective he has shared with us
today in his capacity as representative of the Angolan
chairmanship of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.
Luxembourg welcomes the progress made in
the security area since the military defeat of the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and in the joint military
action undertaken since the beginning of the year by
MONUSCO and the the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), particularly
against the Allied Democratic Forces. The United
Nations Mission’s robust action aimed at improving
the protection of civilians deserves to be emphasized.
It is important that progress now also be made in

14-4980125/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

restoring the State’s authority in the eastern part of the
country, since that is vital to ensuring the provision
of basic services to the population and launching an
economic recovery that will enable it to offer tangible
opportunities, particularly for young Congolese people.
At the same time, we encourage the authorities
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to redouble
their efforts, in collaboration with Uganda and
Rwanda, to implement the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration for the members of
М-23. Not only will the success of the programme
prevent its members from resuming armed combat, it
will also encourage the members of other armed groups
to lay down their arms and reintegrate into civilian life.
The voluntary disarmament of the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR),
which began on 30 May, must be completed without
preconditions and according to a specific timetable.
To that end, it is crucial that the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo maintain their
commitment, with MONUSCO’s backing, and that the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
and the Southern African Development Community
continue to support the process. If the desired results
do not materialize, the use of a military option for
neutralizing the FDLR should remain on the table. As
Special Representative Kobler said, it is time to bring
the FDLR to a definite close once and for all.
Women and children are still the chief victims of
the fighting that continues to convulse the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women are
still martyrs to intolerable levels of sexual violence.
Children are still recruited and used by the FARDC
and the armed groups. The Secretary-General’s most
recent report on the situation of children in armed
conflict (S/2014/453) cites more than 4,000 cases of
recruitment and use of children between January 2010
and December 2013. Murders, mutilations, sexual
violations and abductions of children are numbered
in the hundreds. More than 180 schools have been
attacked and looted or used for military purposes,
putting schoolchildren in danger and depriving them of
their right to an education.
Given such violations, we must act. The
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
committed to that, and we welcome it. In 2012 it signed
an action plan to halt and prevent the recruitment and
use of children as well as sexual violence committed
by its armed forces. In general, we encourage the
26/34

07/08/2014

Congolese authorities to make every effort to put an
end to impunity. In that context, the trial of military
personnel for the rapes, murders and looting committed
in November 2012 at Minova has left a bitter taste in
our mouths. The verdicts handed down illustrate the
importance of furthering judicial reform if impunity is
to be combated more effectively.
Neutralizing the armed groups in the eastern part
of the country is not enough. The root causes of the
conflict must also be addressed by implementing the
reforms that the Congolese authorities committed to
when they signed the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. More must be done in that regard, and
that applies in particular to reforming the army and
establishing a rapid-reaction force, which is an essential
element of MONUSCO’s exit strategy.
We remain committed to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo’s democratic path and to the proper
management of the electoral cycle, which should
culminate in the holding of legislative and presidential
elections in 2016. It is up to the Congolese authorities
to prepare and establish an electoral schedule in
compliance with constitutional provisions. We welcome
the role in this area of the good offices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
remains the cornerstone of peace and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. It
is the responsibility of the Framework’s signatories to
fully honour the commitments they have made both at
the national and regional levels, including deepening
economic integration so as to ensure that the people see
the benefits of the peace dividend quickly. We express
our support and best wishes to Mr. Said Djinnit as he
prepares to take up the torch from Mary Robinson in
order to keep this framework of hope alive.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and Francophonie of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
Mr. N’tungamulongo (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first like
to undertake the pleasant duty of expressing my
delegation’s satisfaction at seeing the Security Council
presided over during this month of August 2014 by the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

a country with which we have excellent relations,
characterized by mutual trust and respect. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting of the Council on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, giving us the
opportunity to assess together the progress that is under
way and to agree on the measures needed to put the
Great Lakes region irreversibly on the road to peace,
stability, economic recovery and lasting development.
I commend the report of the Secretary-General
submitted pursuant to resolution 2147 (2014)
(S/2014/450), which discusses the implementation of
the commitments made under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well as the progress made by the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in
implementing its mandate. I also welcome the statements
just made by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, and by Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
of Africa, on the current situation in the region — the
problems that persist, the difficulties and obstacles
that must be overcome and the immense opportunities
for peace that the Security Council and all the parties
involved must take advantage of so that all the peoples
of the Great Lakes region can enjoy the fruits of the
peaceful coexistence they have been deprived of for too
long.
Regarding my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, it should be noted that, generally speaking,
remarkable efforts have been made and significant
results achieved in normalizing the domestic political
landscape, implementing the institutional reforms
necessary for strong, lasting and socially shared
growth, as well as in improving relations with our
neighbours. This is true in all sectors and aligns with
all of my country’s national and regional commitments
under the provisions of the Framework agreement.
With regard to the security sector, it should be noted
that in terms of the army, the recruitment and training
of new units to form the rapid-reaction force is in most
part under way and progressing satisfactorily. The same
is true regarding the police, including restructuring
and setting up new command posts subsequent to
the December 2013 orders, the community policing
experiment and the adoption of the law on the police
reform programme.

S/PV.7237

In view of the neutralizing of armed groups and
other negative entities that have been the cause of
20 years of sorrow in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, fraught relations among regional States
and the reintegration of their ex-combatants to the
benefit of the general DDR III plan approved by Cabinet
ministers in December 2013, the following significant
advances deserve to be mentioned.
First, pre-disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) operations that are entirely
funded by the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
under way. The identification and assessing of former
combatants from most of the national armed groups is
taking place in reception centres, followed by transfer
to an evaluation centre; those efforts should accelerate
in the weeks to come.
Second, the final version of the unique,
comprehensive DDR III plan was presented to partners
and donors on 11 July, with a view to closing out the
fund.
Third, the identified rehabilitation centres will
soon be operationalized.
Fourth, having refused voluntary disarmament
under the ultimatum presented to them and to all of the
other negative forces by His Excellency Joseph Kabila
Kabange, President of the Republic, or disarmament
by force, the Ugandan rebels Allied Democratic
Forces — National Army for the Liberation of Uganda
were targeted by military operations and removed, at
great cost, from the area they had occupied for decades.
The FARDC is continuing the final phase of search
operations with a view to completely eradicating that
negative force.
Fifth, the Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR), which remains a major concern to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and other countries
in the region, instead responded to the ultimatum by
choosing voluntary disarmament, which they solemnly
announced in a letter addressed to most of the signatories
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
They then began the voluntary disarmament process as
of the date announced, that is, 30 May. To date, 250
FDLR forces have been disarmed — out of the 1,400 to
1,500 that remain active — accompanied by over 400
family members, including women and children. They
have deposited weapons and assembled in regroupment
sites secured by the FARDC and MONUSCO, and

14-4980127/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

await transfer to temporary relocation sites far from our
border with Rwanda, from where they will eventually
be repatriated to their country of origin or channelled
to third countries outside of the Great Lakes region.
The non-negotiable option is that they cannot
return home; in the interest of regional peace and
to build confidence among the States of the region,
FDLR elements, once disarmed and demobilized must
leave Congolese territory and find refuge in a distant
country where they could not reasonably be considered
a serious security threat to Rwanda, and thus will cease
to provide a pretext for destabilizing activities in the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
Sixth, the Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs
at the joint meeting of the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) held on
2 July in Luanda were conscious of the enormous risks
to which all military operations — particularly one
against the FDLR, who live with their families among
the Congolese population — would expose civilians.
They viewed that as much from a moral point of view as
from an international law perspective, as it is improper
to engage in military operations against people
unless they are criminals — as in the case of FDLR
members — or those who wave a white flag and have
chosen voluntary disarmament and started to carry it
out. The Ministers therefore decided to give a chance
to the FDLR voluntary disarmament option. They set
a date of six months from 2 July 2014, by which time
the FDLR must voluntarily disarm or risk military
action and forced disarmament. Under the time frame
it could be completed earlier, however the maximum
time cannot exceed six months. The Ministers also
decided that an interim assessment would take place in
October, at the initiative and on the part of the ICGLR
and SADC, two regional entities that, together with
the United Nations and the African Union, form the
guarantors of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region.
Seventh, to ensure consistent and efficient monitoring
of the FDLR voluntary disarmament process, it is
important to ensure credibility by generating tangible
results. We have launched a monitoring mechanism
that includes representatives of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO, the
ICGLR and SADC. It is responsible in North Kivu and
South Kivu, just as well as in Kinshasa — for ensuring

28/34

07/08/2014

an effective disarmament process and taking corrective
measures as necessary to achieve success. Meetings
of the mechanism occur almost daily in the field, in
the form of ongoing constructive engagement with the
FDLR leadership to accelerate their disarmament and
demobilization. Weekly meetings take place in Kinshasa
between our colleagues in charge of operations, while
monthly meetings are held at the strategic and policy
levels. I preside in person over the monthly meetings,
which in addition to Government representatives
include all ICGLR and SADC ambassadors and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. The
first such meeting took place on 14 July, less than two
weeks after the Luanda decision. The second took
place on 2 August, while the next one is scheduled for
2 September. I can assure the members of the Council
that the FDLR has nothing to fear. They should look
forward to the holding of those meetings, where the
voluntary disarmament process is regularly evaluated
without any hesitation.
It should be noted that at the end of the 2 August
meeting, as a specific response to the stagnation we
seem to have observed, we decided to send a delegation
of representatives from the coordination mechanism
to evaluate the process at this stage, to encourage the
FDLR to move quickly to generate greater numbers
and to firmly remind them that the military option
remained on the table and could be activated at any
moment if their conduct did not lend credibility to
the voluntary disarmament process and that they had
no other option but to disarm voluntarily or face the
FARDC and the Intervention Brigade. We also charged
our respective experts with developing indicators of
progress — or benchmarks — that could objectively
measure credibility and effectiveness of the FDLR
voluntary disarmament process.
Similarly, to conclude with the important issue of
neutralizing the FDLR, allow me to say that there is
no State or people more aware than the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people of the urgent
need to neutralize the FDLR, since it is the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its people that have suffered
the most from the activism of that negative force since
its arrival on Congolese territory. It is a group that
arrived in our country without our having invited it in,
and our decision to push it back over the border was
in response to the international community’s pressing
demand.

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Allow me also to remind the Council that more
than any other State of the region, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was in the frontline for making
the principle of the creation of a neutral international
force acceptable, for making such a force operational by
accepting its transformation into the Force Intervention
Brigade within MONUSCO, and for convincing the
Security Council of the need to give the Intervention
Brigade an unprecedented aggressive mandate, with the
explicit objective of driving out all the negative forces,
including specifically the FDLR. Let us be reassured
that we will not stop before we have been successful in
that endeavour.
On another level, pursuant to the Nairobi
declaration, an amnesty law was promulgated on
11 February 2014 by our Head of State. To date, several
decrees on amnesty have been published by the Ministry
of Justice, and hundreds of prisoners who qualified
for the amnesty, including former members of the
Mouvement du 23 Mars (M-23), were in fact released.
The result for that group would have been even more
remarkable were it not for the initial lack of cooperation
of one of the countries where they had sought refuge,
namely, Rwanda, which for months had refused to allow
Government envoys from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to have any contact with former M-23
members on its territory and prevented them from
filling out the individual commitment forms required
by law for them to be eligible for amnesty. I must say,
however, that the situation was recently corrected,
thanks to the intervention of the Special Envoys, and
that our envoys recently travelled to Rwanda and were
able to start the work. Progress should therefore be
made in the coming weeks in terms of recognizing the
amnesty of former M-23 member located in Rwanda.
With respect to the justice sector, reforms are
also under way, including the establishment of the
Constitutional Court and the appointment of its
members. The same is the case with regard to the
fight against sexual violence and child recruitment,
which is of primary concern to the Head of State and
the Government of my country. That is the reasoning
behind the recent appointment by the President of an
adviser on sexual violence and child recruitment.
With regard to the strengthening of State authority,
the implementation of State administrative instruments
continues in the territories taken back from former
M-23 fighters and other armed groups. Furthermore,
skills and resources will gradually be transferred to

S/PV.7237

the provinces and decentralized territorial entities,
especially in such leading sectors for development as
primary and secondary education, health, agriculture
and rural development. Finally, the progress in the
decentralization process should be included in the
calendar for the next parliamentary session.
The Democratic Republic of Congo is entering a
new phase that is characterized by the elections cycle
scheduled to take place in 2015-2016. The draft law on
the organization of the elections has been submitted
to Parliament. The schedule for municipal, urban and
local elections was published on 26 May, while that of
other elections will be passed on by the sole competent
authority, the Independent National Electoral
Commission.
In accordance with the tradition that is today
well established in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my Government intends to promote a political
dialogue open to all and transparent for all Congolese
stakeholders. We are counting on the widest possible
support for the electoral process, as well as the expected
assistance from the United Nations and the international
community, in order to hold free, transparent and
democratic elections that take into account the country’s
stability and security requirements.
We are aware that the need to consolidate peace
and stability in our country goes hand in hand with
that of the entire African subregion to which we
belong, in particular those that are close to us in the
Great Lakes region. We must therefore look for a new
momentum based on a new regional security order,
on the enlargement and integration of economic and
commercial space, on democracy and good governance
and on stabilizing and improving the collective
management of social and humanitarian problems. It is
clear that there is still some way to go and that efforts
will be required from all, with each of our countries
making internal adjustments and adapting to the rules
of peaceful coexistence between States. I want to
reiterate once again the unwavering commitment of my
country to follow those rules and work tirelessly for
peace and stability in the Great Lakes region.
In that regard, I would also like to affirm once again
before all present in this Chamber that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is more determined than ever to
neutralize the FDLR by any means necessary. However,
as it did for the M-23 and the Allied Democratic
Forces—National Army for the Liberation of Uganda,

14-4980129/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

07/08/2014

military force — necessary but insufficient — only
makes sense as a last resort solution.

for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation and
Francophonie of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

That being the case, n view of lower security risks
and the progress made i​​ n strengthening national capacity
in all sectors, I appeal on behalf of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for a substantial
scaling down of the strength of MONUSCO. The
Council should agree that it would provide significant
savings for the benefit of maintaining peace in other
theatres in Africa and in the rest of the world, which
today have greater need of United Nations forces than
we do.

Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you,
Sir, and your country, the United Kingdom, on the
assumption of the Security Council presidency for this
month and on having organized this important debate
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region. Let me also thank Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), for his briefing. I wish to commend Her
Excellency Mrs. Mary Robinson for her tireless efforts in
ensuring the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region. I have no doubt that her
efforts have achieved credible results in realizing peace
and security in the region. I wish her all the very best in
her new assignment. I would also like to congratulate
Mr. Said Djinnit on his appointment as the new Special
Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and to assure him of
Uganda’s full support and utmost cooperation.

I cannot conclude without paying glowing
tribute to Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa, and to express to her all the gratitude of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the excellent
work done during her term, which we would have liked
to see continue, as well as for her total dedication to
the cause of peace in our country and the subregion.
We console ourselves by noting that her new functions
will address an area — climate change — that will
keep her in contact with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which is known for its extraordinary biological
diversity, so essential for the future of humankind and
which is, as Council members know, the world’s second
set of lungs.
I would also like to welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General found her a worthy successor in the
person of Mr. Said Djinnit, whom we know well from
his time at the African Union. He has perfect knowledge
of region, and I do not doubt for a moment that he will
live up to the hopes for peace, security and shared
prosperity of the populations of the long-suffering
Great Lakes region. We wish him every success in his
work and promise him the unreserved support of the
Democratic Republic of Congo.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Henry Okello Oryem, Minister of State
for Foreign Affairs of Uganda.
Mr. Okello Oryem (Uganda): Allow me to
start by acknowledging the presence of my fellow
Ministers — my brother His Excellency Mr. João
Lourenço, Minister of Defence of Angola and Chair
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region; and my senior and elder brother His Excellency
Mr. Raymond Tshibanda N’tungamulongo, Minister

30/34

The Great Lakes region has experienced recurrent
and devastating armed conflicts, as well as humanitarian
crises, resulting in social and human destruction. In
various parts of the region, the legacy of colonialism,
ethnic conflict, weak State structures, transnational
crime and terrorism, the proliferation of small arms
and light weapons and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources have given rise to a vicious cycle of violence,
instability, displacement and institutional collapse. The
state of peace and security in Africa, in particular in the
Great Lakes region, remains a worrying phenomenon,
with successes and continuing challenges. Indeed,
the establishment of many regional and subregional
organizations, such as the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR), the East African
Community, the Southern African Development
Community, to mention but a few, and their great
and promising achievements in the region should be
venerated.
However, there are diverse challenges, which
are often based on confrontation and rivalries to the
detriment of concepts and ideological orientations
that are more receptive to the exigencies of peaceful
solutions anchored in dialogue, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, compromise and a win-win proposal for
mutual benefit. I wish to cite quote one of our founding
fathers, Kwame Nkrumah, who stated,

14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

“The survival of free Africa, the extending
independence of this continent and the development
towards that bright future on which our hopes and
endeavours are pinned depend upon political unity.”
There is no doubt that Africa, in particular the Great
Lakes region, has consolidated its efforts to address
challenges and combat conflicts, giving impetus to the
regional dimension. During its chairmanship of the
ICGLR, Uganda spearheaded the Kampala dialogue and
ensured that the parties to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, that is, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23),
were brought to the table to peacefully resolve their
conflict. It is worth noting that the Nairobi declarations
were the result of the tireless effort and commitment
of the Government of Uganda, in particular President
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, in facilitating dialogue
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the M-23. It is therefore incumbent on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the M-23 to ensure the
full implementation of the Nairobi declarations. The
tasks and responsibilities were fully outlined in the
declarations. It is therefore important to take stock of
the status of compliance and implementation.
On the basis of our observation and engagements
over recent years, there is no doubt that there is a
desire and commitment on the part of the region and
international partners to resolve conflicts in the region.
That desire and commitment are well expressed in
previous and recent regional efforts undertaken to
ensure security, stability and development in the Great
Lakes region.
However, if commitments and agreements such
as the Nairobi declarations are not fully implemented,
they create a gap, allowing for a relapse into conflict in
the region. We commend the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Force Intervention
Brigade for the joint operations against the Allied
Democratic Forces (ADF) and urge continued efforts in
dealing with other armed groups to pacify and stabilize
the region.
The repatriation of former M-23 combatants
remains unresolved. Uganda received them but feeding
them and looking after them have exerted pressure
on our meagre resources. We therefore call on the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to expedite the repatriation process as much as possible.
It is even more disheartening that the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo has chosen to

S/PV.7237

make false and unfounded allegations against Uganda
that the M-23 are moving freely in Uganda despite the
close cooperation provided by my Government to make
available all the detailed information, such as the list
of former combatants, the weapons and many other
elements, that was communicated to the Government
of the the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It truly
casts doubt on the intention and purpose of the Group
of Experts.
The main challenge to the region is the lack of
guaranteed ways to finance the efforts and development
projects, especially the implementation of the Nairobi
declarations and the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. Commendable work has been carried out
by the Technical Support Committee in that regard.
That all requires stable funding. More genuine support
from development partners and the international
community is therefore paramount. Last year, on a trip
to the Great Lakes region, the World Bank President,
Mr. Jim Yong Kim, announced that $1 billion would be
made available for development projects in the Great
Lakes region. However, more financial commitments
are still necessary in order to provide infrastructure
and other development programmes in the region. It is
even more important that the pledges be fulfilled.
For our part, Uganda established the ICGLR
regional training facility on sexual and gender-based
violence in Kampala to train judicial officers, social
and medical workers, police and prison officers and
many others to prevent crimes of sexual violence. We
welcome the support of the World Bank for the regional
training facility and call upon all development partners
and the international community to support its activities
and operationalization.
Finally, I wish to emphasize the following issues.
It is necessary to support and strengthen regional and
subregional organizations, owing to their comparative
advantage, proximity and complementarity to the role of
the United Nations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Nairobi declarations and the
national commitments of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework must be speedily implemented.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process for former M-23 combatants must be expedited.
There is a need for the joint and coordinated effort
of the United Nations and regional mechanisms,
such as the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism,
MONUSCO and the joint intelligence fusion centre.
The Force Intervention Brigade, MONUSCO and the

14-4980131/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo
must continue to pursue the armed terrorist groups
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, such as the ADF. The Security Council must
give regional groupings, such as the ICGLR Committee
of Ministers of Defence, the opportunity to regularly
brief it on peace and security in the Great Lakes region.
There must be sustainable and predictable funding for
regional initiatives and efforts.
In conclusion, we are convinced that fostering
strategic partnerships will bolster the effective
maintenance of international peace and security. We
therefore call for regular interaction, coordination
and consultation between the Security Council and
regional and subregional organizations on matters of
peace and security. That will enable us to augment
complementarities and avoid the duplication of efforts.
The Council should strive to be more even-handed
and transparent in its approach and decisions so as
to dispel the perception that on some issues under its
consideration, vested interests override fairness.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting us to participate
in this debate. My delegation would like to express
its congratulations to the Mission of the United
Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the Council
for this month. In the same breath, we would like to
congratulate the previous presidency of the Council,
held by the delegation of Rwanda. We appreciate your
prioritizing this matter, Mr. President, and scheduling
this debate. We are particularly pleased that you, Sir,
personally came to preside over the debate.
We would like to pay tribute to Mrs. Mary
Robinson, the outgoing Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, for her hard work and political commitment
to the resolution of the challenges facing the Great
Lakes region. A lot of work has been done and a lot of
ground covered in the past 18 months during her tenure
in this role. We would also like to welcome the recent
appointment of Ambassador Said Djinnit as the new
Special Representative, and we look forward to working
with him. We also thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Mr. Martin Kobler for his
comprehensive briefing and appreciate the work that
he continues to do. We take note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/450) in that regard. We also
want to thank the Minister of Defence of Angola for his
32/34

07/08/2014

briefing in his capacity as Chair of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR).
The United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) is one of the oldest and the largest United
Nations peacekeeping missions in the world and on our
continent, Africa. We are pleased with the progress that
has been made in the past decade and in the past few
years. The security situation in the region and in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remains fragile, but there is no doubt that significant
progress has been made. The recent strengthening
of MONUSCO and its mandate by the Council has
contributed a great deal to the progress that has been
made. In that regard, South Africa would like to express
its appreciation to the Security Council for its continued
cooperation with and support for regional efforts and
initiatives aimed at the resolution of the challenges in
the region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
South Africa attaches great importance to peace
and security on the continent in general and in the Great
Lakes region in particular. It is for that reason that we
continue to be committed to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region. We are of the firm view
that its successful implementation will go a long way
towards comprehensively addressing the challenges
facing the region and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
South Africa’s position is informed by the
decisions that were taken at the recent ministerial
meeting of the ICGLR and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) on the political and
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the continued voluntary disarmament
and demobilization of the Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Rwanda (FDLR). The ministerial meeting
was mandated by the ICGLR/SADC summit that took
place last year in Pretoria. We remain convinced of the
political correctness of the decisions that the ministerial
meeting took to the effect that the disarmament of the
FDLR should take place within the framework of six
months, beginning on 2 July, with a midterm review.
It is therefore the responsibility of all of us — the
stakeholders — to jointly and collectively define the
criteria and terms of the review that will be done in
three months.
South Africa appreciates the manner in which
the Security Council has so far cooperated with the
14-49801

07/08/2014

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

regional organizations in addressing the challenges in
the region and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Given the critical stage that we have entered in all our
efforts as part of the international community, it will
be critical that we continue to build and consolidate
this cooperation, which is based on mutual respect and
an appreciation of the divergent roles of the various
stakeholders. In that regard, we would like to emphasize
the significance of respecting the decisions that the two
regions — the ICGLR and SADC — have taken and
will continue to take. On our part, we will continue
to appreciate the broader role of the international
community, particularly the Security Council and
MONUSCO.
South Africa remains committed to efforts to bring
peace and stability to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We will continue to contribute
whatever resources at our disposal that are required for
that purpose, including our participation in MONUSCO
and its Force Intervention Brigade.
We would like to call on the international community
and the United Nations to continue to provide the
much-needed resources for the implementation of the
disarmament process.
In conclusion, South Africa remains committed
to finding a lasting and durable solution to all the
challenges facing the Great Lakes and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo within the context of regional
mechanisms. We are convinced that in the next few
months and years as we move forward, the people of the
Congo, who have suffered many years of instability and
insecurity, will appreciate the collective efforts of the
international community, the region and their national
leadership.
The President: The representative of Rwanda has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): It is not a big issue; I
just wanted to make a slight clarification. I want to
thank you, Mr. President, and assure you that I will
not take much of your time. Allow me to make just
one clarification on what our good friend Minister
Tshibanda N’tungamulongo has said with regard to
the denial by Rwanda of a team from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to meet the ex-combatants.
The Council will recall that on 24 April, at around
4 p.m. Kinshasa time, our Embassy in Kinshasa
received a note from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Ministry of Foreign Affairs announcing its

S/PV.7237

intention to send to Rwanda a 10-man team in the days
ahead, without indicating specific dates. The following
morning at 8:45 a.m. exactly, on 25 April, the Congolese
team showed up at our border, before the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Embassy in Kigali was even
able to submit a formal request to the Government of
Rwanda.
On the same day, our Ministry of Foreign Affairs
wrote back to the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo noting that the delegation had
showed up ahead of the request pertaining to the visit
and that therefore no arrangements had been made to
receive them. The letter also requested the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to propose a suitable date for
the delegation’s visit. That was done and the visit took
place, finally, from 18 to 20 July.
The President: The representative of Democratic
Republic of the Congo has asked for the floor to make
a further statement.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Tshibanda N’tungamulongo (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I said earlier
that the visit did finally take place and that the work
was mostly done, and that we should see some progress.
I would prefer to remain on that positive note. I do not
intend to engage in a polemic. What I said earlier was
just to establish the facts. Regrettably, I must say that
there are corrections to be made with regard to what
the Ambassador just said. The note verbale was sent
after an agreement was reached that the mission would
go there. There were exchanges between the various
officials, who requested confirmation through a note
verbale. Therefore, the agreement had already been
reached that the visit would take place.
The second thing is that, in the response, it was
not just a question of saying that they arrived too soon.
With regard to going to Rwanda, we have an Embassy,
which was supposed to play a key role in instructing
people on how they should fill out various forms, and
Embassy personnel was to be instructed by our envoys.
Therefore, supposing that the Government of Rwanda
was not prepared, for some unknown reason, regarding
the Mouvement du 23 mars before the meeting with our
envoys, their envoys could have started to work with
our Embassy.
In Rwanda’s response, it asked us to go through
the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism, which has
absolutely nothing to do with this process. Thanks to

14-4980133/34

S/PV.7237

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the intervention of the Special Envoys, that request,
which had nothing to do with the process, was lifted,
and the people left and were able to do their work.
As I said, I do not want to insist on this; I just
wanted it to be understood that even though this was
done in Uganda, in Rwanda progress was not made on
that issue. That was not on account of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. However, with that established,

34/34

07/08/2014

I prefer to look to the future, rather than to dwell on
the past.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

14-49801
