54

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

ommended for use and that the first national reports have
been received this year,
Emphasizing the value of a full implementation of such
a reporting instrument and of its further refinement as a
means to increase confidence between States by contributing
to greater openness in military matters, which is particularly
important for arriving at international agreements to reduce
military expenditures,
Reaffirming also its conviction that the reporting of military data and the examination of problems concerning comparability and verification have the fundamental objective
of making possible the conclusion of international agreements to reduce military expenditures,
Taking note with appreciation of the first report of the
Secretary-General on these matters, 6
Considering that the activities r~lated to the reporting of
military expenditures as well as to the questions of comparability and verification and other current activities within
the framework of the United Nations related to the question
of the reduction of military budgets should be regarded as
having the fundamental objective of reaching international
agreements on the reduction of military expenditures,
1. Stresses the need to increase the number of reporting
States with a view to the broadest possible participation
from different geographic regions and representing different
budgeting systems;
2. Reiterates its recommendation that all Member States
should make use of the reporting instrument and report
annually, by 30 April, to the Secretary-General their military
expenditures of the latest fiscal year for which data are
available;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to examine ways and
means to make the collection and assembling of data on
military expenditures, reported by States on the basis of the
reporting instrument, an integral part of the regular United
Nations statistical services and to arrange and publish these
data according to statistical practice;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to include these
matters in his next annual report on military budgets to the
General Assembly.
9 I st plenary meeting
9 December 198 I

36/83.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
35/143 concerning the signature and ratification
of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco)

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions, 2286 (XXII) of 5 December
1967, 3262 (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, 3473 (XXX) of
11 December 1975, 32/76 of 12 December 1977, S-10/2
of 30 June 1978, 33/58 of 14 December 1978, 34/71 of 11
December 1979 and 35/143 of 12 December 1980 concerning the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol I
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco), 7
Taking into account that within the zone or application
of that Treaty, to which twenty-two sovereign States are
already parties, there are some territories which, in spite of
not being sovereign political entities, are nevertheless in a
position to receive the benefits deriving from the Treaty

through its Additional Protocol 1, to which the States that
de jure or de facto are internationally responsible for those
territories may become parties,
Recalling with satisfaction that the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Netherlands became parties to Additional Protocol I in 1969 and 1971,
respectively,
Noting with satisfaction that the United States of America
likewise became a party to Additional Protoco! I on 23
November 1981, when its instrument of ratification was
deposited,
1. Regrets that the signature of Additional Protocol I
by France, which took place on 2 March 1979, has not yet
been followed by the corresponding ratification, notwithstanding the time already elapsed and the pressing invitations addressed to France by the General Assembly and
which it reiterates with special urgency in the present
resolution;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session an item entitled •'Implementation of
General Assembly resolution 36/83 concerning the signature
and ratification of Additional Protocol I of the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
(Treaty of Tlatelolco)".
91 st plenary meeting
9 December 1981

36/84.

Cessation of all test explosions of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that the complete cessation of nuclearweapon tests, which has been examined for more than
twenty-five years and on which the General Assembly has
adopted more than forty resolutions, is a basic objective of
the United Nations in the sphere of disarmament, to whose
attainment it has repeatedly assigned the highest priority,
Stressing that on seven different occasions it has condemned such tests in the strongest terms and that, since
1974, it has stated its conviction that the continuance of
nuclear-weapon !~sting will intensify the arms race, thus
increasing the danger of nuclear war,
Reiterating the assertion made in several previous resolutions that, whatever may be the differences on the question
of verification, there is no valid reason for delaying the
conclusion of an agreement on a comprehensive test ban,
Recalling that since 1972 the Secretary-General has declared that all the technical and scientific aspects of the
problem have been so fully explored that only a political
decision is now necessary in order to achieve final agreement, that when the existing means of verification are taken
into account it is difficult to understand further delay in
achieving agreement on an underground test ban, and that
the potential risks of continuing underground nuclearweapon tests would far outweigh any possible risks from
ending such tests,
Recalling also that the Secretary-General, in his foreword
to the report entitled ''Comprehensive nuclear-test ban'', 8
reiterated with special emphasis the opinion he expressed
nine years ago and, after specifically referring to it, added:
''I still hold that belief. The problem can and should be
solved now'',
Noting that in the same report, which was prepared in
compliance with General Assembly decision 34/422 of 11
December 1979. the experts emphasized that non-nuclear-

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

weapon States in general have come to regard the achievement of a comprehensive test ban as a litmus test of the
determination of the nuclear-weapon States to halt the arms
race, adding that verification of compliance no longer seems
to be an obstacle to reaching agreement,
Taking into account that the three nuclear-weapon States
which act as depositaries of the Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water9 undertook in that Treaty, almost twenty years ago,
to seek the achievement of the discontinuance of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons for all time and that such an
undertaking was explicitly reiterated in 1968 in the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, JO
Recalling that in its resolution 35/145 A of 1_2 Decem~r
1980 it urged all States members of the Committee on Dtsannament to support the establishment by the Committee,
from the beginning of its session in 1981, of an ad hoe
working group which should start the multilateral negotiations of a treaty for the prohibition of all nuclear-weapon
tests,
Deploring that the Committee on Disarmament, as stated
in paragraph 44 of its report to the Assembly, 11 was prevented from responding to that exhortation owing to the
negative attitude of two nuclear-weapon States,
l. Reiterates once again its grave concern that nuclearweapon testing continues unabated against the wishes of the
overwhelming majority of Member States;
2. Reaffirms its conviction that a treaty to achieve the
prohibition of all ~uclear-weapon-test _explosio~s . by all
States for all time is a matter of the highest pnonty and
constitutes a vital element for the success of efforts to prevent both vertical and horizontal proliferation of nuclear
weapons and a contribution to nuclear disarmament;
3. Urges all States that have not yet done so to adhere
without further delay to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon
Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under Water
and, meanwhile, to refrain from testing in the environments
covered by that Treaty;
4. Urges likewise all States members of the Committee
on Disarmament:
(a) To bear in mind that the consensus rule should not
be used in such a manner as to prevent the establishment
of subsidiary bodies for the effective discharge of the functions of the Committee;
(b) To support the establishment by the Committee,
from the beginning of its session in 1982, of an ad hoe
working group which should start the multilateral negotiations of a treaty for the prohibition of all nuclear-weapon
tests;
(c) To exert their best endeavours in order that the Committee may transmit the multilaterally negotiated text of
such a treaty to the General Assembly at its second special
session devoted to disarmament, to be held from 7 June to
9 July 1982;
5. Calls upon the States depositaries of the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space and under Water and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, by virtue of their special responsibilities under those two treaties and as a provisional
measure, to bring to a halt without delay all nuclear-test
explosions, either through a trilaterally agreed moratorium
or through three unilateral moratoria;

• United Nations. Treaty Series, vol. 480. No. 6964, p. 43.
10
Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
11
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/36/27).

55

6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled •'Cessation of all test
explosions of nuclear weapons''.
91 st plenary meeting
9 December I 98 I

36/85.

Implementation of General Assembly resolution
35/145 B

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on a comprehensive
nuclear-test ban, in particular resolution 32/78 of 12 December 1977, paragraph 51 of resolution S-10/2 of 30 June
1978, resolution 33/60 of 14 December 1978, section IV
of resolution 33/71 H of 14 December 1978, resolution
34/73 of 11 December 1979 and resolution 35/145 B of 12
December 1980,
Reaffirming its conviction that it is in the interest of all
people that nuclear-weapon testing by all States in all environments should cease, as this would be a major step
towards ending the qualitative improvement, development
and proliferation of nuclear weapons, a means of relieving
the deep apprehension concerning the harmful consequences
of radioactive contamination for the health of present and
future generations and a measure of the utmost importance
in bringing the nuclear-arms race to an end,
Recalling that the parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear
Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and under
Water 12 and the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 13 expressed their determination in those treaties
to continue negotiations to achieve the discontinuance of
all test explosions of nuclear weapons for all time,
Expressing the belief that, to be effective and capable of
attracting the widest possible adherence, a treaty prohibiting
nuclear testing should include provision for an effective
verification system,
Recognizing, accordingly, the importance to such a treaty
of the work assigned by the Committee on Disannament to
the Ad Hoe Group of Scientific Experts to Consider International Co-operative Measures to Detect and Identify
Seismic Events on a global network of stations for the
exchange of seismological data,
Deeply concerned about the fact that thP- three negotiating
nuclear-weapon States have not resumed their negotiations
on a treaty prohibiting nuclear-test explosions in all environments and its protocol covering nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes,
Emphasizing the urgent need for a complete cessation of
the testing of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing the indispensable role of the Committee on
Disarmament in the negotiation of a comprehensive test-ban
treaty capable of attracting the widest possible international
support and adherence.
Expressing regret that it did not prove possible for the
Committee on Disarmament to commence negotiations on
such a treaty,
Convinced that the proceedings of the second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament, to
be held from 7 June to 9 July 1982, would benefit substantially from positive progress towards the conclusion of such
a treaty,
I. Reiterates its grave concern that, despite the express
wishes of the overwhelming majority of Member States.
nuclear-weapon testing continues unabated;

" United Nations. Treatv Series. vol. 480. No. 6964. p. 43.
Resolution 2373 (XXII). annex.

1.1
