S/2016/952*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
10 November 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on United Nations policing
Summary
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2185
(2014), in which the Council requested me to submit, by the end of 2016, a report on
the role of policing as an integral part of peacekeeping and post -conflict
peacebuilding, with particular focus on the challenges faced by police components of
United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political missions, and to make
recommendations on how best to strengthen their contribution to the achievement of
mission mandates. Furthermore, pursuant to paragraph 93 of my report entitled “The
future of United Nations peace operations: implementation of the recommendations
of the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations” (A/70/357-S/2015/682),
the present report contains my response to the external review of the functi ons,
structure and capacity of the Police Division of 31 May 2016. Notably, it sets out my
vision as to how to ensure that the United Nations police is ready to respond
effectively to the challenges of the twenty-first century and contains 14 key
recommendations that I hope my successor will follow up on. This constitutes my
second report on the United Nations police, the first ( A/66/615) having been
submitted to the General Assembly in December 2011 in response to a request by the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (see A/65/19, para. 78).
The present report outlines how the environment in which the United Nations
police operates has been altered by changing conflict dynamics. The United Nations
police now engages in United Nations peace operations and post-conflict and other
crisis situations across the entire peace and security spectrum, from conflict prevention
and management to peacekeeping, peacebuilding and peace sustainment. It is often the
breakdown of law and order that triggers United Nations deployment and, conversely
the establishment or re-establishment of policing and other rule of law functions that
allows United Nations peace operations to downsize and eventually withdraw.
Furthermore, the report takes stock of progress made and operational successes,
such as the conferral of full responsibilities to host -State police in Timor-Leste and
Sierra Leone; transition planning in Liberia, Côte d ’Ivoire and Haiti; gendersensitive policing and gender-balancing efforts in Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur and Haiti;
and evolved integrated rule of law approaches in Mali and Somalia.

* Reissued for technical reasons on 28 November 2016.

16-18992* (E) 291116

*1618992*

S/2016/952

In the report, consideration is also given to the growing importance of the
United Nations police to international peace and security, as emphasized by Member
States at the first United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in June 2016 and several
peacekeeping summits, and the increased attention given to policing by the Security
Council and the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations. It underscores the
most recent global developments, including advances made in the Strategic Guidance
Framework for International Police Peacekeeping, to ensure coherence of effort and
refine strategic police generation platforms.
At the same time, the report highlights critical challenges, such as the mismatch
between mandated policing tasks and the authorized posture and allocated resources.
It underscores operational dilemmas, from addressing gaps in th e criminal justice
chain in the Central African Republic to interpreting public safety and security
mandates in South Sudan in a way that both protects internally displaced persons and
responds to the perpetrators of threats. My report also illustrates how the political
nature of host-State police capacity development as part of larger security sector
reform efforts necessitates national ownership and integrated approaches. It also
underscores practical challenges pertaining to United Nations police, includ ing
welfare, which require action.
The present report presents my vision for a people-centred, modern, agile,
mobile and flexible, rights-based and norm-driven United Nations police. To realize
this vision, I put forward 14 recommendations, namely: (a) realistic mandates that
are adequately resourced and a Police Division that is appropriately staffed and
positioned within Secretariat structures; (b) the nomination of Member States ’ most
qualified officers and most able units that are able to deploy rapid ly to implement
mandated tasks; (c) an audit of selection and recruitment processes to ensure
effective and efficient rotations; (d) steps to ensure that deployed police personnel
have undergone human rights screening and are held accountable for any crimi nal
acts, including sexual exploitation and abuse; (e) special measures to increase the
proportion of female United Nations police to create more inclusive, responsive
policing; (f) a review of the formed police unit concepts, capacities and capabilities
to improve performance and overall management; (g) enforcement of the Strategic
Guidance Framework for International Police Peacekeeping; (h) predeployment,
induction and in-mission training that is compliant with the Strategic Guidance
Framework, including on the protection of civilians, child protection and conflictrelated sexual violence; (i) integration of United Nations policing in effective
political solutions; (j) participation of United Nations police in conflict prevention;
(k) consolidation of synergies with rule of law, human rights, civilian and military
efforts to ensure holistic approaches to the protection of civilians and capacity
development; (l) operationalization of comprehensive rule of law support through the
Global Focal Point on Police, Justice and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in
Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations, including access to necessary funding
sources; (m) a coherent approach to preventing and addressing serious and organized
crime through access to information exchange networks and the establishment of a
dedicated capacity within the Police Division; and (n) appropriately resourced
backstopping of special political missions and other planning processes.

2/20

16-18992

S/2016/952

Overall, my proposal for overcoming the challenges of Unit ed Nations police
and realizing my vision will require strong leadership by Member States, the
Secretariat and my successor, reinforced partnerships and robust and effective
capabilities, including well-trained and well-equipped police with access to the most
recent innovations and technology.

16-18992

3/20

S/2016/952

I. Background
1.
In its resolution 2185 (2014), the Security Council requested that I submit a
report by the end of 2016 on the role of policing as an integral part of peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding, with particular focus on the challenges faced by
police components of United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, and making recommendations on how best to strengthen their contribution
to the achievement of mission mandates. In line with the recommendations of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (A/70/95-S/2015/446), I
instructed the Police Division to undertake an external review of its functions,
structure and capacity (see A/70/357-S/2015/682, para. 93). The external review
was completed on 31 May 2016. 1 The present report constitutes my response to the
request of the Security Council and to the external review, sets out my vision to
ensure that the United Nations police is posed to respond to the challenges of the
twenty-first century and contains 14 recommendations that could be followed up on
by my successor.
2.
This constitutes my second report on United Nations police. My first report
(A/66/615) was submitted to the General Assembly in December 2011, pursuant to a
request from the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Opera tions (A/65/19,
para. 78).

II. Introduction
3.
The external review, reiterating the findings of the High -level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, stressed the significant changes that had taken place in
United Nations peace operations and their impact on United Nations policing. In
1960, 30 police monitors deployed to the United Nations Operation in the Congo.
Today, approximately 13,500 officers, of whom 10 per cent are women, are
deployed in 12 peacekeeping operations and 6 special political missions, where they
are assigned a variety of complex tasks (see A/66/615, paras. 9-32). Increasingly
robust mandates require police to protect civilians and provide operational support,
while also promoting the reform, restructuring and development of host -State
capacity. The breakdown of law and order often provides a trigger for the
deployment of a United Nations peace operation. Conversely, it is often the
establishment or re-establishment of policing and other core functions of the
criminal justice chain, in adherence to the rule of law, that allows United Nations
peace operations to downsize and eventually withdraw. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and specifically Sustainable Development Goal 16 on the
development of effective, accountable and inclusive rule of law institutions,
reaffirmed the linkages between security, human rights and development. Thus, by
increasing the ability of the host-State’s law enforcement and justice institutions to
perform their tasks, the United Nations police has become an indispensable
instrument in creating an environment in which there is increased political will and
capacity that contributes to a mission’s exit strategy.

__________________
1

4/20

Available from http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/documents/policereview2016.pdf.

16-18992

S/2016/952

III. Changing operating environment
4.
In its report, the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
determined that United Nations peace operations had proven highly adaptable and
had contributed significantly to the successful resolution of conflicts (see A/70/95S/2015/446, summary). Given the centrality of policing in preventing, mitigating
and resolving violent conflict and contributing to early peacebuilding and
reconciliation, an effective, capable and delivery-oriented United Nations police
must be a key element of United Nations peace operations.
5.
Such change must take into account the deteriorating global security
environment, which, as I have noted elsewhere (see A/70/357-S/2015/682,
para. 103) and as also recognized by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (see A/70/19, para. 39), has increased the nature and scale of the security
challenges faced by United Nations peace operations. The United Nations is a target
for direct attack, including asymmetric threats, by some parties and spoilers to
peace processes. In certain contexts, this threat is further aggravated by the blurring
of lines and collaboration between transnational criminal networks, extremist
groups and political actors. In addition, the increased risk of indirect attacks during
and following conflict, including a disregard for international humanitarian law, as
illustrated by the targeting of civilians, including humanitarian personnel, 2 presents
grave risks to the safety, security and livelihoods of communities around the globe,
as well as to international peace and security (see A/70/357-S/2015/682, paras. 1-9).
6.
The restoration of State authority in remote or contested areas presents a
serious challenge, on repercussion being that non-State, and often criminal, actors
take advantage of security and governance vacuums. Furthermore, the Organization
has been tasked to respond to threats against civilians, including conflict -related
sexual violence and sexual and gender-based violence. In South Sudan, hundreds of
thousands of internally displaced persons have sought safety on th e premises of
peacekeeping operation, and United Nations police have been called upon to take on
new tasks, including the provision of public safety and security for those seeking
refuge within United Nations premises.

IV. Evolving role and composition of United Nations police
7.
The United Nations defines “policing” as a function of governance responsible
for the prevention, detection and investigation of crime; the protection of persons
and property; and the maintenance of public order and safety. Policing must be
entrusted to civil servants who are members of police or other law enforcement
agencies of national, regional or local governments, within a legal framework that is
based on the rule of law. 3 Police and law enforcement officials 4 have the obligation
__________________
2

See, for example, the report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2016/447).
3
The rule of law refers to “a principle of governance in which all persons, institutions and entities,
public and private, including the State itself, are accountable to laws that are publicly
promulgated, equally enforced and independently adjudicated, and which are consistent with
international human rights norms and standards” (see S/2004/616, para. 6).

16-18992

5/20

S/2016/952

to respect and protect human rights. As this understanding of policing must serve as
the common denominator for United Nations police officers, who currently come
from 87 police-contributing countries with a variety of organizational and legal
frameworks, the Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping provides comprehensive policy and guidance for United Nations
police officers from a diverse range of police-contributing countries to work
together efficiently and impartially.
8.
The mission of the United Nations police is to enhance intern ational peace and
security by supporting Member States in conflict, post-conflict and other crisis
situations to realize effective, efficient, representative, responsive and accountable
police services that serve and protect the population. To that end, Un ited Nations
police build and support, or, where mandated, act as a substitute or partial substitute
for, host-State police capacity to prevent and detect crime, protect life and property
and maintain public order and safety in adherence to the rule of law and
international human rights law. United Nations police pursue community -oriented
and intelligence-led policing approaches to contribute to the protection of civilians
and human rights; address, among other things, sexual and gender -based violence,
conflict-related sexual violence and serious and organized crime; and conduct
investigations, special operations and electoral security. They are composed of
formed police units (currently 66 per cent), individual police officers (currently 34
per cent), which include specialized teams, contracted seconded police and civilian
experts.
9.
The work of the United Nations police is undertaken within a framework
which includes the principles of security sector reform, 5 peacebuilding and early
peacebuilding for peace operations, and encompasses efforts to prevent the outbreak
of or relapse into conflict (see A/69/968-S/2015/490, para. 7). Conflict prevention
involves both immediate operational activities (stabilization and ph ysical
protection) and longer-term structural prevention (building of political will and
national capacity) (see A/55/985-S/2001/574, para. 8) within a larger context,
including reconciliation and transitional justice as critical factors for sustainable
peace.
10. There is also a continuing need to advance gender mainstreaming efforts and
the participation of women in the United Nations police (see Security Council
resolution 2242 (2015), para. 8). Police services benefit greatly when the
experiences and perspectives of women and men are incorporated in the design,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of police legislation, policies and
programmes. This includes addressing sexual and gender-based violence, conflictrelated sexual violence and the security concerns of women, men, girls and boys. It
also requires the building of more democratic, inclusive host -State police services
__________________
4

Including police, gendarmerie, customs, immigration and border services, as well as related
oversight bodies, such as ministries of the interior or justice.
5
Security sector reform describes a process of assessment, review and implementation as well as
monitoring and evaluation led by national authorities that has as its goal the enhancement of
effective and accountable security for the State and its peoples without discrimination and with
full respect for human rights and the rule of law. As the Security Council noted, security sector
reform should be a nationally owned process that is rooted in the particular needs and conditions
of the country in question (see A/62/659-S/2008/39, para. 17).

6/20

16-18992

S/2016/952

with due regard for gender equality. The inclusion of women in police services
provides a greater sense of security overall and improves access to and support from
law enforcement agencies to women. As at 30 September 2016, the representation of
women among individual police officers and formed police units stood at 19.7 per
cent and 6.6 per cent, respectively. In order to reach 20 per cent, continuing efforts
will be required by police-contributing countries to increase nominations of women
officers and mainstream gender considerations within their national po lice services.
11. For the most part, the United Nations police comprises police components
within United Nations peace operations. Specialized expertise has also been
deployed in non-mission settings under the Global Focal Point on Police, Justice
and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in Post-Conflict and Other Crisis
Situations arrangement. This has included, for example, deployments to Sri Lanka
and Sierra Leone. The United Nations police, in conjunction with mission
components, United Nations partners and others, including the African Union, the
European Union and INTERPOL, strengthens rule of law capacities and supports
security sector reform in host States, in line with international human rights law.
This support reinforces national, regional and international efforts to disrupt
criminal networks and address key drivers of conflict and violence, as well as social
injustice and inequality.
12. Finally, the United Nations police also includes the Police Division of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, with its New York-based sections and the
Brindisi-based Standing Police Capacity. At Headquarters, the Police Adviser,
supported by the Police Division, is responsible for providing strategic advice and
support on all policing issues to senior United Nations officials, as well as to heads
of police components of operations led by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Political Affairs. The Police Adviser also
oversees basic support by the Division to police components, including guidance
development, planning, selection and recruitment, mission management and
backstopping. The Standing Police Capacity provides start -up capacity and technical
assistance to field missions, as well as in non-mission settings through the Global
Focal Point arrangement, primarily through time -limited deployments.

V. Global developments
13. At the United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in June 2016, 6 United Nations
officials and Member States emphasized the centrality of United Nations poli cing to
international security. Furthermore, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2185 (2014) on policing and has requested annual briefings by heads of
police components since 2014, as has the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.
14. The increased significance of United Nations policing has necessitated the
elaboration of more detailed guidance for United Nations police, namely the
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police Peacekeeping, which
comprises the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Support
__________________
6

16-18992

For further information, see http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/sites/police/initiatives/
UNCOPS.shtml.

7/20

S/2016/952

policy on United Nations police in peacekeeping operations and special political
missions and the guidelines on police capacity-building and development, on police
command and on police operations. The guidelines on police administration will be
completed by the end of 2016. Detailed, field-oriented manuals will follow. While
the development of the Strategic Guidance Framework has been slow and
deliberately paced, I fully expect that further guidance will be completed
expeditiously, as called for in the external review.
15. The Strategic Guidance Framework cannot, however, be seen in a vacuum. It
situates United Nations policing in a broader framework, in cluding my Human
Rights Up Front initiative (2013); the establishment of the Global Focal Point
arrangement (2012); the development of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations/Department of Field Support policy on the protection of civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping (2015); the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights/Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Political
Affairs policy on human rights in United Nations peace operations and political
missions (2011); the human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces (2011); the policy on human rights screening of
United Nations personnel (2012); and Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) on
the application of the relevant standards related to sexual exploitation and abuse that
must be met by troop- and police-contributing countries prior to deployment. By the
end of 2016, guidance for United Nations police will be further expanded in t he
revised Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Support policy
on formed police units, as well as new Department of Peacekeeping Operations/
Department of Field Support guidelines on the protection of civilians by United
Nations police.
16. Full implementation of these initiatives and guidance will require enhanced
predeployment, induction and in-service training to further increase the
effectiveness of the United Nations police. 7 In its resolution 49/37, the General
Assembly recognized that the training of personnel for United Nations peace
operations was the responsibility of Member States. The Strategic Guidance
Framework provides police-contributing countries with an overview of the
expectations of their officers in the field and desired skill sets. It also renders the
role of United Nations police transparent to host States.
17. As the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations noted, closing the
gap between what is asked of missions with respect to the protection of civilians and
what they can provide requires improvement across several dimensions: assessment
and planning, capabilities, timely information and two -way communication,
leadership and training, and mandates and expectations (A/70/95-S/2015/446,
__________________
7

8/20

As was stated in paragraph 20 of the external review “In service training for [United Nations
police] should be greatly enhanced, including training in advising and mentoring skills and on
the Strategic Guidance Framework. Given the unique needs of police components in United
Nations peace operations, there is a need to better use training capacity and invest in helping
bridge the gap between [United Nations police] officers’ national experience and their role
within peace operations. It is the view of the review team that, even with significant
improvements in the provision of appropriately skilled personnel, there will remain a large
requirement for United Nations in-service training. The [Strategic Guidance Framework], in
addition to skills training, should be an integral part of predeployment, induction and in-service
training.”

16-18992

S/2016/952

para. 91). To that end, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support will closely collaborate on improving performance
management frameworks for military, police and civilian components.
18. Ongoing efforts by the Police Division and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Strategic Force Generation and Capability Cell will have all formed
police unit commitments registered and managed through the Peaceke eping
Capability Readiness System by 1 January 2017. At the 2015 Leaders ’ Summit on
Peacekeeping, 26 Member States pledged approximately 400 individual police
officers, 25 formed police units, 2 special weapons and tactics (SWAT) units, 4
guard units and 8 specialized teams. There were also six pledges of training support.
At the United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit in 2016, 7 police -contributing
countries pledged additional formed police units and 12 police -contributing
countries pledged additional individual police officers, which addressed some
immediate shortcomings. The United Nations police nevertheless continues to face
systemic gaps, including in the ability to deploy rapidly, as well as in their in theatre mobility, capacity to protect civilians and United Nations personnel and
access to advanced police technology, training and extrabudgetary and
programmatic funding. Ensuring that formed police units are fit for purpose requires
clear oversight of their delivery against mandates.
19. In line with the external review, the Police Division, in consultation with
missions and Member States, continues to review standard operating procedures for
the selection, assessment and deployment of individual police officers, formed
police units and police leadership to enhance the effectiveness of police
deployment. It has adjusted its recruitment system by developing separate
recruitment streams for command, operations, capacity -building and development,
and administration. This is in accordance with the Strategi c Guidance Framework
and responds to the recommendation of the external review to have separate streams
for the deployment of personnel that will be employed in the areas of protection and
development, including civilian experts. To increase the timeliness , effectiveness
and transparency of the evaluation and selection of candidates, the Police Division
is further refining its computerized human resources system to manage all the
information on specific individualized skills and cross-check relevant data of the
individual police officers with other United Nations entities with respect to
mandatory clearances (conduct and discipline and medical clearance and human
rights certification provided by Member States). It remains a challenge to sustain a
high number of French-speaking officers and units. The Police Division has been
working closely with partners such as the International Organization of la
Francophonie to improve the nomination and recruitment processes.

VI. Field-related developments
20. United Nations police provide the bedrock of a mission’s exit strategy. In
Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone and Liberia, security responsibilities were successfully
conferred to the host-State police in 2012, 2014 and 2016, respectively. In Timor Leste, this handover followed the completion of a joint assessment of t he
institutional capacities of the national police, in which each Timorese police station
was evaluated against agreed indicators of progress set out in a joint development

16-18992

9/20

S/2016/952

plan. The planning, assessment and handover process was implemented jointly by
the host-State police and United Nations police, including a cadre of 19 civilian
police experts, in conjunction with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), other agencies, funds and programmes, and bilateral partners.
21. In Sierra Leone, the United Nations transitioned from a peacekeeping
operation to a special political mission and now supports the country through the
United Nations country team. Under the Global Focal Point arrangement, United
Nations police continued to assist in peace consolidation, following the exit of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone in 2014, deploying
the Standing Police Capacity to support ongoing UNDP security sector reform
efforts.
22. In 2013, the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) supported the
national police in a joint assessment exercise to monitor progress and identify
priorities for development and reform. Those assessments informed the
Government’s plan for the UNMIL transition, with security responsibilities handed
over from the Mission on 30 June 2016. United Nations police continue to support,
inter alia, the development and implementation of key law enforcement legislative,
policy and accountability frameworks and intelligence -led and community-oriented
policing capacities in Liberia.
23. In Côte d’Ivoire, a joint technical committee, comprising representatives of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire police, the Ivorian national police and
gendarmerie and UNDP, was established in June 2016. The committee develope d a
plan, completed in August 2016, for the transfer of responsibilities from the United
Nations police to the relevant government authorities and the United Nations
country team.
24. In Haiti, the Haitian National Police Development Plan for 2012 -2016,
implemented by the police component of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH) with support from the United Nations country team and
bilateral partners, has focused on improving the capacity and operational readiness
of the national police. By the end of 2016, the United Nations police will have
assisted the national police in increasing its overall personnel to 14,600 officers, 10
per cent of whom are women.
25. Incorporating gender considerations into its work, a specialized sexual an d
gender-based violence police team in the police component of MINUSTAH
developed the capacity of the national police, including the establishment of 13
specialized sexual and gender-based violence police offices, a sexual and genderbased violence classroom at the Police School and an office for the Haitian National
Police National Coordinator on Gender and Women’s Affairs. In Somalia, the police
component of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) assisted
the Somali federal police in addressing gender-related crimes. Similarly, the police
component of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), in collaboration with UNDP, built seven family and child protection
units across Darfur to address sexual and gender-based violence and conflict-related
sexual violence.
26. A targeted recruitment campaign in Liberia, linked to an accelerated education
programme and the implementation of a gender policy, resulted in 18.6 per cent

10/20

16-18992

S/2016/952

female representation within the national police. UNOCI advocacy has similarly
focused on the integration of women in the national police and the previously all male gendarmerie. In October 2014, the first 4 women officers joined the
gendarmerie; an additional 35 female recruits began training in 20 16. The UNOCI
police component, with support from UNDP, initiated a project of rehabilitating
accommodations at the École de Gendarmerie d’Abidjan, which can house 50
female gendarmes.
27. The United Nations police, together with the task force on human ri ghts due
diligence policy in each mission, undertakes risk assessments regarding United
Nations police support to non-United Nations security forces, notably host-State
police, so as to mitigate potential human rights violations by such forces.
28. Approaches to the rule of law and the role of the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and its field
missions have evolved considerably since 2007. As set out in the presidential
statement of the Security Council on the rule of law (see S/PRST/2014/5),
supporting national authorities, where mandated, to develop rule of law priorities
and strategies to address the needs of police, judicial institutions and corre ctions
systems and their interlinkages is a vital contribution to building peace and ending
impunity. Both the efforts and the impact on the ground have increased
significantly, and coordination at Headquarters and in the field has improved. In my
reports on the rule of law, I have repeatedly stated that there can be no peace
without respect for the rule of law and human rights. The challenge is not only to
understand the importance of rule of law activities as a pillar of peace operations,
but for political strategies to ensure adherence to the rule of law priorities that are
necessary for sustainable peace and security, through a coherent response.
29. The United Nations police in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), along with its justice and corrections
and mine action components, as well as UNDP, the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and other partners, including the European Union, coordinated
their support to the establishment and operationalization of the specialized judicial
unit on terrorism and transnational organized crime. It is composed of 12
magistrates, led by a special prosecutor, and a specialized investigation brigade
comprised of 50 investigators, and is tasked with addressi ng terrorism and
transnational organized crime as part of a comprehensive investigation/prosecution
team. The MINUSMA police and its partners continue to train the Malian security
forces, with a focus on the fight against terrorism and serious organized cr ime,
improvised explosive devices threat mitigation, intelligence, investigations and
forensics.
30. The United Nations police continues to strengthen host-State capabilities to
address serious organized crime, together with INTERPOL, UNODC, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Political Affairs,
through the joint West Africa Coast Initiative, including the establishment of
transnational crime units. In Côte d’Ivoire, UNOCI police coordinated activities of
UNODC, INTERPOL and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
and provided expertise to national counterparts in establishing the transnational
crime unit. Access to INTERPOL online training and its I -24/7 database allows
host-State transnational crime units and the United Nations police to expand their

16-18992

11/20

S/2016/952

capacities to gather, analyse and act upon criminal information. This work is
increasingly reflected in mandates, such as Security Council resolution 2277 (2016),
in which the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of Congo was called upon to collect and analyse information on the
criminal networks which support armed groups.
31. United Nations police are increasingly called upon to support special political
missions, where small, high-impact police components provide strategic advice on
the transformation of the police within wider political strategies, as well as critical
coordination support to ensure coherent international assi stance. In UNSOM, United
Nations police contributed, through the Global Focal Point arrangement, to an
agreement on a new policing model in a federated Somalia. Given the importance of
rule of law and policing in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, reso urces are
needed to ensure adequate Headquarters support to police components in special
political missions.

VII. Global and field-based challenges
32. One of the key challenges for United Nations policing is the mismatch
between mandated tasks and the posture of the United Nations police and allocated
resources at Headquarters and in the field. Mandate implementation is at times
hindered by inconsistent planning and unrealistic operational recommendations.
These challenges can be exacerbated by a perceived disconnect among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and police-contributing countries, as well as the perception
that actions of the Secretariat are carried out within organizational “silos”.
33. Even innovative approaches by the Security Council, such as the urgent
temporary measures in the Central African Republic granting limited authority to
carry out policing and law enforcement activities to maintain basic order and
combat impunity, have raised challenges for United Nations policing. When th e
justice chain is ineffective or lacking, how can investigations conducted by United
Nations police be brought into the legal framework of a host -State where the
mission has been mandated with only some of the attributes of executive policing?
This underscores the need for clear, implementable and appropriately resourced
mandates.
34. A pragmatic approach is critical. For example, serious crimes committed by
internally displaced persons on United Nations premises in South Sudan cannot be
investigated and prosecuted by the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). Yet expelling serious offenders is often, for human rights reasons, not
an option. Consequently, UNMISS police are confronted with the challenge of
protecting internally displaced persons fro m serious crime, including by detaining
individuals who constitute such threats, based on a mandate to maintain public
safety and security within its sites for the protection of civilians, raising new legal
and protection issues.
35. As recognized in the Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping and by the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
capacity-building is inherently political, as well as technical. The host State must be
in the lead. Progress must be assessed on the basis of benchmarks and standards.

12/20

16-18992

S/2016/952

Any reform effort should be undertaken in close consultation with relevant
stakeholders and promote host-State police ownership and accountability. It is
imperative that heads of missions utilize United Nations police to prioritize
capacity-building and continue to foster political will in support of the protection of
civilians and longer-term capacity-building.
36. Wavering host-State commitment can manifest itself in various ways. Lack of
political will can hinder or even prevent capacity-building and development. The
non-establishment of the Abyei Police Service by the Sudan and South Sudan is a
case in point. An unwillingness or inability to implement fundamental reforms,
particularly when integrated into broader security sector reform efforts, can further
prevent the delivery of mandated tasks. Political processes are essential to long -term
peace. Accordingly, the political work of missions must include support to policing
reform efforts.
37. Police need to be fully integrated into security sector reform efforts. The
perception remains that such efforts are often military-centric, without proper
inclusion of other aspects of the security sector. The host State sometimes prioritizes
the military to the detriment of the police and the justice system. In its resolution
2151 (2014), the Security Council stressed the importance of security sector reform,
including the development of professional, accessible and accounta ble policing
capabilities as well as institutions responsible for oversight and management. Too
often, the omission of police in security sector reform priorities leads to otherwise
avoidable hard lessons years later. At the same time, many countries in wh ich the
United Nations works have no tradition of formal policing, and the traditions that do
exist are often highly militarized. Thus, the clear delineation of responsibilities
among security entities is critical. We must support the development of emergi ng
police systems but also recognize when the centre of gravity for host -State security
lies in alternate or informal security structures.
38. In other cases, host States rely overly on the United Nations to assume
policing duties. In Haiti, inadequate budgetary allocations for the national police
have negatively affected the ability of the United Nations police to quickly cease
operational support to the national police. In the Central African Republic, the
Government, notwithstanding its memorandum of understanding with the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), at times seems to have interpreted the mandated urgent
temporary measures as transforming United Nations police into the Government’s
operational arm for conducting sensitive arrests. In Liberia, the inadequate
budgetary allocations for the police have led to an overreli ance on United Nations
police for construction and renovation of police stations and for improved delivery
of policing services countrywide. While mandates should prioritize capacity building, United Nations police and military should not subsume governmen tal
responsibilities in a way that pre-empts the host-State’s willingness or ability to
restore accountable legal and law enforcement institutions. The greater the
commitment of Member States to investing in capacity -building, the more the cost
of peace operations will decrease over time.
39. In addition, non-adherence by host States to status-of-forces and status-ofmission agreements, including freedom of movement and visa restrictions, severely
limits missions’ abilities to deliver on mandated tasks.

16-18992

13/20

S/2016/952

40. An integrated approach is essential from the start. United Nations police are a
critical element in the initial joint military and police stabilization efforts, as well as
the later initiatives on the transition to broader justice and corrections promot ing
peaceful dispute resolution through host-State rule of law institutions. In the Central
African Republic, MINUSCA police working with military, justice and corrections
components are contributing to restoring law and order through the urgent
temporary measures framework. Furthermore, the Bangui Joint Task Force, an
integrated police-military structure under one command line, and combined,
integrated police-military action, have proven essential in the context of the
protection of civilians. The challenge, however, is to maintain a clear understanding
of the respective roles of the military and police and their respective rules of
engagement and directives on the use of force. Much remains to be done in applying
lessons learned from this unique approach combining police and military assets
under a unified chain of command.
41. A functioning criminal justice chain is crucial to the protection of civilians. As
I have stated before, systematic accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law is crucial to providing redress for victims,
deterring further violations and promoting reconciliation (see S/2016/447, para. 18).
United Nations police, along with human rights and justice and corrections
components, are instrumental in the post-conflict and early peacebuilding phase in
supporting the development of host-State institutions to ensure non-discriminatory
accountability. Human rights violations need to be addressed by national
counterparts, with the support of the mission, as a key deterrent to continuing cycles
of violence. Law and order gains in this regard send a strong signal that spoilers
cannot act with impunity. However, there are perception risks associated with the
United Nations implementing such rule of law tasks, which should be limited in
scope and duration. The overall focus should be on supporting the national
authorities in undertaking their protection and accountability responsibilities. In
extremis, the application of such measures by a peacekeeping operation can lead to
allegations that it is not being impartial.
42. Another practical challenge facing United Nations individual police officers,
military experts on mission, individually deployed military personnel and other
components using government-provided personnel relates to the mission subsistence
allowance and the lack of hazard or danger pay. Mission subsistence allowance is
not an incentive, but rather compensation for living expenses in the mission area.
Existing disparities in conditions of service among differen t types of personnel
continue to pose grave challenges to mandate delivery, especially where colleagues
work side by side and perform comparable tasks. This has a detrimental effect on
the morale, safety and performance of individual police officers, espec ially those
serving under the most challenging, hazardous conditions, such as in Afghanistan,
Libya or Somalia, without the benefit of the hazard pay received by their civilian
colleagues. This further hampers the United Nations police in attracting enough
high-quality personnel to perform the mandated functions.
43. Finally, national caveats on the deployment and functions of individual police
officers and formed police units limit the extent to which those contingents can
support mandate implementation. All missions are to report to Headquarters any
incidents of refusal to follow orders, whether on grounds of new caveats or for any

14/20

16-18992

S/2016/952

other reason (see A/70/95-S/2015/446, paras. 105(c) and 220, and A/70/357S/2015/682, para. 98). The imposition of caveats will also be taken into account by
the Secretariat when determining whether or not to proceed with deployment.

VIII. Vision
44. Changing conflict dynamics have transformed United Nations policing. The
number of major violent conflicts has almost tripled and communities worldwide
are affected by serious, organized and transnational criminal violence. Threats of
terrorism, violent extremism and the trafficking of illicit goods and persons are
growing more serious. Humanitarian needs, exemplified by the displacement of 60
million persons worldwide, are often driven or exacerbated by conflict. International
human rights and humanitarian law are frequently ignored. Where civi l strife erupts,
fair, impartial law enforcement is typically one of the first state services to erode,
often triggering the deployment of United Nations peace operations.
45. The non-existence or weakening of the rule of law, including poor policing
practices, not only cause but exacerbate unrest and violations of human rights, often
with devastating consequences for communities. As continues to be the case in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, South Sudan and elsewhere, United
Nations police play a key role in the protection of civilians, bringing to bear skills
that complement those of the military or civilian components, in providing physical
protection and establishing a protective environment. By supporting host -State
police and other law enforcement services in reforming, restructuring and
developing their institutions, United Nations police can be essential to the
resumption of host-State services and responsibilities.
46. This qualitative shift in requirements for United Nations police is mirrored by
an increase in quantitative demand. While the United Nations does not have a
monopoly in international policing, it is by far the largest supplier. 8 United Nations
police have the ability to help advance political processes by facilitating dialo gue
and access to a wide range of actors, and they can help improve security and
legitimacy, laying the foundations for longer-term institution-building. These
comparative advantages uniquely position United Nations police to contribute to
comprehensive rule of law assistance and wider political and preventive efforts.
47. At the same time, gains in efficiency and effectiveness can only be attained
through continued reinforcement of regional partnerships. This includes support by
the Police Division to standardizing the process of rehatting uniformed personnel.
Working closely with the African Union and the European Union, the Police
Division and its partners are advancing this cooperation to address training,
equipment, sustainment and performance standards, conduct and accountability, and
logistics support requirements, as recommended by the High -level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations and in my report entitled “The future of United Nations
peace operations: implementation of the recommendations of the High-Level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations” (see A/70/95-S/2015/446, para. 204, and
A/70/357-S/2015/682, para. 51).
__________________
8

16-18992

United Nations police number approximately 13,500, African Union police less than 500 and
European Union police less than 1,000.

15/20

S/2016/952

48. Concerted efforts by Member States, the Secretariat, regional organizations,
specialized policing organizations and other partners are required to realize my
vision of a transformed United Nations police that is people -centred, modern, agile,
mobile and flexible, specialized, rights-based and norm-driven. This vision will
require strong leadership and reinforced partnerships. It will also require robust and
effective capabilities, such as well-trained and well-equipped police that have
access to recent innovations and technology for better performanc e. The United
Nations police will effectively contribute across the entire spectrum of peace and
security, from conflict prevention, peacemaking and peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and sustainment of peace.
49. During recent peacekeeping summits and the United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summit, Member States and the international policing community reaffirmed the
centrality of the United Nations police in the peace and security agenda. Going
forward, there is a need to work together in unprecedented ways and re new the
commitment to the United Nations police through innovative political, human and
financial investments, a broadened base of police-contributing countries and robust
processes that ensure interoperability and interorganizational cohesiveness. In so
doing, the Organization will be able to translate this vision of the United Nations
police into reality.

IX. Observations and recommendations
50. The report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations and the
external review contain a series of recommendations to improve the performance of
the United Nations police. 9 After reflecting on these recommendations, I have
formulated the plan of action set out below, which describes specific measures to
address the challenges outlined above. The Police Division has been instructed to
use this plan of action to create opportunities for both United Nations policing and
international policing. Realizing this plan depends on the key cross -cutting enablers
of partnerships, critical resources and capabilities and a well-structured and wellfunctioning Police Division.
51. Recommendation 1. The recognized role and importance of United Nations
police must translate into strategic but realistic mandates that are adequately
resourced. The Police Division must also be appropriately positioned and structured.
In line with successive reports of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (see, for example, A/69/19 and A/70/19), Security Council resolution
2185 (2014) and the statement of the President of the Security Council of
31 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/26), this requires close consultation between
Member States and the Secretariat prior to and during the lifecycle of a mission.
Such consultation is meant to provide strategic advice to the Security Council, in
particular on the priorities and sequencing of United Nations po lice support in
specific settings and which capacities are required; align mandates to available
capacities; set and adjust expectations for required capabilities, performance
__________________
9

16/20

See also the report of the Office of Internal Oversight Services entitled “Evaluation of the results
of national police capacity-building in Haiti, Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by United Nations police in MINUSTAH, UNOCI and MONUSCO” (Report No. IED-16014) (available from https://oios.un.org).

16-18992

S/2016/952

standards and timelines, taking into account the limitations of police -contributing
countries; and provide for joint engagement on integrated planning and mission specific directives on the use of force or concept of operations. On the positioning
and structure of the Police Division, I welcome the recommendation of the external
review to establish a Police Advisory Committee to further strengthen information
exchange and triangular cooperation and encourage Member States to consider
having such a subsidiary body to the Security Council or the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. I also encourage the Security Council and the General
Assembly to consider the recommendation of the external review regarding the
strengthening of the leadership of the Police Division in light of the increasing role
that United Nations policing is playing in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I also broadly support the proposed new requirements related to
mission support, planning, recruitment and strategic analysis set out in paragraphs
174 and 175 of the external review and encourage the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations to properly balance the composition of the Police Division.
52. Recommendation 2. With the active support of Member States, the Police
Division has engaged in strategic police generation initiatives that have c ontributed
to making the United Nations police more results-oriented, focusing on anticipated
requirements and demand-driven skill sets using new deployment models, such as
specialized teams, civilian experts and a formed police unit standing capacity
offering specialized expertise. In order to overcome the serious obstacles to
recruiting individual police officers with high-level expertise, attract a new cadre of
qualified police leaders for United Nations police command positions through the
senior police leadership roster, increase female police participation and generate
fully functioning formed police units with more diverse capabilities that could be
deployed through the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System, I call on Member
States to nominate their most qualified officers. The Secretariat will collaborate
closely with potential contributors to ensure a shared, forward -looking
understanding of required capacities and capabilities, and shortened deployment
timelines.
53. Recommendation 3. The deployment of trained, well-equipped and fit police
officers with the necessary skill sets to United Nations operations at the right time is
essential. As noted in the external review, United Nations policing continues to
struggle to provide missions with personnel satisfying the full range of capacities
necessary to effectively and efficiently implement protection and capacity -building
mandates in a timely manner. Closing this gap will require close coordination with
Member States. In order to determine how the Secretariat can further improve its
selection and recruitment processes, and following on the external review, an
internal audit will be conducted of the selection and recruitment processes for
United Nations police. Following the audit, I propose that cons ideration be given to
further refining the Police Division architecture through a strategic police
generation and recruitment section. Further, I reiterate my call for Member States to
ensure that the police personnel that they contribute to peace operatio ns uphold the
highest human rights standards and receive predeployment training on protection of
civilians, child protection and conflict-related sexual violence, according to United
Nations standards. I also call on Member States to ensure prompt investigation in
cases of alleged crimes or misconduct. All United Nations police must, furthermore,
perform their duties in line with their mandate and directives on the use of force

16-18992

17/20

S/2016/952

(see S/2016/447, para. 78(a)). Incidents of non-performance or underperformance
should be immediately reported to Headquarters to ensure timely follow -up and
accountability, as appropriate.
54. Recommendation 4. Recent cases of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations personnel have gravely endangered the United Nations peace operations
enterprise. Contributing countries should assume full responsibility for holding their
personnel accountable, including through prosecution, where appropriate, for any
criminal acts, including sexual exploitation and abuse, in accordance with due
process and consistent with Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) and the
Organization’s zero-tolerance policy. I welcome the efforts of Member States and
the Secretariat to strengthen the vetting of all United Nations police personnel to
ensure that they do not have a history of human rights violation, including instances
of sexual exploitation and abuse in service with the United Nations, and to comply
with all provisions of the policy on human rights screening of United Nations
personnel. Security Council resolution 2272 (2016) and the associated operational
guidance on its implementation should have a significant impact on efforts already
in place to prevent and address misconduct more broadly and sexual exploitation
and abuse in particular. The United Nations police will active ly support their
implementation.
55. Recommendation 5. With regard to increasing the participation of women
police officers in United Nations peace operations, including command positions,
the Secretariat will continue to work closely with Member States an d the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women to overcome
systemic challenges regarding the eligibility of female candidates, such as entry
requirements to ensure equal opportunity, including by instituting special measures.
56. Recommendation 6. In order to protect civilians and help stabilize
communities emerging from conflict, I intend to strengthen the capacity, capabilities
and performance of formed police units, in close consultation with Member States,
based on a review to be undertaken by the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Department of Field Support.
Notably, the evaluation will look at their impact and role within individual missions,
as well as challenges related to flexibility, mobility, training and equipment.
57. Recommendation 7. United Nations policing services must comply with, and
operate on, the doctrinal foundation of the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping through: (a) targeted recruitment based on
identified field needs, including for special political missions; (b) a solid
accountability framework for the implementation of mandates; and (c) continuous
monitoring of performance and its improvement through data collection, a nalysis
and implementation of lessons learned. I welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support to strengthen the
United Nations police knowledge management and training capacity, particularly as
it relates to the Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping and protection of civilians.
58. Recommendation 8. As outlined in my report on the future of United Nations
peace operations (A/70/357-S/2015/682), enhancing the predeployment, induction
and in-mission training of United Nations police personnel requires a collective

18/20

16-18992

S/2016/952

effort by the Secretariat and Member States to ensure deployment readiness and
increase performance. This includes, but is not limited to: (a) Member Stateprovided certification for all police personnel who have complet ed United Nationsspecified predeployment training as part of the police generation process;
(b) support to the establishment of bilateral and regional train ing partnerships; and
(c) establishment of a pilot train-the-trainer centre in Entebbe, Uganda, supported
by voluntary contributions, to reinforce the role of the United Nations in setting
training standards.
59. Recommendation 9. Reform efforts undertaken by the United Nations police
should inform political processes and be seen as an enabling element that drives the
design and implementation of peace operations. Heads of mission should capitalize
on United Nations police capacity-building and development initiatives, situational
awareness and community relations as resources to bolster capacities to support
effective political solutions from the outset of a mission.
60. Recommendation 10. It is necessary to respond to the deteriorating police
performance of host-State police services, or their politicization or abuse, before
conflict erupts, in particular through the participation of the United Nations police
in the Organization’s mediation and conflict prevention efforts. This will also
require a slight augmentation of preventive capacity in the Police Division in New
York and its Standing Police Capacity in Brindisi.
61. Recommendation 11. Police components are essential to any United Nations
rule of law initiative in the field. The heads of police compo nents, in conjunction
with heads of missions, must continue to pursue a strategically and operationally
integrated approach with their justice, corrections, human rights, security sector
reform and other partners to effectively deliver peace dividends on t he ground.
62. Recommendation 12. Member States and the United Nations system should
provide United Nations police, justice and corrections personnel with adequate
means to help sustain peace and avoid relapse into conflict, including by further
strengthening and expanding the Global Focal Point on Police, Justice and
Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in Post-Conflict and Other Crisis Situations
arrangement. This must include mutually supportive, interoperable arrangements
between the United Nations and other entities, including in non-mission settings,
and diversification of the financing of rule of law activities, including through
access to assessed mission budgets for programmatic activities in support of
mandated tasks, as recommended in the report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, voluntary trust funds such as the Peacebuilding Fund, missionspecific trust funds, or UNDP thematic or geographic trust funds, as well as
strategic partnerships with the World Bank, the European Uni on and other
stakeholders.
63. Recommendation 13. Heads of missions should ensure that United Nations
police have integrated access to security and information exchange networks in
order to facilitate better situational awareness, predictive analysis and early warning
information, including on serious and organized crime. This will also allow them to
better assist national law enforcement actors to help build their own capacity over
time. This should be accompanied by the formalization of the serious organized
crime team within the Police Division, with adequate resources and funding, and the

16-18992

19/20

S/2016/952

establishment of serious organized crime support units in missions with a serious
organized crime mandate. In close coordination with UNODC, INTERPOL and
bilateral donors, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations wi ll thus be able to
provide increasingly integrated assistance to host-State entities in establishing or
consolidating transnational crime units and associated processes.
64. Recommendation 14. Adequate resources are required for Police Division
backstopping support to special political missions. It currently provides support to
UNSOM, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, as well
as to the planning processes for Burundi, Colombia and Yemen. This has led to a
severe stretching of resources specifically budgeted for backstopping support to
peacekeeping operations, especially during start-up and transition phases. I
encourage Member States to consider allocating appropriate resources for the
backstopping of special political missions.
65. The implementation of my vision of a modern United Nations police also rests
on the availability of key cross-cutting enablers, in particular the newest
technologies to enhance situational awareness and protect United Nations personnel,
as well as the consolidation of partnerships to create new global models of
cooperation, so that the Police Division is fully capable of supporting United
Nations police components in the implementation of their mandated tasks.
66. The United Nations police have served to protect people around the world,
strengthening inclusive and representative institutions and States , while respecting
and promoting human rights and exemplifying the values enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. At great personal cost, they have generously executed their
tasks, in extreme conditions, sometimes under imminent threat and immense
pressure, to protect civilians and represent the fairest principles of law and order. I
extend my heartfelt admiration and gratitude to these brave men and women, who
have, time and again, demonstrated their deep commitment to the ideals and goals
of the United Nations.
67. I approach the end of my tenure as Secretary-General with continued concern
over the many challenges facing the United Nations. The present report sets out my
vision of how the United Nations police, when given strategic, realistic and
adequately resourced mandates, can contribute to the sustainment of peace in the
broadest sense. It sets out recommendations that reflect the findings of the High level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, my report on the implementation of
those findings and the external review of the functions, structure and capacity of the
Police Division, as well as other global United Nations initiatives. I trust that my
successor will give these recommendations strong consideration, with a view to
advancing the development of more timely, tailored and effective United Nations
prevention and conflict management responses, recognizing that the United Nations
police can and should play a central role in these efforts.

20/20

16-18992
