S/PV.8866

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8866

th meeting
Tuesday, 28 September 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Byrne Nason. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ireland)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Gotru
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Mills
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-26704 (E)
*2126704*

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

along the path of restoring Syria’s sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity and meeting the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people to determine
their own future — the pillars of resolution 2254 (2015).

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria; and Ms. Rouba Mhaissen, Founder and Director
of Sawa for Development and Aid.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Last week, a grim announcement
reminded us of the appalling suffering and losses
of the Syrian people. The High Commissioner for
Human Rights stated that more than 350,000 people
can be confirmed individually — by name, date and
location — as having been killed in the first decade of
the conflict. Given the vast numbers still unaccounted
for, the actual figure is likely much higher.
To that horrific death toll, we may add other
measures of deep suffering from more than a decade of
conflict. More than 12 million Syrians are displaced;
that is half of Syria’s pre-conflict population. Tens
of thousands remain detained, abducted or missing.
Poverty levels are approaching 90 per cent after a
decade of conflict, mismanagement and corruption,
and now there is the impact of the Lebanese economic
collapse, the coronavirus disease and, indeed,
sanctions. Syria is divided into several de facto zones,
with international players jostling in the theatre, as
well as violent episodes that continue to test the relative
calm of the past 18 months.
The Syrian people desperately need a Syrian-led and
-owned political process to deliver. As part of that, they
also need the sustained attention of the international
community in support of a wider effort that could
solidify calm, ease their suffering and carry us forward
2/19

28/09/2021

With military front lines largely frozen for 18
months and the concerns of parties regarding the
status quo, the time to push for a political process is
now. Resolution 2254 (2015) recognizes the close link
between a nationwide ceasefire and a parallel political
process, and I continue to call for that, particularly
given the episodes of violence and the dangers of that
spiralling into an all-out confrontation.
In Idlib, many who returned to their homes in the
south of the province have now been displaced once
more against a backdrop of sustained mutual shelling,
rocket fire and increased air strikes amid reports of
civilian fatalities. Many strikes have been concentrated
south of the M4 highway, but there have also been
strikes deep inside the de-escalation zone, including
alarming strikes near internally displaced person
camps. Meanwhile, an agreement has brought calm to
Dara’a Al-Balad, and I hope that it proves sustainable. I
welcome the reduction in violence and the resumption of
humanitarian access. I hope that civilians are protected
without any further escalation there or in other parts
of the south-west where similar agreements are being
replicated. I also hope that there can be safe, dignified
and voluntary returns of all civilians to their homes.
Elsewhere in Syria, there are multiple sources
of concern: ongoing shelling and skirmishes among
non-State armed groups and the Turkish military on
front lines across the perimeter of north-west Syria
and northern rural Aleppo; reports of an increase in
Turkish drone strikes in Syrian territory; and yet
another round of air strikes attributed to Israel on
targets near Damascus.
Multiple listed terrorist groups continue to operate
across all quarters of Syria. The Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant attacked a gas pipeline supplying the
power plant in Deir Ali, causing a power outage across
the country — a reminder of the dangers those groups
still pose. Counter-terrorism action in accordance
with international humanitarian law, conducted in a
manner that is effective while protecting civilians and
safeguarding regional security, is possible and indeed
needed. It will require greater international cooperation
among key stakeholders.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

I am sure that the situation on the ground in
Idlib and elsewhere will be an important issue when
Presidents Putin and Erdoğan meet tomorrow. I
continue to appeal for those with influence to promote
calm. Much depends on that.
Meanwhile, Russian-American contacts to pursue
humanitarian progress in the framework of resolution
2585 (2021) have continued. Indeed, the United Nations
is committed to doing all it can to fully implement the
resolution in all its aspects.
Let me also remind Council members that any
humanitarian effects of sanctions that could exacerbate
the plight of ordinary Syrians need to be avoided and
mitigated, particularly in terms of overcompliance.
But I hope that the issues being discussed in recent
international contacts are the floor, and not the ceiling,
of what we collectively want to achieve in Syria. That
has been my message during recent weeks, including
trips in the region and in New York. I have engaged
intensively with the Syrian parties — the Syrian
Government and the opposition Syrian Negotiations
Committee. I was able to join the Secretary-General
when he met several Foreign Ministers and senior
officials of key countries. I have seen several other
senior officials recently, including in Geneva. I will
be travelling from here to Washington, D.C., as my
consultations continue.
It is clear from all our engagements that trust is low,
but it is also clear — and let me emphasize this — that
common interests do exist, that things are not static and
that there is every reason to try now to build a more
effective political effort.

S/PV. 8866

The co-Chairs’ agreement on methodology is based
on three pillars that formed the basis of my engagement
with them: first, respect for the terms of reference and
core rules of procedure; secondly, the submission of
texts of basic constitutional principles in advance of
the meetings; and thirdly, regular co-Chair meetings
with me before and during the coming session. The
co-Chairs are also committed to setting provisional
dates for future meetings and discussing a workplan.
In short, we should all now expect the Constitutional
Committee to begin to work seriously on a process
of drafting — not just preparing — a constitutional
reform. If it does that, then we will have a different and
credible constitutional process. We need that if we are
to build a modicum of trust. All three delegations — the
delegation nominated by the Government, the delegation
nominated by the opposition and the middle third
civil society delegation, which my Deputy Special
Envoy, Ms. Matar, briefed yesterday — have important
contributions to make in that regard.
We need to find a genuine intra-Syrian political
dialogue — something that was reportedly discussed
when President Putin met President Al-Assad in
Moscow recently — and through that, a genuine
process of Syrian political reform. I am convinced that
Geneva can be the place where Syrians committed to
durable peace can begin to work with each other in a
constructive manner.

On the Constitutional Committee, we are at an
important moment. It has now been exactly two years
since the Committee was agreed by the Government
of Syria and the Syrian Negotiations Committee.
Regrettably, the Constitutional Committee has not yet
begun to make steady progress on its mandate.

Let me recall that resolution 2254 (2015) also
encouraged the meaningful participation of Syrian
women in the political process. Without that no solution
in Syria can be complete. My office has continued to
consult with the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board. In
fact, the Board is currently convening in Helsinki, and
Deputy Special Envoy Matar will be joining them.
While there, the Board has also been invited to meet
with Finnish officials to gain insights on the Finnish
experience in education and conflict resolution.

But today there is some good news to report.
Following eight months of intensive facilitation with
the co-Chairs, I am pleased to announce that agreement
is in place on methodology, and invitations have
been issued for a sixth session of the Constitutional
Committee. While we are still in the process of
confirming logistics, the small drafting body will
convene in Geneva as of 18 October, and the co-Chairs
will meet the day before for the first time, together with
me, to prepare the session.

Let me underline the importance of action on
the crucial file concerning detainees, abductees and
missing persons. All sides say that they agree that action
is needed. All sides stand to benefit from progress, as
families from every corner of Syria have seen loved
ones detained, abducted or gone missing. I remain
absolutely convinced that, if we could make inroads on
that, it would be a vital confidence-builder, a signal to
all Syrians that peace is possible and a circuit-breaker
in the context of international diplomacy.

21-267043/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

My hope is that this concerted international
cooperation could also help to focus on the safe,
dignified and voluntary return of refugees. Clearly the
conditions are far from being ripe for most of them.
But we can start to look at how to remove some of the
obstacles to returns — whether they be in terms of the
security situation, legislation, resources or livelihoods
and with the relevant authorities sending clear and
credible signals. That would send a signal of concrete
hope to millions of Syrians. And I believe that it would
help decrease tensions across the region — tensions
that are intimately linked to the spillover effects of the
Syrian conflict.
As I have often stressed, the issues are not solely
in the hands of the Syrians. We need constructive Syria
diplomacy to help save lives, ease suffering, promote
stability and further the implementation of resolution
2254 (2015). In that regard, I am continuing to ask key
States to work with me in exploratory discussions on
concrete, mutual and reciprocal steps that are defined
with realism and precision and that are implemented
in parallel and are verifiable. I am continuing my
consultations to seek real buy-in in the form of relevant
players being ready not only to identify what they seek,
but also what they can deliver on, in a reciprocal process.
I remain ready to use the convening power of
the United Nations in Geneva if that can help create
prospects for incremental progress. I will continue that
work on the wider process, while focusing in the weeks
ahead on facilitating the next session of the Syrian-led
and -owned Constitutional Committee.
The President: I thank Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mhaissen
Ms. Mhaissen: With the pressing socioeconomic
and political issues in multiple Security Council
Member States, the escalation and heightened nature
of conflicts in countries like Afghanistan, Yemen,
the Sudan and others and the protracted nature of the
Syrian conflict, it is a challenge today to keep Syria
on the priority agenda, whether on the political or
the humanitarian levels. However, the demands for
which the people of Syria, especially the courageous
women of Syria, went to the streets in 2011 remain
unmet. Until Syrians — inside Syria or in forced
refugeehood — can exercise their long-demanded
human rights under international law and until a fair
political settlement and a holistic transition are reached,
it is our imperative to actively work on ensuring that
4/19

28/09/2021

Syria remains on the international agenda and that the
everyday demands of people — not only the interests of
those in power — find their way to the negotiating table.
Yes, there have been some gains that we as Syrians,
as Syrian women, are proud of at the level of political
representation. The wall of fear surrounding us has been
toppled. We have penetrated realms where we were not
previously welcome. In the past years, we have carved
out spaces for us as Syrians and fought for a seat at the
table of the political process as women. The successes
are modest, but we did manage to participate in official
delegations to the United Nations-led talks, including
28 per cent representation in the Constitutional
Committee, the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, the
women members of the Civil Society Support Room
and women briefers to the Security Council, to name
just a few. However, a lot remains to be done to ensure
that women are truly participating and that women are
included at all levels. The everyday contributions of
women at the community level remain unseen, and their
demands remain unheard at the peace-process level.
“Peace process” is a phrase much used, but often
stripped of its meaning. We are today far from peace
or peacebuilding in Syria. We simply cannot talk about
peacebuilding when Syrian’s rights, especially Syrian
women’s rights, are being breached on a daily basis.
Many stakeholders engaged at the Syrian political
level have seen a constant belittling of safety,
livelihoods, housing and education rights. Those are set
aside as pure humanitarian concerns to be addressed
only in humanitarian meetings. But the concerns of
everyday Syrians are what is most political. If accessing
one’s home and land is not political, then what is? If
one’s ability to vote in one’s constituency or place of
origin is not political, then what is? If one’s ability to
live in dignity in a country that welcomes, resembles
and protects one is not political, then what is? And if
the everyday women heroes fighting for those demands
are not recognized at the political level, then who is?
Politics is about monitoring humanitarian aid. It
is about documenting human rights violations. It is
about negotiating the release of loved ones. It is about
forging new civil spaces. It is about continuing to fight
for inclusion at all levels. How can one expect a wife
who knows not the fate of her husband — imprisoned,
disappeared or kidnapped — to contribute to any
sustainable peace? How can one convince a woman who
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

cannot return to her land with her children to accept a
political settlement that does not guarantee her rights?
Those are the Syrians we cannot fail. We cannot
allow the political process to bring them justice
before anyone else to continue to stall. In the direst
of circumstances, those women have gathered their
grievances, losses and hardships into a unifying
power — rising above affiliations, ideologies or the
instrumentalization of their voices. They said it clearly:
Syria first. To honour them, a Syria for all must remain
first — above any one person, one party or one interest.
Nonetheless, it is difficult to make that vision of
a dignified life a reality when the political process
continues to be obstructed. Throughout our work, we
see that, despite challenging times in neighbouring
countries, refugees’ intentions to return today are
at their lowest levels. Yet we see no prioritization of
alleviating pressures on forced refugee returns when
conditions are not safe. Today we continue to see
evidence of returnees leaving Syria again; we continue
to see big waves of forced internal migration. Refugees
and internally displaced persons are continuing their
search for a decent life, flowing into Egypt, Turkey and
Europe through newly formed trafficking channels. The
prolongation of the current status quo at the political
process level inside Syria and in the neighbouring
countries will not be conducive to stability and a
sustainable voluntary return of refugees. Those issues
rarely find their way into political discussions. The
political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
requires compromises, but those compromises should
be at the expense of the parties’ interests rather than
those of the people.
Nevertheless, the stalling of a political settlement
has not stopped local actors at the community
level — many of them women activists and agents of
change — to push for local dialogue and mediation
efforts, often at great risk to themselves. They have
fought for spaces to express their needs, negotiated with
parties to the conflict, demanded to know the fate of
their loved ones and fought to ensure that their children
are well fed and receive an education. Again, if that is
not political participation, then I do not know what is.
In order for any political settlement to be
successful, we must focus on building local resilience
and supporting Syrians, especially women’s voices and
agencies. It is time for societal structures, including
leadership and legislative frameworks, to reflect the

S/PV. 8866

shifts in gender dynamics that are emerging every day
at the community level. As we stand here today, it is
difficult to deny that the traditional efforts to convene
the parties around the table — alone — are insufficient
in the face of military developments inside Syria and are
subservient to the will of proxies and regional Powers.
This increasing grass-roots approach to crafting
healthy communities, despite polarized and divisive
environments, both inside and outside Syria, shows
promise in increasing the unity of the Syrian people
and healing the divisions and trauma caused by 10
years of conflict. However, this approach alone will not
pay off if it is not accompanied by a political settlement
that is fair and just to all. It is time to activate the role
of women as community mediators and bring their
everyday demands to the negotiating table.
Finally, peace in Syria will require the Council
to move from its fixation on great-power politics
to dynamic engagement with communities affected
by conflict in order to understand our perspectives.
Put Syrians at the forefront of any strategy. Speak to
us — not about us or in our name. Invest in us if the
Council is serious about achieving sustainable and
just peace in a democratic Syria, free of oppression,
violence and extremism and advancing global peace
and security.
The President: I thank Ms. Mhaissen for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank Geir Pedersen for his
briefing. We listened closely to Ms. Rouba Mhaissen.
On the political track, we welcome the progress
observed in the resumption of the efforts of the
Constitutional Committee in Geneva. In our contacts
with the parties and the leading actors, we have
continuously advocated for this. We anticipate the
prompt resumption of direct intra-Syrian dialogue in
Geneva. It is exceedingly important for that process to
remain Syrian-led and -owned, without intervention
from abroad and without the imposition of artificial
timelines, supported by the impartial mediation of the
United Nations. Recent developments reflect the fact
that burdening the pursuit of negotiations with artificial
demands is misguided and counterproductive.

21-267045/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

The situation on the ground in Syria remains
complicated. At the same time, in early September,
the Syrian army, with support from Russian military
specialists, managed to peacefully settle the situation
in Dara’a governorate, specifically around the Dara’a
Al-Balad neighbourhood, where there was an alarming
uptick in tensions since the end of May.
The cessation of hostilities is ongoing against
the backdrop of the road map, which stipulates, inter
alia, settling the legal status of the fighters with whom
reconciliation is possible, the expulsion of hard-line
elements to Al-Bab to northern Syria, the laying down
of weapons and the deployment of Government forces
and Russian military police in the besieged area.
Terrorists in Idlib are attempting to exploit
instability in the south. In the past month alone, more
than 760 shellings of Government positions were
reported. As a result, several dozen Syrian military
personnel were wounded. The situation is worsening in
the area where Turkish operations are being carried out
in the north of Syria, as well as in the area beyond the
Euphrates — and this amid ongoing clashes between
the Kurds, the pro-Turkish units and Arab tribes.
We condemn unremitting Israeli air strikes
targeting Syria, which are undermining efforts to
stabilize the situation both in Syria and in the wider
region. We believe that the establishment of long-term
peace and security in Syria is possible only through the
full restoration of both the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria, with an end to the illegitimate foreign
presence and the definitive routing of terrorists.
The humanitarian situation in the country
continues to remain dire. We believe there is an urgent
need to depoliticize the Syrian humanitarian dossier
and to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance
deliveries under the auspices of the United Nations to
all Syrians, while respecting the core principles set out
in General Assembly resolution 46/182.
Against this backdrop, the question of lifting
anti-Syrian sanctions from the West remains urgent,
which, international experts all concur, makes the
suffering of ordinary civilians all the more dire.
According to United Nations reports, the conditions
for the overwhelming majority of Syrians continue
to deteriorate. Some 90 per cent of Syrian people are
below the poverty line. These people are encountering
not only dire economic difficulties — inflation and
food scarcity, inter alia — but they are also coming up
6/19

28/09/2021

against the dangerous consequences of the water crisis,
which is creating a threat to more than 5 million people.
Accordingly, the full-fledged the implementation in
good faith of resolution 2585 (2021), which provides
for expansion of internal humanitarian aid deliveries in
Idlib and the north of Syria and for more transparent
cross-border deliveries, project implementation for
early recovery and greater support for Syrians against
the backdrop of the coronavirus pandemic, is of
particular importance.
Resolution 2585 (2021) now represents a
qualitatively new framework for the provision of
humanitarian assistance. However, the clock is ticking.
We need tangible progress on the ground, and that needs
to be reflected in the report of the Secretary-General by
January 2022.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
Special Envoy for his briefing and, as always, for his
tireless efforts. We offer a special welcome and thanks
to Ms. Mhaissen as well. We know her organization is
doing valuable work to empower Syrian refugees and
promote the dignity of all Syrians. We thank her for her
insights today.
Last week, after a decade of conflict in Syria, one
number stood out for my delegation as it did for the
Special Envoy: 350,209. This was the number that the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
released after the painstaking research by the United
Nations to identify all those who have been killed
since the beginning of the uprising: 350,000. And,
as the special Envoy noted, this is most certainly an
undercount, given the incredible difficulty of obtaining
data during an active conflict.
These were people who had families, hopes,
dreams, full lives. They were no different from us,
except that they were unlucky enough to live and die
under the horrific Al-Assad regime.
While we cannot bring back those that have died,
there is another number the Al-Assad regime could
do something about right now: 149,000. That is the
estimated number of Syrians suffering in arbitrary
detention or whose whereabouts are unknown. I am
glad to hear the Special Envoy highlight this issue
this morning, and we reiterate our call for the Syrian
regime to unilaterally and immediately release the tens
of thousands of arbitrarily detained men, women and
children in its custody and share information on the
fate of those that are missing.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We certainly agree with what we heard from the
Special Envoy this morning, namely, that progress on
the detainee issue could serve as a confidence-building
measure that would bolster the political process. Despite
its occasional announcements of alleged amnesties, we
have not yet seen meaningful efforts from the Syrian
regime. The United States therefore reiterates its
support for the Office of the Special Envoy’s continued
efforts aimed at addressing this protracted issue, and we
call for those with influence over the regime to use it.
In Dara’a, we are cautiously hopeful that the
September ceasefire will hold. We are encouraged by
reports that some bakeries and other businesses have
reopened, and that the World Food Programme was
able to deliver emergency food assistance in the region.
We urge all the parties to abide by the ceasefire and
for the regime to allow unhindered, regular access to
Dara’a for United Nations humanitarian assistance.
Similarly, we are deeply concerned about the
potential for a resurgence of violence in Idlib. Over the
past few weeks, as we heard, the number of civilians
killed and injured in the region has increased. We
encourage all States, especially members of the Security
Council, to take any and all possible action to stem this
violence through diplomatic negotiations.
Finally, we have lamented in the Security Council
that it has been two years since the inauguration of
the Constitutional Committee, and yet we still have
not seen its members actually discuss a single clause
or a single sentence of the Constitution. We therefore
very much welcome the news today on progress on
holding a new round of the Committee. We now urge
all sides to participate in good faith at this sixth round
of the drafting group in October, and we call on the
Al-Assad regime to stop stalling the process and
meaningfully participate.
In conclusion, there is only one way forward for
peace and stability in Syria, and that is a peaceful
resolution to the conflict and an end to this war. It is
time for the Al-Assad regime and all parties involved to
come to the table, follow the path that has been laid out
in resolution 2254 (2015) and put an end to the Syrian
conflict once and for all.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing
and express my appreciation for his recent visit to
Damascus and for his active mediation efforts during

S/PV. 8866

his stay in New York. I listened carefully to the briefing
by Ms. Rouba Mhaissen.
The Syrian crisis has dragged on for 10 years,
causing over 500,000 deaths and the displacement
of over 10 million people. An early end to the Syrian
crisis is the shared expectation of the international
community and the Syrian people.
Regrettably, today, after the Syrian crisis has
entered a second decade, the country still faces
unabated violence and terrorist activities, increasing
humanitarian needs and deep suffering for its people.
All of these aspects highlight the necessity and urgency
of a political solution to the Syrian crisis. China
supports the full implementation of resolution 2254
(2015) and the advancement of a Syrian-owned and
Syrian-led political process.
Just now Special Envoy Pedersen brought us the
good news of the launch of the sixth round of the work
of the Constitutional Committee, which will start soon.
We hope this sixth round of the Committee’s work will
begin as soon as possible, while it stays independent
and free from external interference. We also hope that
its work will be productive.
At the same time, we have realized that the Syrian
political process cannot operate in a vacuum. If there is
a serious lack of mutual trust among parties, it is hard
for the Constitutional Committee to make substantive
progress. While schemes for regime change are still in
place, the work by Special Envoy Pedersen is bound to
be difficult. China calls on the Syrian parties to actively
cooperate with the Special Envoy in his work, strive
to narrow differences and build consensus through
dialogue and consultation.
At the same time, the international community
should create favourable conditions for the
political process.
Foreign forces lacking authorization from the
Syrian Government should withdraw from the country
immediately. The illegal unilateral sanctions against
Syria should be lifted immediately, and the plan to
impose an external solution should be renounced
immediately. The economic plunder of Syria should end
immediately. Only by fully respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the country and the right of
its people to choose independently their political system
and development path can there be the possibility of
and hope for a successful political settlement.

21-267047/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

Terrorism is a common menace facing humankind.
Combating it can serve as the starting point for parties
to carry out cooperation and build mutual trust on the
Syrian issue. All parties should support the Syrian
Government in combating the terrorist organizations
listed by the Security Council, avoiding double
standards and political manipulation.
The international community has reached a high
level of consensus on alleviating the suffering of the
Syrian people. As such, assisting Syria in improving
people’s livelihoods and combating the pandemic can
become another a priority area for cooperation among
parties. Opposing the Syrian Government cannot
justify punishing the Syrian people.
In conclusion, I should like to take this opportunity
to point out once again that devoting three meetings
per month to the Syrian issue takes up too much of the
Council’s resources. We support a gradual adjustment
of our method of deliberations to combine deliberations
on the political situation and humanitarian issues while
giving greater consideration to internal consultations.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing. I also thank Rouba Mhaissen
for her valuable contribution.
We are glad to hear from the Special Envoy that the
parties have been able to agree on a framework for the
next round of negotiations and that invitations have been
distributed for a meeting of the drafting committee on
18 October in Geneva. We also appreciate the updates
provided from his meetings with concerned parties and
hope that this next round of negotiations will bring
the constitutional process forward in a substantial and
tangible way.
We urge the parties to contribute concretely to
the drafting of a new constitution. Progress here can
increase confidence and pave the way for advancement
on other parts of resolution 2254 (2015). We also
reiterate the importance of consulting with the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board and the Civil Society Support
Room in those efforts.
The statement made by Ms. Mhaissen today
illustrates the importance of listening to civil society
and ensuring an inclusive process.
The dire humanitarian, economic and security
situation on the ground must be improved. We will
continue to actively support all efforts to that end, but
the root causes of the conflict must also be addressed.
8/19

28/09/2021

Credible progress on the political track is key to
development, stability, the return of refugees and,
ultimately, peace.
We support the Special Envoy’s calls for the Syrian
parties to move forward in their dialogue as well as
his call for the international actors engaged in Syria
to come together and identify concrete steps that can
move the political process forward.
It is imperative that both the Syrian parties and we
in the international community do more to ensure the
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, let me express the importance of
continuing the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant in Syria. That terrorist group continues
to use Syria as a base from which to operate. That
further underscores the fact that a political solution and
stability in Syria is crucial not only for the people of
Syria but also for its neighbours and for the broader
international community.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Mhaissen for
their statements.
The recent clashes in the region of Dara’a and the
increased attacks by the regime and Russia on the Idlib
zone make clear that the war is not over. It cannot be over
until such time as a political solution is implemented.
That is why France recalls the importance of fully
implementing resolution 2254 (2015). The resolution,
adopted unanimously, remains the common road map
for all members of the Council. That implies that urgent
progress needs to be made on the issue of detainees
held by the regime as well as missing persons. That is
a key demand of all sectors of Syrian society. This also
requires that progress be made with regard to a lasting
and verifiable cessation of hostilities at the national
level. International humanitarian law must also be fully
respected, in particular the protection of civilians and
humanitarian access.
France takes note of the confirmation by the
Special Envoy of the holding of the sixth meeting of
the Constitutional Committee on 18 October next. It
is imperative that the representatives of the regime
participate therein in good faith in order to enable
tangible progress to be made. In other words, we want
to see the Committee finally discharge its mandate, that
is to say, draw up a constitution. The full participation
of women must also be ensured as part of that process.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

In the absence of a robust political solution,
our positions with regard to the lifting of sanctions,
normalization and reconstruction will remain
unchanged. Without a political solution there will be
no safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons. We will continue our tireless fight
against impunity for the crimes committed in Syria.
Those responsible must be held accountable.
Mr. Gotru (India): I join others in thanking Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing
today. I also thank Ms. Rouba Mhaissen, the civilsociety briefer, for her insights.
The past few weeks have seen developments of
interest on the Syria political track. Special Envoy
Pedersen visited Damascus earlier this month for the
first time since February. The important countries
having influence on Syria have also held discussions
informally. There have been high-level engagements
between Syria and the Russian Federation, and
we heard from the Special Envoy details of those
engagements today.
The Constitutional Committee was set up nearly two
years back, and the process of drafting the constitution
needs to begin. The efforts of the past two years have
made it clear that external influence remains the major
impeding factor hampering progress on the political
track. We call on all external actors to desist from
adversely influencing the parties concerned. We hope
that those ongoing efforts will re-energize the political
track. The Special Envoy informed us earlier today
about the convening of the sixth meeting of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva. We
take note of that positive development. All three sides
need to engage constructively with the Special Envoy
on his bridging proposals. The process has to remain a
Syrian-led and Syrian-driven process, facilitated by the
United Nations.
On the security front, the ceasefire agreement in
Dara’a is a welcome development. However, we remain
concerned at the overall situation in Syria, including
in the north-east and the north-west. As mentioned
in the recent Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/735),
military activity and hostilities have increased in recent
months, seriously affecting the civilian population. We
believe that a comprehensive nationwide ceasefire is
paramount to the interests of the Syrian people and
will help to ensure that positive developments such as
the first cross-line humanitarian aid operation from

S/PV. 8866

Aleppo to Idlib can take firm root and not remain a
one-off occurrence.
We have been referring to the involvement of
external actors in Syria and its impact on the growth
of terrorism both in Syria and in the region. Designated
terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham have
continued to gain in strength in Syria, and their activities
have been mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
recent reports. ISIL has continued to launch attacks in
areas across Dayr Al-Zawr, Hasakah and eastern rural
Homs. ISIL has also targeted energy infrastructure in
some instances. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham continues to
have a dominating influence in Idlib. The most recent
report of United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant also referred to
the repeated deployments of chemical weapons by ISIL
against civilian populations between 2014 and 2016.
That is a cause for serious concern and needs to be fully
recognized and acted upon, given that the core area of
operations of ISIL also include Syria.
Long-term security and stability in West Asia can
be achieved only by preserving the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria. We remain convinced that
there can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict,
and we reaffirm our commitment to advancing a
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned United Nations-facilitated
political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015).
India has extended development assistance and
human resource development support to Syria through
grants, lines of credit for development projects,
medicine and food supplies, artificial-limb fitment
camps and capacity-building and training programmes.
India has always engaged diplomatically with Syria
since the beginning of the conflict, including at the
highest levels. Our External Affairs Minister held
bilateral discussions with the Foreign Minister of Syria
earlier this week on the margins of the ongoing seventysixth session of the General Assembly. We reiterate
our steadfast commitment to continuing to render all
possible support and assistance to the people of Syria.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Ms. Rouba Mhaissen
for their briefings.
It bears repeating that there is no military solution
to the conflict in Syria. The only solution is through
a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led credible, balanced and

21-267049/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

28/09/2021

inclusive political process that meets the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. We reiterate that the
political and humanitarian situations are inextricably
linked, as without a political solution to the conflict the
humanitarian crisis will worsen, and the suffering of
the Syrian people will continue.

Ten years of war have eroded the social fabric of
the country. It is therefore important to make concrete
steps on critical issues, such as those of detainees,
abductees and missing persons. Action on those matters
of concern will serve as expressions of goodwill,
cultivate trust and promote reconciliation within Syria.

For that reason, we continue to support the
unwavering efforts of the Special Envoy to facilitate
the wider political process, of which the Constitutional
Committee remains an integral component. We welcome
the announcement of the convening of a sixth session of
the Committee in October, and we encourage all the
parties to work together in a spirit of mutual respect
and compromise to make much-needed progress.

Practical steps must be taken by the international
community to address the plight of the Syrian people. As
such, the adverse impact of unilateral coercive measures
on the civilian population should not be ignored, and we
appeal for such measures to be immediately lifted. Also,
conditions must be cultivated for the safe, dignified and
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. Naturally, that must include the reconstruction
of homes, schools, medical facilities and other essential
infrastructure that have been decimated. We once more
encourage the international community to contribute
to Syria’s rebuilding. Furthermore, the continued
presence of unauthorized foreign forces on Syria’s
sovereign territory should be given due attention, and
their withdrawal must be prioritized.

The full participation of women in the political
process must be guaranteed to ensure a sustainable
and equitable peace for all Syrians. Ms. Mhaissen
underscored that during her briefing. We laud the work
of the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, and we take
note of its meeting currently being held in Finland. We
are certain that the discussions will be constructive
and meaningful.
We remain concerned by the sporadic violence
across the country. There is a close link between
the nationwide ceasefire and the parallel political
process, and the perpetuation of hostilities denies
an environment conducive to the achievement of the
goals and objectives set out in resolution 2254 (2015).
As such, we strongly urge the parties to the conflict
to exercise maximum restraint, de-escalate and fully
abide by their obligations under international law for
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Furthermore, we welcome all international diplomatic
efforts to reduce hostilities and cement a ceasefire,
particularly in Dara’a Al-Balad.
Security Council-designated terrorist entities
continue to pose a grave threat to Syria’s people,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. A collaborative and
targeted approach that is strictly within the confines of
international law is therefore required.
There exists a well-established link between
justice and peace, and it has long been recognized that
neither one is able to thrive in isolation of the other. We
therefore reiterate that accountability for the atrocities
committed since the commencement of the war ought
to remain a high priority.
10/19

With the socioeconomic conditions rapidly
deteriorating in the country, a political solution is
needed now more than ever. Special Envoy Pedersen
emphasized that what is needed is constructive
diplomacy. The Security Council has a responsibility
to engage pragmatically in order to adequately support
the political process, which is the only viable path to
return peace and stability to Syria.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing and Ms. Rouba Mhaissen
for sharing her insights. I welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran in
this meeting.
The 10 and a half years of crisis have had a
devastating impact on the lives of the Syrian people,
especially children and other vulnerable groups.
As a result of the continued violence and economic
meltdown, as well as the impact of the coronavirus
disease, a multi-layered crisis is pushing them further
into misery.
Across the country, 13.4 million people are in need
of humanitarian assistance due to the extremely limited
access to food, fuel, water, health care, education and
other basic goods and services.
A relatively calm situation on the ground has been
preserved for months. However, insecurity persists, and
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

escalation takes place in certain parts of the country.
Innocent civilians continue to be killed or injured;
civilian infrastructure continues to be affected.
Although a ceasefire deal has come into effect, the
recent uptick in violence in Dara’a clearly shows the
volatility of the security situation in Syria.
Against the current backdrop, concrete steps
towards a political solution are needed now more than
ever in order to find a viable way to long-term peace,
stability and development for the Syrian people.
Let me once again stress our staunch support for the
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated
political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015),
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
including respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of Syria.
In pursuing that goal, first of all, trust and confidence
must be rebuilt among all the parties concerned in order
to bridge the long-standing substantial differences.
My delegation calls for constructive dialogue
and negotiation among the Syrian parties, especially
within the framework of the Constitutional Committee.
We warmly welcome the agreement just reached on
the working methodologies, and we look forward
to further concrete, positive steps in the work of the
Constitutional Committee.
To support their efforts, the requisite spirit of
cooperation among all international interlocutors must
also be revived to promote meaningful engagement in
a political solution. Throughout this process, we would
like to reiterate our full support for the bridging role of
the United Nations and the Special Envoy. The Special
Envoy’s proposal on a new international format could
be a feasible way out of the current impasse.
Secondly, a political solution necessitates an
environment conducive to dialogue and negotiation.
We call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint
and refrain from actions that could lead to further
escalation. A sustainable calm period is of vital
importance to unlock progress on the political track.
Efforts to combat terrorist groups designated by the
Security Council need to be maintained. At the same
time, those efforts should be well coordinated to ensure
respect for international law, including humanitarian
law, as well as relevant Security Council resolutions.

S/PV. 8866

Last but not least, my delegation would like to
highlight the need for the unity of the international
community in assisting Syria. Efforts to achieve
sustainable peace and improve the resilience of the
Syrian people must always be coupled with our
unwavering and unified support. We therefore call
for continued assistance for the Syrian people in all
areas and by all means in order to facilitate a peaceful
solution to the crisis and to help alleviate their extremely
dire conditions.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and
Ms. Mhaissen for their briefings. I also welcome the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey to this meeting.
Today I will focus my remarks on three areas: the
political process, the ceasefire and human rights.
Mexico applauds the Special Envoy’s continued
efforts to promote the political transition. We
welcome his most recent visit to Damascus and his
convening of the sixth session of the small body of
the Constitutional Committee. We call on the parties
to join this process, which is being facilitated by the
United Nations, in a constructive and committed
spirit, and thereby advance the very necessary political
transition. We also reiterate our call for continuing
to encourage the participation of representatives of
civil society so as to promote and support a broad
and inclusive political process that ensures the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
youth and minorities and makes it possible meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
Secondly, despite the relative freeze along the front
lines of the conflict, violence continues. The situations
in Idlib, the north-west and Dara’a are of serious
concern. Concerning the latter situation, the ongoing
violations of international humanitarian law are
worrisome. Mexico condemns the siege tactics against
the civilian population. We have taken note of the truce
that the Special Envoy referred to, and we hope that
it can be sustained. Without a national and sustained
ceasefire, the humanitarian demands will continue
to increase.
More than 13 million people are in need of
humanitarian assistance today. It is clear that
the conditions for the voluntary, safe and dignified
return of the refugee population are not in place. We
applaud the efforts of those countries that have hosted
Syrian refugees throughout the past decade.

21-2670411/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

We echo the calls for the release of detainees
and clarification with regard to the whereabouts of
disappeared persons. Access to detention centres
must be granted for humanitarian agencies and human
rights organizations.
With regard to the most recent report of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, we note that human rights
violations continue to be reported. We call on all
States to cooperate with the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. And we echo the Secretary-General’s call for the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, it is time for the international
community to adopt and support new approaches that
will make it possible for there to be a genuine political
transition and for a lasting and sustainable peace
agreement to be reached.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Allow me to start by thanking Special Envoy Pedersen
and Ms. Mhaissen for their briefings.
We join others in welcoming Mr. Pedersen’s
announcement that a sixth round of Constitutional
Committee talks will take place in Geneva in
mid-October. We commend Mr. Pedersen for his
persistent efforts to secure agreement to the further
talks. As Mr. Pedersen has made clear, the next meeting
needs to be different to those that have gone before.
Just as the United Nations strives to facilitate a political
process in the implementation of its side of resolution
2254 (2015), so it is now down to the Syrian parties
to take responsibility for implementing their side. It is
time for the regime to end its artificial delays of the
process and for substantive progress to be made on a new
constitution, as envisaged in resolution 2254 (2015).
Resolution 2254 (2015) explicitly recognizes the
link between the political process and a nationwide
ceasefire. We therefore remain very concerned by the
ongoing escalation of violence in north-west Syria,
which has recently led to the deaths of civilians and
humanitarian workers, including in heavy shelling of
residential areas, and the destruction of medical facilities.
We hope the upcoming meeting between Turkey and
12/19

28/09/2021

Russia in Sochi will lead to the full implementation of
the 5 March 2020 ceasefire agreement.
And we remain concerned too about the potential
for renewed conflict to break out across the rest of Syria.
The recent hostilities in Dara’a are a reminder of that.
We welcome the recent ceasefire there, but that, and
the ceasefire in Idlib, need to form part of a nationwide
ceasefire agreed in parallel with the upcoming political
talks in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).
Until progress is made on the political process
and until there is a nationwide ceasefire, the suffering
of the Syrian people will continue, and the millions
displaced will be unable to return home. In that regard
we take note the Commission of Inquiry’s latest report,
which documents the atrocities, abuses and violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law that continue in Syria to this day,
including the indiscriminate use of weapons, targeted
killings, arbitrary and incommunicado detention and
torture and the denial of humanitarian access, which
Ms. Mhaissen described so eloquently to us.
We urge the Syrian parties, particularly the regime,
to commit to compliance with their obligations and a
nationwide ceasefire and to seize this opportunity for
progress with both hands. The international community
will support them.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen, and Ms. Rouba Mhaissen,
Founder and Director of Sawa for Development and
Aid, for their briefings. I welcome the participation
of the representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran in
this meeting.
Tunisia is following with concern the developments
on the ground in Syria in the light of the increasing
level of violence, tension and escalation in recent days
in a number of regions of the country. That poses major
security and humanitarian challenges and undermines
international efforts to ease the crisis and contain the
spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We reiterate the importance of a rapid return
to stability in Syria through efforts to de-escalate,
restore calm and protect civilians at all times, in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law, in order to bring about
a comprehensive and sustainable ceasefire in Syria.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

We look forward to the Special Envoy’s de-escalation
efforts in that regard.
We recall once again that the current understandings
and arrangements in Syria, despite their importance,
are only short-term solutions. They do not offer a
practical way to neutralize the organizations classified
as terrorist groups and to eliminate their safe havens
in certain parts of the country, leading to a sustainable
political solution and stability in the country and
the region.

S/PV. 8866

Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pedersen and Ms. Rouba Mhaissen for their
briefings. I welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran
and Turkey to this meeting.
After so much loss of life and the immense
destruction caused by a decade of conflict, it is
regrettable that the Syrian political actors are unable
to lay the groundwork for a process to end the crisis. It
is therefore urgent to get the political process back on
track, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

We support any measure that will end the current
political stalemate and help to resume the work of the
Syrian Constitutional Committee and its subcommittee
soon. We also welcome the preparation work for holding
the sixth round of the Constitutional Committee in
Geneva in October, facilitated by Mr. Pedersen. In that
context, we hope that international efforts will make
it possible to advance the constitutional process and a
broader political path.

On the security front, the Niger remains concerned
about the continuation of hostilities in areas inhabited
by civilians, particularly in the south and the northwest. We welcome the ceasefire between the armed
opposition and Government forces, negotiated under
the auspices of Russia in the city of Dara’a. That is a
positive development that has given the people of the
city a respite and enabled many families to return to
their homes.

It goes without saying that a secure and stable
environment in Syria and the strengthening of
confidence-building measures would create the
right conditions for accomplishing that objective in
accordance with relevant Council resolutions, including
resolutions 2254 (2015) and 2585 (2021). Existing and
interrelated problems should be addressed, especially
the issues of establishing a comprehensive and
permanent ceasefire, achieving the safe and dignified
return of refugees and displaced persons, promoting
the recovery of Syria and the Syrian people, mitigating
the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, fighting
terrorist cells in the country and managing the situation
of detainees.

My delegation calls on the parties to agree a general
ceasefire in the country, as requested by the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy. This is a sine qua non
for tangible progress in resolving the crisis in Syria. At
the same time, Syria, in the exercise of its sovereignty,
must not waver in its fight against terrorism. Any
attempt to undermine its sovereignty and territorial
integrity is unacceptable.

It is worth stressing also that arriving at a common
vision for resolving the Syrian crisis will require
searching for common factors among the Syrian parties
in a way that prioritizes the overriding needs of the
brotherly Syrian people above all else. That requires
as well a common vision and the support of the actors
concerned and the Security Council.
In conclusion, we reiterate Tunisia’s steadfast
position, namely, that resolving the Syrian crisis
requires finding a Syrian-led and -owned political
settlement facilitated by the United Nations, in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), in order to
preserve Syria’s unity, sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity and restore its security and stability.

My delegation reiterates its concern about the fate of
the many detainees by both sides. We call on the parties
to take confidence-building measures, especially
through the unilateral mass release of detainees and by
providing clarifications to families about their missing
loved ones. That would help de-escalate the situation,
build confidence among the parties and thereby achieve
the progress we all expect on the political track.
We welcome the Constitutional Committee
session to be held in October. The Niger calls on all
stakeholders to show flexibility in order to advance
the political process. As we have always said, only a
Syrian-led inclusive dialogue that reflects the will of
the Syrian people can lead to a peaceful long-term
solution to the crisis.
We also welcome the meeting of the Syrian
Women’s Advisory Board to be held in Helsinki. The
Niger welcomes the admirable contribution of the
Board and that of all Syrian women, who are playing
a leading role.

21-2670413/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, my delegation remains convinced
that progress in the work of the Constitutional
Committee and the cessation of hostilities must go
hand in hand with the other aspects of the crisis, such as
putting an end to external interference, the support of
armed groups and the plundering of Syrian resources,
among others. Syria’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity must be respected by all.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Pedersen and Ms. Mhaissen for their thorough briefings.
At least half a million people have lost their lives
during the decade-long Syrian conflict. Despite the
current relative calm, military operations continue in
many parts of the country. Achieving a nationwide
ceasefire and ensuring unimpeded humanitarian access
remain priorities.
In addition to violence, economic worries further
hamper the livelihoods of the Syrian people. I thank
Ms. Mhaissen for her insightful comments, which
helped to shed light on these compounding challenges.
The problems can be seen in two main areas.
First, the economic difficulties of the broader
region, especially those in neighbouring Lebanon,
greatly affect Syria. Moreover, targeted international
sanctions play a minimal role, as noted by the Syrian
regime on several occasions.
Secondly, the economic crisis is the result of
internal factors. Widespread corruption, warlordism
and lack of good governance hinder any potential
positive developments in terms of recovery. The
lack of meaningful steps towards a credible solution
is also reflected in the wider political process. The
Constitutional Committee has been dormant. However,
we welcome the upcoming sixth round of talks in
Geneva. We appreciate the Special Envoy’s efforts in
mediating the differing views.
Finally, without justice for victims, there will
not be any real peace in Syria, and Ms. Mhaissen’s
testimony today confirms this point. The Security
Council needs to act decisively against the widespread
and systematic violations of international human rights
law and international humanitarian law in Syria.
Estonia and the European Union call on the creation
of an international mechanism to locate missing persons
or their remains. There are already multiple initiatives
that have collected, systematized and preserved
evidence of these crimes since the very beginning of
14/19

28/09/2021

the conflict. Such investigative mechanisms as the
International, Impartial, and Independent Mechanism,
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic established by the Human
Rights Council, which reports to the General Assembly,
and the Fact-Finding Mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons can all be used to
improve accountability. A lasting and credible political
solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015) can be
reached only when we end impunity once and for all.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Let me also thank Special
Envoy Geir Pedersen and Ms. Rouba Mhaissen for
their briefings on the political situation in Syria. I
acknowledge the presence of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Turkey in the Chamber this morning.
Every month, the people of Syria look to the
Security Council as it considers the situation in their
country, with the expectation that perhaps something
positive would emerge — something that would help
to turn their situation around for the better. We believe
that it is only by working together, as we did in the
adoption of resolution 2585 (2021), that the Council can
put together the long-desired consensus for achieving
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political solution to the
decade-old conflict.
Kenya welcomes the positive developments that
emanated from the Special Envoy’s trip to Damascus
early this month, and we know that, after a drawnout stalemate, the sixth round of meetings of the
Constitutional Committee are now set to resume on
18 October. We commend the parties for making this
crucial decision, which will hopefully significantly
contribute to taking the much-desired political
steps towards a solution that will bring back the
peace, security and stability that the country sorely
needs, through a new Constitution, as envisaged by
resolution 2254 (2015).
Kenya calls on the parties to seize the moment,
engage constructively and demonstrate commitment
to the millions of Syrians who are counting on their
leadership for a brighter future. We commend the
Special Envoy’s continued robust engagement with
civil society and with the Syrian Women’s Advisory
Board. In particular we welcome the convening of the
Women’s Advisory Board meeting from 26 September
to 1 October in Helsinki, and we encourage their
continued engagements in a manner that reflects the
diversity of voices of Syrian women.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The security situation continues to be characterized
by an uptick in violence, targeted killings, terrorist
attacks, shelling and air strikes in parts of the northeast and north-west of the country and in the south,
particularly in Dara’a. Indeed, the alarming and vicious
attacks against civilians and humanitarian workers by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other armed
groups are despicable. In this regard, Kenya reiterates,
first, the ever-growing need for the parties to honour
the nationwide ceasefire and commit to ensuring
that it holds. Secondly, the parties must commit to
a renewed unified action against terrorist groups,
including holding to account those responsible for
heinous crimes in accordance and full compliance with
international humanitarian law and applicable United
Nations resolutions. Thirdly, all parties, including
foreign armies, must exercise maximum restraint and
refrain from actions that could jeopardize the safety
and security of the people and the country.
In closing, Kenya commends and supports the
efforts of the Special Envoy in facilitating the Syrian
political process, which should remain Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led, in a fashion that reflects the collective
aspirations of the Syrian people.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ireland.
I want to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his
briefing and express the deep appreciation of my
country, Ireland, for his ongoing and tireless efforts. I
also want to sincerely thank Ms. Rouba Mhaissen for
her impressive remarks this morning. Her voice and,
through her, the voices of the countless communities
affected and displaced by the tragic conflict in Syria
are exactly what the Security Council needs to hear.
Her presence today matters, and I want to thank her.
Regrettably, of course, we meet again against the
backdrop of extremely limited political progress. For
millions of vulnerable people, that means another
month of conflict, another month of suffering and loss,
and another month without hope. We reiterate our call
on the Syrian Government to cooperate constructively
with the United Nations and to engage fully and in good
faith with the efforts of the Special Envoy.
The upcoming round of negotiations of the
Constitutional Committee is a welcome development. It
presents a rare opportunity now for real progress. I urge
all parties to grasp that opportunity. Otherwise put, we
cannot afford to squander this chance.

S/PV. 8866

Our briefers today have put into stark relief the fact
that peace and stability remain distant dreams for the
Syrian people. We know that there are differing views
around this table about how to address that. But let us be
clear: when we are divided in this Chamber, it is almost
always the vulnerable who suffer the consequences.
As High Commissioner Bachelet set out last week,
a decade of conflict has already caused over 350,000
identifiable deaths. This is unconscionable and cannot
continue. A comprehensive political solution in line
with resolution 2254 (2015) is more urgently needed
now than ever. To achieve that, addressing the root
causes of the conflict and the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons remains fundamental.
In Ireland, we know that inclusive peace is
sustainable peace. It is critical that Syrian women,
representing all backgrounds, are fully, equally and
meaningfully involved at all levels in the political
process. All of us in this Chamber know that Syrian
women and girls have been disproportionately affected
by this devastating decade-long war. They have
been subjected to horrific sexual and gender-based
violence as well as to early and forced marriage. Many
have experienced food insecurity and lack access to
education and health care.
Despite these challenges, the women of Syria, as
Ms. Mhaissen has so clearly described, are keeping faith
with the future of Syria and are playing a critical role
in leadership development and conflict resolution. We
salute their courage, determination and commitment,
Their resilience inspires us. We should listen and learn
from their valuable experiences. Put simply, their
meaningful participation, to which some of us often
pay lip service in this Chamber, is an actual reality and
is key to achieving long-lasting peace.
We are deeply concerned by reports of the explicit
targeting of refugees returning to Syria. Unfortunately,
the fact remains that Syria does not yet offer a safe and
stable environment for the sustainable and dignified
return of refugees. I want to underline that all returns
should be safe, voluntary and dignified.
As we speak, tens of thousands of Syrians
desperately await news from missing or disappeared
loved ones. Tens of thousands more, including women
and children, remain unlawfully deprived of their
liberty. I repeat our call on the Syrian authorities and
other parties to release detainees and abductees in
meaningful numbers.

21-2670415/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

The ceasefire in Dara’a city earlier this month was
a positive development. However, we remain concerned
about its fragility as well as the lasting impact of the
fighting that took place.
The worrying escalation of violence in north-west
Syria has continued at a time when the coronavirus
disease is surging. We continue to receive reports of
indiscriminate attacks on civilians and civilian objects.
Those remain utterly unacceptable.
Finally, I want to repeat Ireland’s longstanding call
for a nationwide ceasefire in Syria.
Once again, we say sincerely that it is incumbent
upon all of us here in the Council to do all in our power
to support the efforts of the Special Envoy and to work
to prevent further destruction and loss in Syria. Now
is the time to act. The people of Syria have waited too
long and suffered too much.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): The Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic, in his address
to the General Assembly yesterday (see A/76/PV.16),
indicated that the Syrian Government has always been
open to any genuine and impartial political initiatives
or efforts to assist the Government in ending the crisis
that targeted the State and the people of Syria, despite
the obstacles placed by countries that have no interest
in these continued efforts to achieve stability in Syria
while maintaining our national pillars.
The Syrian Government has facilitated the
launch of the work of the Constitutional Committee
by contributing to reaching an agreement on the
formation and rules of procedure of the Committee.
The Government also stressed the need for the process
to be Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, without any
foreign intervention or any attempt to impose artificial
deadlines or advance conclusions to the work of the
Committee, given that the constitution and anything
related thereto is a Syrian matter to be determined by
the Syrians themselves, pursuant to the principle of
the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic. It is an established
principle that is reaffirmed by all relevant Security
Council resolutions on the situation in my country.
16/19

28/09/2021

The Syrian Government is continuing to cooperate
with the Special Envoy, Mr. Pedersen, and we welcomed
his visit to Damascus on 11 and 12 September, where he
conducted constructive discussions. We also welcome
what Mr. Pedersen noted in his briefing about his
intention to issue invitations to the sixth session of
the Constitutional Committee, to be held in Geneva
in October.
We reaffirm the need for the Special Envoy to
maintain his role as a facilitator and to convey what he
sees in an impartial, neutral and objective manner.
The recent settlements and reconciliation in
Dara’a governorate prove once again that the Syrian
Government is keen to restore security and stability
to all parts of the country while ensuring the safety
of its citizens and ending the bloodshed of innocents.
The patience and wisdom of the Syrian leadership,
along with the efforts of our Russian friends, helped
to reach an agreement to restore stability in the areas
that witnessed tensions recently in Dara’a and its rural
area, in south-west Syria. That also allowed residents to
return home safely and peacefully.
The role of the Security Council in maintaining
international peace and security was used by some to
interfere in the affairs of my country and to disrupt
security and stability in Syria over the past 10 years.
We must therefore speak out to expose those practices
and call on those countries to end that disruptive
behaviour and to learn from the lessons of their failed
and senseless wars of past years.
The war imposed on us by Governments known
to all, through varied and diverse means, has claimed
the lives of many. That war has undermined the
achievements of an ancient civilization and has led to
the loss of the significant development gains made by
the Syrian people over many decades. It is high time to
put an end to this war and to end the illegitimate foreign
military presence on Syrian territories, including the
United States military forces in the north-east and the
Turkish military forces in the north-west. They must
withdraw fully. We call for the immediate lifting,
without any preconditions, of the unilateral coercive
measures imposed by the United States of America and
the European Union, and for support to be provided to
the efforts of the Syrian State and its allies to combat
terrorism, restore security and stability, and rebuild
and rehabilitate the damaged infrastructure.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Recovery projects and resilience support for all
sectors must start early, particularly for those of water,
energy, education, health care and others, to provide
basic services to the Syrian people and improve their
living and humanitarian situation, in addition to
facilitating the safe and dignified return of displaced
persons and refugees to their homes.
To achieve that objective, all relevant Syrian
parties are intensifying their efforts to facilitate such
a voluntary return and guarantee that the basic needs
of returnees are met. To that end, we have taken many
measures and issued a number of decrees.
It is unfortunate that the efforts of the Syrian State
and friendly countries are faced with the attempts of
some to exploit the suffering of the Syrian people and
leverage that suffering to achieve aims that are far from
being humanitarian objectives and do not serve the
interests of the Syrian people, including by relying on
the reports of committees that have proved time and
again that they are politicized mechanisms and are not
professional, objective or credible in their work. Their
main objective is to issue reports that will allow certain
hostile countries to defame Syria’s image.
I must also refer to the aggressive and destructive
practices carried out by the Turkish regime on Syrian
territories through its support for terrorism and by
killing, destroying, Turkification and the plundering
of Syrian wealth. They are even using water as a tool
to serve their political games and as a weapon against
millions of Syrian citizens to achieve political and
regional gains in total disregard for the principles of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international and bilateral instruments and agreements,
as well as the principle of good-neighbourliness.
My country reiterates its call to the Security Council
and the Secretariat to shoulder their responsibilities
to put an end to the crimes of the Turkish occupation
and to end the presence of its military forces on the
territories of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): First, I would like to
thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. I would
also like to thank Ms. Rouba Mhaissen for highlighting
the crucial role of Syrian women in the efforts towards
finding a lasting political solution to the conflict. The
perspective of Syrian communities with regard to the

S/PV. 8866

recent developments needs to be taken into account,
and we welcome Ms. Mhaissen’s insights. The Security
Council needs to give a greater voice to the Syrian
people in the Chamber.
After 10 years of bloodshed, we simply cannot lose
another day in ending the conflict. We need to take
urgent action now to build momentum for a lasting
and credible political solution. We have the right tools
at hand to achieve a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015).
The Constitutional Committee is the sole
mechanism in place within the political process. We are
pleased to learn that Mr. Pedersen’s intense efforts over
the past months finally paid off. Despite a long delay,
the Syrian sides agreed on the methodology of the sixth
round of the Constitutional Committee. It is now time
to shift gears. We cannot afford to see more of the same
in Geneva. It is time for the Constitutional Committee
to yield concrete results with regard to its core mandate.
It is time to make genuine progress on substance.
There is no room for repetition, stalling tactics or
blame games. It is imperative that the terms of reference
and the core rules of procedure of the Committee be
fully respected. Turkey is actively engaged in efforts to
ensure that the sixth round will be held in a constructive
and results-oriented manner. We are confident that
the opposition will maintain its positive approach, as
in previous rounds. Today we reiterate our call to all
parties to adopt the same constructive attitude towards
the Constitutional Committee. Genuine engagement is
required if we are to finally make credible progress on
the political track.
While there are positive developments on the
political track, we are dismayed by the ever-worsening
situation on the ground. The increase in violence in
Idlib is a cause for serious concern. Since the beginning
of this month, the ceasefire violations of the regime and
its backers have reached alarming levels. In September
alone, more than 185 attacks have been documented.
Due to the recent increase in violence, 22,000 more
people have been internally displaced.
Continued ceasefire violations not only risk
triggering a new wave of migration; they also jeopardize
the prospects of ending the conflict through a political
solution. That dangerous escalation also casts a dark
shadow over the compromise reached on the crossborder humanitarian mechanism in July and taints the
goodwill displayed in that process.

21-2670417/19

S/PV.8866

The situation in the Middle East

Such attacks continued unabated over the past
weekend. That is simply unacceptable. Attacks targeting
civilians must stop immediately. The protection of
civilians is not negotiable. The regime and its backers
must fully adhere to the ceasefire. That is the minimum
that they can do to have any credibility whatsoever in
the process.
An increase in ceasefire violations is not the
only destabilizing development on the ground. The
Kurdistan Workers’ Party/People’s Protection Units
(PKK/YPG) remains a major threat to the security
of Syria. That terrorist organization and its offshoot,
the Syrian Democratic Forces, are not relenting in
their attacks against civilians. This year alone, they
have killed at least 118 civilians. Yet the international
community remains silent in the face of those crimes
against humanity, which have also been documented by
the Independent International Commission of Inquiry
on the Syrian Arab Republic.
Last week, Syrian Kurds and Arabs were
peacefully protesting the price hikes in areas under
the de facto control of the PKK/YPG. Yet those socalled democratic forces suppressed Syrians who were
exercising their democratic right to protest. It is also
that terrorist group that attacks and prevents Syrian
Yazidis in Iraq and Syrian Kurds from returning to
their homes in Syria. When will that hypocrisy end?
How much longer will the Security Council ignore the
elephant in the room? When will the PKK/YPG’s attack
against the United Nations-supported Al-Shifa hospital
in Afrin be investigated by the United Nations? We will
never condone supporting terrorism under the pretext of
fighting Da’esh. Turkey will continue its resolute fight
against all terrorist organizations, including Da’esh and
the PKK/YPG.
Yet again, the previous speaker poisoned this
meeting with fabricated lies. I will not honour him with
a reply. Try as it may, the regime will never succeed in
diverting the attention of the international community
from its abhorrent crimes. While the regime holds
onto its illusions, Turkey will continue to address the
suffering of the Syrian people. We will persevere until
peace and stability are restored in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Syria, for his input. Thanks to his efforts
18/19

28/09/2021

and the cooperation of the Syrian Government, the next
session of the Constitutional Committee is expected to
take place soon. That is an encouraging development.
We reiterate our support for the efforts of the
Special Envoy and the constructive engagement of
the Syrian Government in facilitating the work of the
Committee. We encourage the Committee’s co-Chairs
to engage constructively and work in a spirit of
flexibility and compromise.
The Committee must continue its work without any
external interference or pressure. Setting any artificial
deadline for its conclusion or any other conditions or
requirements of such a nature will negatively impact the
Committee’s work. It must be ensured that it is a truly
Syrian-led, Syrian-owned, United Nations-facilitated
political process.
Concurrent with the Committee’s work, serious
efforts must also be made in other areas.
First and foremost, the occupation of parts of Syria
by foreign forces must come to an end. Accordingly,
all uninvited foreign forces must leave that country
without any precondition or further delay.
Equally important, the Security Council must live
up to its responsibility and compel the Israeli regime to
put an immediate end to its acts of aggression against
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria.
Such adventuristic practices, which we condemn in
the strongest terms, constitute flagrant violations of
international law, threatening regional and international
peace and security.
In addition, fighting all terrorist groups must
continue unabated, as their presence and criminal
activities threaten the security and territorial integrity
of Syria, as well as peace and security in the region.
We reject separatist activities or illegitimate self-rule
initiatives in Syria and condemn all efforts to support
them. The sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Syria must be fully respected by all.
Likewise, Syria’s reconstruction and the return
of refugees and displaced persons must go hand in
hand with the political process. They are interlinked,
mutually inclusive and mutually reinforcing. That
requires depoliticizing humanitarian aid and the return
of refugees and displaced persons, as their politicization
only prolongs both the crisis and the woes of the Syrian
people, who have already been suffering seriously from
more than 10 years of conflict.
21-26704

28/09/2021

The situation in the Middle East

In that context, we recall resolution 2585 (2021),
through which, in paragraph 3, the Security Council
called upon all Member States “to respond with practical
steps to address the urgent needs of the Syrian people”.
The reference to “practical steps” in the resolution is,
inter alia, meant to call for the removal of unilateral
sanctions. As resolution 2585 (2021) is the result of a
compromise, including by the main countries imposing
such sanctions, we urge them to honour their promises,
take their obligations under that resolution seriously and
immediately and fully remove all unlawful sanctions
against Syria, which are among the major causes of the
current humanitarian situation in that country.

S/PV. 8866

We reiterate our principled position that the Syrian
crisis must be settled peacefully and in accordance with
principles of international law, particularly respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States,
non-intervention and non-interference in their internal
or external affairs and the peaceful settlement of
international disputes.
Finally, I reiterate the support of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the people and the Government of
Syria to restore the unity and territorial integrity of
their country.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

21-2670419/19
