5%

Genera) Aeeembly-Seventeenth See&ion

Expressing its concern that, according to the survey,
70 per cent of the population of the world lack
adequate information facilities and are thus denied
effective enjoyment of the right to information,
Considering that the information media have an important part to play in education and in economic and
social progress generally and that new techniques of
communication offer special opportunities for acceleration of the education process,
1. Invites the Governments concerned to include adequate provision in their economic plans for the development of national information media ;
2. Invit es the T echnical Assistance Board, the Special
Fund, the specialized agencies concerned, the regional
economic commissions and other public and private
agencies and institutions to assist, as appropr iate, the
less deveioped countries in developing and strengthening
their national information media;
3. Requests the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to continue to further
the programme for the development of information media
including the application of new techniques of communication for achievement of rapid progress in education,
to keep up to date as far as possible its survey on this
subject and to report as appropriate to the Commission
on H uman Rights and to the Economic and Social
Council ;
4. Rt'commends that the Governments of Member
States should take this programme into account in connexion with the United Nations Development Decade:
5. !tivites the Governments of the more developed
countries to co-operate with less developed coun tries
with a view to meeting the urgent needs of the lr.ss
developed countries in connexicm with this progr:imme
for the development. of independent national information
media. with due regard for the culture of cad, country.
1187th plc•wr-y mcrtino.
7 Deccmhc'r 10(,?.

1779 ( XVII) . Manifestations of radal prejudice
and national and religio us intolerance

The General Asse,tttbly,
H m1i1i_q consider Pd the report of the seventf'('nth se~sion of the Commission on Human Righ ts 6 anrl the
report of the thirteenth session of the Suh-Commission
on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities,'
De,ply diaurbcd by the continued existence and manifestations oi racial prejudice and of national and religio11s
intolerance in different parts of the world.
Reiteratinq its condemnation of all manifestations of
racial prejudice and of national and religious intolerance'
as violations of the Charter of the Unitc<l Nations and
of the Universal Dedaration of Human Right!:,
Recalling its resolution 1510 (XV) of 12 December

1960,
Considering it essential to recommend further specific
effective measures to eliminate these manifestation~ of
prejudice and intolerance,
1. lnuites th~ Governments of all States. the specir1lized agencies and non-governmental and private organizations to continue to make sustained effort s to educate

e Ibid., Thirty-second Sess,·on, S11pp/rmenf ."¼. 8 (E/3456);
sec in particular paras. 99-139 and draft resolutions V anrl VI.
1 E/CN.4/815 and Corr.I ; see in particular paras. 149- 18?.

public opinion with a view to the eradication of racial
prejudice and national and religious intolerance and the
elimination of all un~esirable influences promoting these,
and _to take appropriate measures. so that education may
be directed with due regard to article 26 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and to principle 10 of the
Declaration of the Ri~hts of the Child adopted by the
General Assembly on 20 November 1959 ;3
2. Calls upon the Governments of all States to take
all necessary steps to rescind discriminatory laws which
have the effect of creating and perpetuating racial
p rejudice and national and religious intolerance wherever
t~ey _still exist,_ to ~d?pt _legislation if necessary for proh1b1tmg such discnmmatton, and to take such legislative
or other appropriate measures to combat such prejudice
and intolerance ;
3. Recommends the Governments of all States to discourage actively, through education and all media of
information, the creation, propagation and dissemination
of such prejudice and intolerance in any form whatever:
4. Invites the specialized agencies and non-governmental organ izations to co-operate fully with the Governments of States in their efforts to prevent and eradkate
racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance;
5. lnvit es the Governments o f Member States the
specialized agencie~ and the non-governmental orga;1izat10ns concerned to inform the Secretary-General of action
taken by them in compliance with the present resolution ;
6. Req1tcsts the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session a report on
compliance with the present resolution.
1187th ple11ary nicrtin,r, ,
7 December 79ti7.
1780 (XVII). Preparation of a draft d eclaration
and a draft con\'ention on the elimination
of all forms of racial discrimination

The General Assenibly,
Desfrin_q to put into effect the principle of the eci11alit:,
of all men and all peoples without distinction as to race.
colour or religion, as stated in the Charter of the U11ited
Nations,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of d iscrimination based on differences of race, colour and relirrion
still in evidence throughout the world,
"
Considering the necessity ~f taking all possible steps
conducive to the final and total elimination of nil such
manifestations, which violate the Charter of the Unitect
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Emphasizin_q that each State ought to take all the
necessary action to put an end to these violations. which
infringe human dignity,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask
t~e Commission on Human Rights, bearin~ in mind the
vtews of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Di"cri111i nation and Protection of Minorities, the debate~
at the seventeenth session of the General Assemhlv. am·
proposals on this matter that may be submitted hy Governments and any international instruments already
adopted in this field by the specialized agencies. to
prepare :
(a) A draft declaration on the elimination of all forms
of racial discrimination, to be suhmitted to the A sst•mhl y
for consideration at its eighteenth session ;
·
( b) A draft international convention on the eliminat ion of all forms of racial discrimination, to be submitted

3S

Resolutions adopted on the report! of the Third Committee

to the Assembly if possible at its nineteenth session and,
in any case, not later than at its twentieth session ;
2. Invites Member States to submit their comments
and proposals concerning the draft convention by 15
January 1964.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
1781 (XVIl). Preparation of a draft declaration
and a draft convention on the elimination
of all forms of religious intolerance
The General Assembly,
Desiring to put into effect the principle of the equality
of all men and all peoples without distinction as to race,
colour or religion, as stated in the Charter of the United
Nations,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of discrirnina
tion based on differences of race, colour and religion
still in evidence throughout the world,
Considering the necessity of taking all possible steps
conducive to the final and total elimination of all such
manifestations, which violate the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Emphasizing that each State ought to take all the
necessary action to put an end to these violations, which
infringe human dignity,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights is
preparing draft principles on freedom and non-discrimination in the matter of religious rights and practices,
1. Requests the Economic and Social Council to ask
the Commission on Human Rights, bearing in mind the
views of the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities, the debates
at the seventeenth :;ession of the General Assembly, any
proposals on this matter that may be submitted by Governments and any international instruments already
adopted in this field by the specialized agencies, to
prepare:
(a) A draft declaration on the elimination of all forms
of religious intolerance, to be submitted to the Assembly
for consideration at its eighteenth session;
( b) A draft international convention on the elimination of all forms of religious intolerance, to be submitted
to the Assembly if possible at its nineteenth session and,
in any case, not later than at its twentieth session ;
2. Invites Member States to submit their comments
and proposals concerning the draft convention by 15
January 1964.
1187th plenary meetin(l,
7 December 1962.

1782 (XVII). Advisory services in the field of
human rights
The General Assembly,
Noting the continued success of the programme of
advisory services in the field of human rights established
by the General Assembly in its resolution 926 (X) of
14 December 1955, including the human rights seminars
which have provided numerous opportunities for a fruitful exchange of experience am-1 information relating to
problems of human rights, as well as the promising
results shown by the fellowships aspect of the programme, which was initiated during 1962,
Noting furthermore the opinion expressed by the
Economic and Social Council in its resolution AA9

(XXXIV) of 24 July 1962 that this programme is an
important means towards achieving progress in the field
of human rights, and would make a significant contribution to the United Nations Development Decade,
Taking into account the hope expressed by the Economic and Social Council in the same resolution that
the programme of advisory services will be expanded,
l. Decides that the programme of advisory services in
the field of human rights should be further expanded
with a view to increasing the resources for fellowships
so as to permit the award of at least double the number
of fellowship available in 1962;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to give appropriate
publicity to the increased opportunities available to
Governments through the programme of advisory services in the form of seminars, fellowships and the services of experts.
1187th plenary meeting,
7 December 1962.
1783 (XVIl). Continuation of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees
The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 8
Recalling its resolution 1165 (XII) of 26 November
1957, in which it decided to review, not later than at
its seventeenth session, the arrangements for the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
with a view to determining whether the Office should be
continued beyond 31 December 1963,
Convinced of the continuing need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed by the Office of the High Commissioner in providing international protection for refugees and in promoting permanent solutions for their problems, with the
joint participation of Governments, international organizations and voluntary agencies,
Commending the High Commissioner for the efforts
he has made in finding satisfactory solutions of problems
affecting groups of refugees within his mandate and those
for whom he lends his good offices,
1. Decides to continue the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for a further
period of five years from 1 January 1964 :
2. Requp,sts the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to report to the Executivr
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, and
to abide by the directions which the Committee gives
him with regard to refugee situations;
3. Invites States Members of the United Nations and
members of the specialized agencies to lend their support
to the High Commissioner's Programme:
4. Deci.des to review, not later than at its twentvsecond session, the arrangements for the Office of the
High Commissioner with a view to determining- whether
thr Office should be continued bevond 31 December

1968.

-

1187th plenary meeting,
7 Decembrr 1962.
8 Official Records of the General Asumbly, Sevenlet'tlth Sr.~sion, Supplement No. 11 (A/5211/Rev.t) and S11f'/'lrmn1t .\'n
11A (A/5211/Revl/Add.1).
