S/22016/915*

United Nations
N

Securiity Cou
uncil

D
Distr.: Generaal
228 October 20
016
O
Original: Engllish

Letter da
ated 28 Octtober 2016 from the S
Secretary-G
General
addressed
d to the President of the
t Securitty Council
As requested by th
he Security Council
C
in parragraph 33 off its resolutio
on 2296
(2016) dateed 29 June 2016, I have thee honour to suubmit my recoommendationss on the
practical steps to be taken by all Sud
danese partiess, with the suupport of the A
African
Union-Unitted Nations Hybrid Operration in Darrfur, in orde r to make tangible
progress towards achieviing the bench
hmarks endorssed by the Seecurity Council in its
resolutions 2148 (2014), 2228 (2015) and 2296 (20016) (see anneex).
My reecommendatio
ons, which taake into accoount the disc ussions of th
he joint
working gro
oup meeting from
f
17 to 20
0 October 20116 and the tweenty-second m
meeting
of the Tripaartite Mechanism of 20 Octtober 2016, annd contain a bbrief overview
w of the
current statte of implemeentation of eacch of the bencchmarks, are annexed hereeto, and
include a way
w forward an
nd a timetablee for further im
mplementatioon.
I wou
uld be gratefu
ul if you could bring the ppresent letter and its annex
x to the
attention off the members of the Secu
urity Council. I remain at ttheir disposal should
they wish to
o be briefed on
o these recom
mmendations.
(Siggned) BAN K
Ki-moon

* Reissued for technical reason
ns on 7 Novemb
ber 2016.

16-18903* (E
E)

081116

*1618
8903*

S/2016/915

Annex
Recommendations of the Secretary-General submitted pursuant to
paragraph 33 of Security Council resolution 2296 (2016) on the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur
Introduction
1.
Following the adjustment of the benchmarks for the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) on 15 April 2014 (see S/2014/279)
and their endorsement by the Security Council in its resolutions 2148 (2014), 2228
(2015) and 2296 (2016) and by the African Union Peace and Security Council on
22 June 2015 (communiqué DXVI) and on 13 June 2016 (communiqué DCV), and
the request of the Council that the Secretary-General submit recommendations on
the practical steps to be taken by all Sudanese parties with the support of UNAMID
in order to make tangible progress towards achieving the benchmarks, the
Secretariat and the African Union Commission held further discussions with the
Government within the framework of the joint working group. The group was
established pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2173 (2014), in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to submit recommendations for an exit strategy.
2.
The joint working group met in Khartoum from 17 to 20 October 2016 to
assess the state of implementation of the Operation’s three benchmarks, in particular
focusing on the status of implementation of the recommendations made in the
group’s report of 23 May 2016. The strategic-level Tripartite Mechanism, composed
of the Government of the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations,
oversees the group and met on 20 October in Khartoum and was informed of the
group’s consensus on a number of issues and its discussions regarding the
modalities, timing and scope of the exit strategy. The Tripartite Mechanism then
agreed that the group should resume within two weeks to allow for further
consultations with a view to concluding its work on a draft outcome document.
3.
Further to my recent report to the Security Council on UNAMID dated
27 September 2016 (S/2016/812), which provided a detailed update on and analysis of
the conflict as well as on the political situation in Darfur up to 15 September 2016, the
following contains a brief overview highlighting the main achievements towards
meeting the benchmarks since 1 July, as well as recommendations for immediate
practical steps within the next six months that are essential to the Operation’s exit.

Benchmark 1. Inclusive peace process through mediation between
the Government and non-signatory armed movements on the basis
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
Status of implementation
4.
In West and East Darfur there are currently no active military engagements
with armed groups. However, while there have been no military clashes between the
Sudanese Armed Forces and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) or the Sudan

2/6

16-18903

S/2016/915

Liberation Army/Minni Minawi (SLA/MM) since April 2015, the armed conflict
with the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid (SLA/AW) continues in parts of the
western Jebel Marra area, which straddles North, Central and South Darfur, with
severe humanitarian consequences for the civilians in the area.
5.
On 8 August 2016, JEM and SLA/MM signed a road map agreement, brokered
by the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, following a process of
sustained mediation and negotiations supported by UNAMID. To date, however, no
cessation of hostilities agreement has been signed, although efforts continue to be
made towards that goal. As stated in my previous report, on 14 August the cessation of
hostilities talks were suspended following disagreements on the disclosure of locations
of rebel forces, the role of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as the basis for
political negotiations, the need for a new joint supervisory structure for humanitarian
operations and the release of prisoners of war. The impasse on the negotiations
between the Government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North, which
took place simultaneously, adversely affected the Darfur track. SLA/AW continues to
reject any participation in direct negotiations with the Government.
6.
In September, the Government of the Sudan declared the internationally
supported Doha Document for Peace in Darfur “completed” and dissolved its related
Darfur Regional Authority with the exception of the Darfur Land Commission; the
Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission; the Truth, Justice and
Reconciliation Commission; the Darfur Security Arrangements Implementation
Commission; and the Darfur Reconstruction and Development Fund. Those
commissions will continue to operate under the Presidency. The Darfur Internal
Dialogue and Consultation process is ongoing.
7.
A year-long process concluded on 10 October with a national dialogue
conference, which adopted a national document as a strategy for reform and the
basis for a new constitution, although none of the Darfur movements have
subscribed to it to date. The national document states that it remains open for those
groups to join in the future.
Recommendations
8.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General are as follows:

(a) While recognizing the efforts of the Government of the Sudan to meet its
obligations under the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur, it is imperative to
encourage the Government to continue to try to reach an inclusive political solution
and also to urge the SLA/AW to sign the road map and the non-signatory
movements to sign the national document as a matter of priority;
(b) All Sudanese parties to the conflict in Darfur should sign a cessation of
hostilities agreement immediately;
(c) UNAMID and the United Nations country team will support the work of
the residual Darfur Regional Authority commissions. In addition, they must
accelerate the actual transfer of responsibilities from UNAMID to United Nations
agencies having a comparative advantage with a view to completing that task by
June 2017. Significant funding, staffing and logistical issues are impeding the speed
and effectiveness of the transfer of responsibilities. UNAMID and the Secretariat

16-18903

3/6

S/2016/915

will work closely with donors and United Nations agencies to address those issues
and to accelerate the transition.

Benchmark 2. Protection of civilians and unhindered humanitarian
access and the safety and security of humanitarian personnel
Status of implementation
9.
In the areas where active armed conflict has ceased or diminished, the number
of civilians and communities directly exposed to the effects of armed conflict has
declined. Civilians continue, however, to be exposed to sources of grave risk,
including the widespread prevalence of weapons, criminality, intercommunal
disputes and the activities of armed militias. Difficulties in policing and law
enforcement remain a major challenge to addressing protection risks, even though
significant efforts have been made by the Government in that area through
improvements in policing, community policing, law enforcement, judicial services
and the work of the Special Prosecutor for Crimes in Darfur. The Government of the
Sudan announced the drawing up of a phased plan to address the proliferation of
small arms in Darfur, and in three states, namely West, Central and North Darfur,
some action has been taken to reduce the presence of small arms.
10. An estimated 2.6 million displaced civilians, including some 1.6 million in 60
camps, have been affected by the armed conflict across the region since its
beginning, while some 300,000 others are registered as refugees in Chad. The new
civilian displacements are geographically limited to the Jebel Marra area, where the
armed conflict has caused the displacement of significant numbers of people since
early 2016, and to a lesser extent to areas affected by intercommunal conflict.
Internally displaced persons in several locations are the target of attacks from armed
elements. Nonetheless, improved conditions in some areas have allowed the return
of an estimated 59,000 people to their homes.
11. Human rights violations continue to be reported, including those involving
women and children. The violations reported include the right to life, the right to
physical integrity, sexual and gender-based violence, conflict-related sexual
violence, arbitrary arrest, illegal detention and abductions. Human rights issues are
increasingly being reported to local authorities, which is an indication of higher
awareness of rights and growing confidence in state government institutions.
12. The humanitarian operating environment remains challenging owing to
insecurity and bureaucratic hurdles, as time-consuming procedures adversely affect
the ability of UNAMID and the United Nations country team to obtain permission to
travel to areas where civilians are at risk. Armed criminals continue to target
UNAMID and humanitarian personnel and property. With some significant
exceptions in the area of Jebel Marra, where UNAMID and humanitarian actors
continue to face denials of access, UNAMID patrols are functioning in many other
areas of deployment, allowing the Operation to provide physical protection to many
staff and civilians and to humanitarian convoys.
13. The Government has improved its record of granting visas to international
staff and expediting customs clearances for UNAMID and contingent-owned
equipment. On 18 October, the Ministry of Finance authorized the clearance of the

4/6

16-18903

S/2016/915

entire backlog of UNAMID and contingent-owned equipment from Port Sudan. In
the meantime, the issuance of visas to UNAMID international staff from the human
rights, public information and political affairs sections has remained problematic.
Recommendations
14.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General are as follows:

(a) The United Nations will conduct, and the Government should facilitate, a
mapping exercise of the displaced population by the end of 2016 to determine
potential voluntary returns, return areas and resettlement. The mapping should be
conducted in coordination with the Government, representatives of internally
displaced persons and native administrations, and it should lead to the development
of relevant strategies for return/resettlement, including procedures and standards;
(b) Local authorities must ensure that disarmament efforts are applied to all
civilians regardless of their affiliation. Specific measures should be introduced to
control or to disband the militias;
(c) The requirement for unhindered access for UNAMID and humanitarian
partners to conflict-affected communities to conduct monitoring and verification
missions and deliver humanitarian assistance must be ensured. In view of the positive
experience to date, the monthly technical tripartite meetings should continue.

Benchmark 3. Prevention or mitigation of community conflict
through mediation and, in conjunction with the United Nations
country team, measures to address its root causes
Status of implementation
15. The decreasing trend of hostilities with the rebel movements is paralleled by a
reduction in the number of intercommunal security incidents compared with previous
years, in particular as a result of more effective involvement of the native
administrations as well as the impact of security measures taken by the state
governments, which have led to an increased number of peace agreements. All Darfur
states have established committees to prevent, mitigate and resolve conflicts between
farmers and nomadic herders. They have launched campaigns to ban civilians from
carrying firearms and in many areas have established buffer zones in hot spots.
16. In support of the local authorities, UNAMID is implementing a new
Operation-wide strategy to address intercommunal violence, and in that context the
Operation has established internal and external coordination mechanisms at the
sector level, except for West Darfur, where efforts are ongoing with the newly
appointed state Wali. Specific action plans are being developed to define short-,
medium- and long-term priority areas for prevention, mitigation and conflictresolution activities in close cooperation with the United Nations country team.
17. A number of factors are influencing the lack of long-lasting solutions to the
intercommunal violence, including the absence of a comprehensive peace agreement
in Darfur and the continued emphasis on military actions, the widespread presence
of armed militias and the lack of a coherent policy and associated legislation on
equitable access to and sustainable management of land and water.

16-18903

5/6

S/2016/915

Recommendations
18.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General are as follows:

(a) The Government should fully implement the Doha Document for Peace
in Darfur clauses on land management, the compensation of internally displaced
persons and transitional justice, with UNAMID and United Nations country team
support. Specific focus should be on technical advice, in particular to the Darfur
Land Commission and the Voluntary Return and Resettlement Commission.
Concrete action plans to that end should be drawn up in the next three months;
(b) Building on the establishment of committees to prevent, mitigate and
resolve conflicts between farmers and nomadic herders, efforts in the next months
should focus on the areas most affected by the seasonal migration. In that context,
UNAMID will work closely with the local authorities and the native administrations;
(c) Particular attention should be paid to programmes enhancing the skills of
rural court judges, who are also local leaders, with the aim of establishing
acceptable legal standards in mediation and conflict resolution.

Way forward
19. During the past three years, the situation of armed conflict in Darfur has been
altered significantly by the military successes of the Government of the Sudan
against the rebel movements. That has reduced the fighting between Government
troops and rebels, except for Jebel Marra, where fighting does occur. The
Government has also taken steps to curb intercommunal tensions and to reduce
criminality, especially in the urban centres of Darfur. Despite the evolution of the
conflict and the relative calm in many areas of Darfur, however, crucial grievances
at its origin remain unaddressed. Long-term solutions need to be found to enable the
voluntary return of 2.6 million internally displaced persons and to reduce
intercommunal violence.
20. The current configuration of UNAMID focuses on protecting civilians in an
armed conflict in different locations. Its mandate, as defined in the joint African
Union-United Nations report of 2007 (see S/2007/307/Rev.1) was adjusted on
several occasions to adapt to the changing situation in Darfur. Given the changes on
the ground and the current needs of the population of Darfur, it is important to
reconfigure the Operation so that it can respond adequately, and gradually hand over
its operations to the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations country team
in preparation for an eventual exit.
21. For that purpose, a joint African Union-United Nations strategic review should
be undertaken that would provide detailed recommendations to the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council on the Operation’s priorities and
its configuration and, if necessary, propose a further revision of the benchmarks to
reflect the realities in Darfur. The strategic review should be undertaken during the
month of December 2016 and be presented to the two councils by the end of January
2017. In accordance with established practice, the strategic review will be
conducted in close consultation with the Government.

6/6

16-18903
