S/2017/922

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 November 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 1 November 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995), I have the honour to
transmit the fifty-second report on the implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, covering the period from 22 April to 21 October 2017,
which I received from the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-18886 (E)

031117

*1718886*

S/2017/922

Annex
Letter dated 24 October 2017 from the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council requested the Secretary-General to submit to the Council reports
from the High Representative on the implementation of the Agreement, in
accordance with annex 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995, I transmit herewith the fifty -second report
of the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I would ask that the report be distributed to the members of the
Council for their consideration.
This is my eighteenth regular report to the Secretary-General since assuming
the post of High Representative and European Union Special Representative on
26 March 2009. The present report covers the period from 22 April to 21 October
2017.
Should you or a member of the Security Council require any information
beyond what is provided in the report or have any questions regarding its contents, I
would be pleased to provide you with that information.
(Signed) Valentin Inzko

2/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

Fifty-second report of the High Representative for
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina
Summary
The present report covers the period from 22 April to 21 October 2017.
Although the general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, set for 2018, are a full
year away, the country’s political leaders have already shifted their focus away from
economic reforms towards divisive, nationalistic issues, which, in fact, have never
been completely sidelined. The political parties, in pre -election campaign mode,
have hardened their already polarized positions on several contentious issues. In its
conclusions of 16 October, the Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union
expressed regret that a divisive rhetoric rooted in the past and an early electoral
agenda had slowed the pace of reform and affected the political climate.
On the positive side, Bosnia and Herzegovina took some steps to implement the
reform agenda and continued work on compiling answers to the European Union
questionnaire. In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina signed a transport community
treaty with the European Union and five other countries in the Western Balkans in
September. The treaty opens the door to infrastructure developments and
improvements in the transport sector, and enables the signatories to harmonize their
transport laws with those of the European Union.
Disagreement continued during the reporting period with regard to changes to
the country’s electoral rules. In July, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina struck down provisions of the election law regulating the indirect
election of delegates to one of the chambers of the Federation Parliament. The Court
had previously declared those provisions unconstitutional, agreeing in part with the
appellant that the rules should be changed to ensure legitimate representation in the
election of Serb, Bosniak and Croat members to the Federation House of Peoples.
Political parties hold opposing views as to whether the indirect elections to the
Federation House of Peoples will be able to move forward after the general elections
of 2018 if the gap in the law is not filled. If the Federation House of Peoples is not
formed after the next set of elections, that would likely prevent the formation of a
Federation Government and the formation of one chamber of the State -level
Parliament, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples. There are precedents for
such blockages: delays in forming the Federation House of Peoples occurred in 2001,
2007 and 2011, and each time the High Representative intervened to unblock its
establishment.
Despite those risks, the parties in the State Parliament have not yet begun a
serious political dialogue to discuss potential amend ments to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Election Law addressing the issue. At its June meeting, the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council called on the relevant authorities to
ensure that all necessary conditions were met, including an appropriate legal
framework, to enable the smooth conduct and implementation of the general
elections in 2018.
As I reported six months ago, the President of the Republika Srpska, and other
members of his party, the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), have
reduced the frequency of calls for the secession of the Republika Srpska and the
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina following the imposition of travel and
financial sanctions against the President of the Republika Srpska by the United

17-18886

3/23

S/2017/922

States of America in January 2017. In September, party representatives announced
that the threat of holding a referendum on the status of the Republika Srpska, which
had been part of the official platform of SNSD since 2015, would be taken off the
table for the time being. However, the President of the Republika Srpska, Milorad
Dodik, subsequently made numerous statements supporting the eventual
independence and union with Serbia of the Republika Srpska. Similarly, some Croat
politicians continued to advocate for the reorganization of the country along ethnic
lines. a
Under the authority vested in me under annex 10 of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace, I take the present opportunity to reiterate that the entities have
no right to secede from Bosnia and Herzegovina and that the Framework Agreement
guarantees the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the internal constitutional position of the entities.
Another constitutional issue that will need to be followed closely relates to the
rejection of the authority of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Office of
the Prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Republika Srpska. The President of
the Republika Srpska repeated calls for Serb members of the State judiciar y to
withdraw from those institutions, following a controversial war crimes acquittal by
the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court in October.
Also of concern is the fact that a decision by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly in 2015 to hold a referendum on the Bosnia and Herzegovina judiciary and
the authority of the High Representative, which had been set aside, was allowed to
enter into force on 20 September 2017. While the President of the Republika Srpska
initially announced that this was being done so that the decision could be formally
suspended, he has since hinted that the referendum could take place as currently
scheduled on November 19, or rescheduled for a later date. As I have stated in my
previous reports to the Secretary-General, that decision represents a violation of
annexes 4 and 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace and, consistent
with my previously expressed position, I call on the Republika Srpska authorities to
put that decision out of force.
In October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted a resolution on
the protection of the constitutional order and assuring the military neutrality of the
Republika Srpska, which asserted the entity’s neutrality vis -à-vis integration with the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and sought to redefine the position and
obligations of the entity under the General Framework Agreement for Peace, in
particular under the Constitution, as set forth in annex 4. In response, I have made it
clear that the Framework Agreement, including the Constitution, prevails over any
act adopted by the Republika Srpska National Assembly and that foreign policy is an
exclusive responsibility of the State institutions.

a

4/23

“As for the reactivation of Herzeg-Bosna, if the election law is not amended by the end of the year,
[Croatian Peasant Party] will demand a return to an earlier arrangement, before the Washington and
Dayton agreements, and that would be the Croat Republic of Herzeg-Bosna. We will also approach
[the Croat People’s Assembly], asking them to make this their official position.” Mario Karamatić,
EuroBlic, 14 August 2017. “What we request is that the Constitution of [Bosnia and Herzegovina]
be changed and that is being worked on both in [Bosnia and Herzegovina] and much further from
[Bosnia and Herzegovina]. And in those solutions, all those areas that were protected by the
[Croatian Defence Council] will be parts of the territory in which Croats will live in [Bos nia and
Herzegovina]. Have no doubt about that.” Dragan Čović, TV1, 22 June 2017.

17-18886

S/2017/922

I. Introduction
1.
This is my eighteenth periodic report to the Secretary-General since assuming
the post of High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2009. I t provides a
narrative of progress made towards attaining goals outlined in previous reports,
registers factual developments, logs citations relevant to the reporting period and
provides my impartial assessment of the implementation of key areas falling un der
my mandate. I have focused my efforts on addressing those areas, in line with my
responsibility to uphold the civilian aspects of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. In that respect, I have consistently encouraged the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities to make progress on the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High Representative, and have worked
to preserve previous measures undertaken to implement the Framework Agreement.
2.
I continue to direct my energies towards meeting my mandate as defined under
annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and relevant Security
Council resolutions. Additionally, my Office fully supports the efforts of the
European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina in moving towards closer integration with those bodies.

II. Political update
A.

General political environment
3.
As noted at the outset of the present report, the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina need to address several pending issues, and the political parties have
already begun their pre-electoral campaigns a full year ahead of the general
elections to be held in October 2018. In such an environment, in which political
differences are hardened and ethnic divisions are exploited and amplified, the need
to address real reforms is both challenging and urgent.
4.
At the State and Federation levels, political disputes among the parties within
the ruling coalition have reduced the chances for meaningful progress. The
predominantly Bosniak Union for a Better Future of Bosnia and Herzegovina (SBB)
has openly sided with opposition parties in rejecting a report on the pe rformance of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers, leading to calls from the
predominantly Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA) for SBB to leave the
coalition. Relations between SDA and the Croat Democratic Union of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina) have also soured over differing views
on the need for changes to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law, the resolution
of Mostar’s electoral system and the method of electing members to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency. A lack of political dialogue and cooperation between SDA
and HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina has similarly stalled work in the Federation,
where several key items of legislation remain unaddressed.
5.
In the Republika Srpska, opposition parties reacted strongly a fter the President
of the Republika Srpska, Milorad Dodik, and his ruling coalition successfully
pressured the Auditor General of the Office of Supreme Auditing of the Republika
Srpska to resign over an unfavourable audit of entity finances. When the leadership
of the Republika Srpska National Assembly removed discussion of the issue from
the parliamentary agenda on 12 September, opposition delegates disrupted the
session. Republika Srpska police, reportedly acting at the request of the leadership
of the Republika Srpska National Assembly, physically separated the ruling majority
and opposition delegates, while the majority continued the session in a separate,
smaller hall to which opposition delegates were denied acc ess. Controversy was

17-18886

5/23

S/2017/922

also generated by reports that police officers with weapons were present inside the
parliament building.
6.
Corruption and a lack of respect for the rule of law remain serious problems,
as authorities at all levels consistently disregard or even reject binding decisions of
the judiciary. The Republika Srpska continues to disregard judgments of the Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
concerning the registration of defence property, while the Federation parties show
no commitment to reaching political agreement on the enactment of amendments to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law in compliance with Constitutional Court
decisions, potentially hampering the implementation of the general elections of
2018 and continuing to leave Mostar deprived of any way to enable the holding of
local elections.
7.
The continued failure by the authorities to implement the rulings of the
European Court of Human Rights in Sejdić and Finci and related cases also reflects
the overall disregard for the rule of law. As a result, under the current system,
certain groups have been discriminated against for more than two decades with
regard to their right to hold political office.
8.
As in the previous period, Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities failed to act in
their own self-interest and complete several measures at the State and Federation
levels to allow the second disbursement of funds under the Extended Fund Facility
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
9.
There were some positive developments in terms of regional relations during
the reporting period, in particular the official visit of the President of Serbia,
Aleksandar Vučić, to Sarajevo in September. Although the President had visited
Bosnia and Herzegovina several times in his former capacity as Prime Minister, that
visit marked the first by a Serbian Head of State since 2011.

B.

Decisions of the High Representative during the reporting period
10. Despite ongoing challenges to the rule of law a nd the General Framework
Agreement for Peace during the reporting period, I have refrained from using my
executive powers, in accordance with the policy of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council of emphasizing “local ownership” over international
decision-making.

C.

Five objectives and two conditions for closure of the Office of the
High Representative
Progress on objectives
11. As in the previous period, the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have made
only limited progress towards meeting the requirements of the five objectives and
two conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council as
prerequisites for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Defence property and State property
12. The process of the registration of prospective defence property under the
ownership of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina continued. The term “prospective
defence property” refers to a defined list of immovable assets that are needed by the
Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina and should be registered to the Bosnia
and Herzegovina State in line with the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution, the

6/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

Agreement on Succession Issues, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Law on Defence and
relevant decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency. In addition to being
part of the conditions under the NATO membership action plan for the participation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, progress on the issue is one of the outstanding
objectives set as a prerequisite for the transition of the Office of the High
Representative.
13. Concerning the registration of prospective defence property located in the
Federation, 26 military locations have been successfully registered to date, while
several other properties are in various phases of the registration process. The
competent State-level institutions have expedited their efforts to drive the process
forward, which is mainly focused on clarifying and resolving various technical legal
difficulties related to some prospective defence locations.
14. Unfortunately, the registration process for prospective defence property
located in the territory of the Republika Srpska remains blocked owing to political
obstruction, as the Republika Srpska Administration for Geodetic and Property
Affairs has rejected several registration requests due to what they allege is their
“non-existence of a valid legal basis”. In several public statements, high-ranking
Republika Srpska officials have made it clear that the authorities have no intention
of implementing the final and binding decision of the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the case of the prospective defence location in Han Pijesak, thereby
openly violating the principle of the rule of law. On 6 July 2017, the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina rejected the Republika Srpska motion challenging
the final decision of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Han Pijesak case.
15. Concerning the wider issue of defence property and State property and its
apportionment between different levels of government, progress remains elusive.
There is an urgent need for the adoption of comprehensive State -level legislation
that fully acknowledges and adopts the principles of the ruling of 13 July 2012 of
the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Fiscal sustainability
16. The Office of the High Representative continued to track, analyse and inform
its international partners on developments related to fiscal sustainability, including
developments in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council a nd the Governing
Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
17. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Fiscal Council met more frequently than in the
previous period, but focused almost solely on reaching agreement on the Global
Framework of Fiscal Balance and Policies for 2018–2020. The Framework includes
key parameters and projections required for budget planning, and should have been
adopted in May to allow for the timely preparation and adoption of State and entity
budgets for 2018. However, dissenting views within the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Fiscal Council concerning the upper limit for financing State institutions in 2018,
and their share in indirect tax revenues for 2018, made any agreement impossible
until October.
18. Specifically, the Republika Srpska opposed any increase in the budget of the
State institutions, while the State and the Federation considered a minimal increase
necessary to cover the purchase of equipment for firefighting purposes nationwide,
as well as new expenditures in 2018, such as those for the general elections and
those stemming from the parliamentary adoption of a salary increase for State-level
police officers. In the end, the Framework adopted on 4 October locked the overall
budget of State institutions and their share in indirect tax revenues at the same
amount it has been since 2012.

17-18886

7/23

S/2017/922

19. While the Governing Board of the Indirect Taxation Authority met relatively
regularly during the reporting period, the quality and the quantity of its work
declined. The Board consistently failed to adopt revenue allocation coefficients and
settle inter-entity debts pursuant to its Rulebook on Coefficient Calculation and
Payments to the Entities. Finance ministers continued the practice of agreeing on
agenda items in advance of Board meetings, bypassing the experts and the Board
itself. Also evident were disagreements over issues of relevance to IMF and the
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in particular concerning the
excise tax-related legislation aimed at generating additional revenue for road and
highway construction.
Brcko District
20. My Office continued to provide expert assistance to the Brcko District
authorities, at their request, in preparing by-laws and addressing other issues for the
implementation of four key pieces of financial legislation adopted in June 2016,
which aim to further integrate the Brcko District with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
legal system, facilitate implementation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina economic
programme negotiated with IMF and empower the District with instruments for
increasing fiscal transparency, fighting the grey economy and generating revenues.
My Office also provided support to the Brcko District Finance Directorate in
preparing a new law on budget.
21. In May, the Brcko District authorities sought the intervention of the Brcko
Supervisor and the assistance of my Office with regard to the failure of the Brcko
District Judicial Commission to appoint a Brcko District representative to the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council. Initially, the Commission appointed a person
who was not eligible under the rules and the decision of the Council, thereby
bringing into question the legality of the future work of a Council with an illegally
elected member. Following multiple interventions, the situation has been corrected
in line with the law.
22. Although the decision on Amendments to the Decision on Protection of
Civilian Victims of War entered into force on 18 June 2015, correcting
discriminatory provisions for the victims of rape and sexual abuse in Brcko, the
decision has thus far not been implemented.
Entrenching the rule of law
23. During the reporting period, my Office continued to provide assistance and
support to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities in implementing the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Law on Foreigners adopted in 2015 and the Bosnia and H erzegovina
Law on Asylum adopted in 2016.

D.

Decision of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the “Ljubić case” and its impact on the Election Law
24. On 1 December 2016, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
adopted a decision on the so-called “Ljubić case”, which concerned the request of
the current President of the Main Council of the Croat People’s Assembly, Božo
Ljubić, for a review of the constitutionality of the provisions of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Election Law pertaining to the election of delegates to the Federation
House of Peoples. The Court established that several provisions were not in
conformity with article I (2) of the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
ordered the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly to harmonize those

8/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

provisions with the Constitution no later than six months from the date of delivery
of its decision.
25. In April 2017, the Croat caucus of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples proposed amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law, which
aim to address the Ljubić decision. However, in addition to regulating the indirect
election to the Federation House of Peoples, the amendments also regulate the
election of the members to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Pre sidency and address the
electoral issue in Mostar. The amendments were adopted in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Peoples on 19 July, but their adoption in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina House of Representatives appears unlikely.
26. In the meantime, since the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
failed to harmonize the provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law
with the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina by the established deadline of
30 June, the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted a ruling on
non-enforcement on 6 July, which repealed the provisions.
27. HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina and SDA continue to focus on the issue of
whether elections for the Federation House of Peoples in 2018 could proceed
following the repeal by the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
provisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law it deemed unconstitutional.
SDA has promised its own proposal of amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Election Law, but to date has not submitted anything into parliamentary procedure.
28. My Office will continue to closely follow the developments regarding the
implementation of the decision in the “Ljubić case” and its eventual impact on the
upcoming general elections in 2018, and on the process of government formation
thereafter.

E.

Challenges to the General Framework Agreement for Peace
Challenges to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina
29. During the reporting period, there were numerous statements that challenged the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The President of the
Republika Srpska was again the most frequent and vocal exponent of such
proclamations, which included referring to Bosnia and Herzegovina as a failed State,
referring to the Republika Srpska as a State and Bosnia and Herzegovina as a mere
union of States and calling for the unification of Republika Srpska and Serbia. 1 He also

__________________
1

17-18886

“What state of Bosnia-Herzegovina? The state of Bosnia-Herzegovina does not exist. BosniaHerzegovina exists as foreseen in Dayton. That is not a state, it is a state union, or union of
states. It is no kind of state.” Milorad Dodik, RTRS, 18 October 2017. “One hears more and more
on the international scene and [from] many analysts, reporters and historia ns that [Bosnia and
Herzegovina] is a failed state. It may be time to start talking about a peaceful breakup in [Bosnia
and Herzegovina] … because this kind of [Bosnia and Herzegovina] with massive
interventionism by the international community has failed, as such, [and] it is obviously in the
definition of failed states.” Milorad Dodik speaking to journalists in Zvornik, FENA, 5 October
2017. “And this is not the first time in this part of the world that there are two Serb states, like
now there are Republika Srpska and Serbia … Our position in [Bosnia and Herzegovina] is not
finished. We are forced into it … Do I have to say again that we want to be again together with
Serbia?...And I do not want to give up on my dream that the [Republika Srpska] and Serbi a are
one … In the sense of a state, in the political sense and in the national sense.” Milorad Dodik, at
the opening event of “Days of the [Republika Srpska] in Serbia” in Belgrade, 15 September
2017. “I believe that in this century the Serb people will have the right to be one, because of
their suffering in the past. And that it is completely natural for us to be together. And when I say
together, that means together in the territorial and state sense, to avoid any doubts. Because we
are together anyway.” Milorad Dodik, FENA, 4 August 2017.
9/23

S/2017/922

sparked controversy by referring to the return of Bosniak refugees and displaced
persons ethnically cleansed from eastern Bosnia as an “occupation”. 2
Challenges to the authority of State-level judicial institutions
30. The President of the Republika Srpska has repeated his calls for Serb judges to
withdraw from State judicial institutions 3 and clearly voiced his opposition to the
implementation of the decision of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
registration of prospective defence property in Republika Srpska territory. In a
29 August meeting of Republika Srpska ruling coalition leaders, plans were
announced to adopt a law banning the registration of such property in the Republika
Srpska without the consent of the Republika Srpska National Assembly.
Potential Republika Srpska referendum on the State judiciary and the
authority of the High Representative
31. I previously reported on a decision by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly in July 2015 to hold a referendum in the Republika Srpska on the validity
of the legislation on the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Offi ce of the
Prosecutor in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the applicability of the decisions of
those institutions on the territory of that entity, as well as on the authority and
decisions of the High Representative.
32. In the report, I made it clear that, while the Republika Srpska authorities have
the right to organize referendums on matters falling within the constitutional
responsibilities of the entity, the referendum at hand addressed areas outside that
authority and constituted an open challenge to the sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and a violation of the commitments and obligations of the Republika
Srpska arising under the Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution as set forth in
annexes 4 and 10 to the General Framework Agreement for Peace. The Counci l of
the European Union also expressed its serious concern about the potential
referendum in its conclusions of 12 October 2015, saying that it would challenge the
cohesion, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
33. At the time, the authorities in Republika Srpska ultimately decided to put the
planned referendum aside, and the decision of the Republika Srpska National
Assembly was never published in the Republika Srpska Official Gazette and thus
did not enter into force. However, in September 2017, the 2015 decision was
published and came into force, following criticism by the opposition in the
Republika Srpska against the authorities for failing to publish a duly adopted act of
the entity’s Parliament. At that time, the President of the Republika Srpska
explained that the act would soon be suspended or taken out of force.
34. While I very much welcome the stated intention of the authorities of the
Republika Srpska to take that anti-Dayton decision out of force, I note with concern
that this has not yet been done, since the decision provides for the referendum to be
held in November.
__________________
2

“We are aware of projects of various foundations, primarily Islamic, that have requested or just
directed their money, so Muslims would return here along the Drina River, after the homeland
war and thereby occupy the Drina again ...” Milorad Dodik, speaking to journalists in Bratunac,
7 July 2017.
3
“We call on Serbs in [Bosnia and Herzegovina] institutions to support their withdrawal until a
new Law on the Court of [Bosnia and Herzegovina] and Prosecutor’s Office with clear
competences is enacted, particularly when it comes to selection of judges and prosecutors whose
selection would be conducted in legislative bodies at all government levels, until which time
every decision-making at the level of [Bosnia and Herzegovina] should be halted.” Milorad
Dodik, SRNA, 14 October 2017.
10/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

Republika Srpska National Assembly resolution on the protection of the
constitutional order and assuring the military neutrality of the Republika Srpska
35. At its session on 17 and 18 October 2017, the Republika Srpska National
Assembly adopted a resolution on the protection of the constitutional order and
assuring the military neutrality of the Republika Srpska. The resolution has not yet
been published as it has yet to be considered by the Republika Srpska Council of
Peoples.
36. In terms of military neutrality and the relationship of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to NATO, the resolution proclaims the “military neutrality of Republika Srpska in
relation to existing military alliances until such time as a possible referendum on
this matter is scheduled in Republika Srpska that would make a final decision on
this issue”.
37. Setting aside the specific issue of the relationship of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to NATO, the resolution is problematic in other respects. It asserts that the
constitutional order of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as set forth in annex 4 to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace, was created by the entities and can be
changed only by their agreement. Under that view, the Republika Srpska asserts that
it is entitled to unilaterally dictate certain policy matters falling within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the State and contrary to the existing decisions of the State. In that
case, the Republika Srpska would be able to make proclamations on “military
neutrality”, despite the exclusive competency of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State
for foreign policy under the Constitution, and despite the fact that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency and other institutions have already passed decisions on that
issue.
38. The resolution also attempts to use provisions about the territory of the entities
under the General Framework Agreement for Peace in order to prevent the
registration of State and defence property in the territory of the Republika Srpska in
the name of the State. That goes against final and binding decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and existing State legislation. The resolution claims that such
registration would represent a “violation of the constitutional order and international
law and would not have a legal effect”. It relies on the incorrect assumption that any
registration of real estate property under the name of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
State would be the equivalent of reducing the territory of the Republika Srpska.
39. The resolution also asserts the entity’s right to coordinate its future status with
Serbia, as a signatory to the General Framework Agreement for Peace. It is worth
mentioning in that context that the Constitution o f Bosnia and Herzegovina does
allow the entities to develop special parallel relations with neighbouring States;
however, such arrangements must be implemented in full accordance with the
Constitution and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which includes full respect for foreign policy as a constitutional responsibility of
State institutions.
40. Finally, the resolution seeks to compel both Republika Srpska officials and
officials in the State institutions elected from the Republika Srpska to advance the
views taken in the resolution, and foresees possible legal sanctions for those who do
not comply.
Glorification of war criminals
41. On 8 June, the Croat People’s Assembly, a political organization of Croat
parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, supported the organization of a concert in
Mostar in support of six officials of the former Croat Republic of Herzeg -Bosnia,
17-18886

11/23

S/2017/922

whom the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia had convicted and
sentenced in the first instance to a total of 111 years of imprisonment.
Issue of foreign fighters
42. During the reporting period, the relevant Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities
reported that there were no new departures by citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
join Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The Office of the Prosecutor in
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to prosecute citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina
who have left or plan to leave Bosnia and Herzegovina with the aim of joining ISIL.
According to available information, the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court has so
far found 23 persons guilty of joining ISIL.

III. State-level institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
A.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency
43. Croat member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Dragan Čović (HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina) is the current Chair of the Presidency, having assumed the
function from Serb member Mladen Ivanić (Party of Democratic Progress) on
17 July.
44. During the reporting period, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency met
monthly and focused on its Euro-Atlantic integration processes. Sessions often
began with the Chair of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
providing a detailed progress report on Euro-Atlantic integration, and the
Presidency issuing statements of support and advice to overcome identified
obstacles. On 13 September, the Presidency overcame earlier disagreements and
adopted a decision accepting a transport community treaty.
45. On 20 June, then-Presidency Chair Ivanić led the Bosnia and Herzegovina
delegation at a meeting of the North Atlantic Council in Brussels, where he said
there was no internal consensus in Bosnia and Herzegovina on full NATO
membership, but that all political representatives understood the relevance and
importance of the activation of the NATO membership action plan for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In terms of fulfilling the conditions for the activation of the action
plan, he highlighted the completion of a defence revie w by Bosnia and Herzegovina
and its adoption by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency in November 2016, the
participation of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina in NATO
peacekeeping operations in Afghanistan and the progress made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina with regard to resolving the issue of surplus weapons and military
equipment. He noted, however, that the requirement to register defence property
under the ownership of the State had proven difficult, and might take years to
resolve.

B.

Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
46. The Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina met regularly during the
reporting period, holding 19 regular sessions and 1 telephone session, but its work
was hampered by the lack of parliamentary majority support. One of the main
priorities during the period was the preparation of answers to the European Union
questionnaire, and Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have extended the deadline
to deliver a compiled set of answers to the European Commission, initially set for
May, to December 2017.

12/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

47. The Council of Ministers adopted only six sets of amendments to existing
legislation, and not a single new law during the reporting period. The widespread
perception of its poor legislative output led to the rej ection in July of the Council’s
annual work report for 2016 by the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Representatives. Opposition delegates voted against the report, with the support of
SBB, despite the fact that the party was part of the coalition and had re presentatives
in the Council of Ministers.
48. The Council of Ministers eventually secured consensus for a decision with
regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina joining the transport community treaty, which is
an important step to unblock more than BAM 500 million in European Union funds
for four infrastructure projects in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Chair of the Council
of Ministers, Denis Zvizdić (SDA), signed the treaty on behalf of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in Brussels on 18 September.

C.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
49. During the reporting period, the protracted political crisis in the country
affected the performance of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly,
negatively affecting its functionality and severely reducing its legislative output.
50. The Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) delegates continued to
boycott sessions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives over the
issue of SDA delegate Šefik Džaferović’s rotation to the Speaker position and their
long-held accusations of his involvement in war crimes, until Borjana Krišto (HDZ
Bosnia and Herzegovina) rotated into the position on 9 August. In addition, SNSD
delegates in both houses resigned from parliamentary committees in protest over the
removal by the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives of SNSD
delegate Nikola Špirić from the Joint Committee for Oversight of the Intelligence
and Security Agency in July.
51. The durability of the ruling coalition became more doubtful following the
rejection by the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives of the annual
work report for 2016 of the Council of Ministers. Support by coalition partner SBB
for the opposition on that issue triggered speculation about a possible vote of no
confidence against the Council of Ministers, which has thus far not occurred.
52. Also contributing to the ruling coalition’s instability were significant political
disagreements between SDA and HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina over amendments to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law, as well as an internal rift within SDA,
which led to three delegates leaving the party and establishing their own party
(“Independent Bloc”), thereby weakening the presence of SDA in Parliament.
53. On 10 May, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly rejected
excise and banking deposit insurance-related legislation required for the completion
of the first review under the Extended Fund Facility of IMF. The non -adoption of
those laws will delay the second tranche of the Extended Fund Facility.
54. The Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives held eight regular
sessions during the reporting period, while the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Peoples held only five. As a whole, the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliament adopted
only 3 pieces of legislation during the reporting period, in the form of amendments
to existing legislation, and rejected 11 laws.
55. The issue of financing the Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Broadcasting
System also remains unresolved in any permanent systematic manner. On 4 May, the
Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples rejected amendments to the existing

17-18886

13/23

S/2017/922

Public Broadcasting System law that sought to extend the temporary collection of
Public Broadcasting System taxes by the telecom operators until the end of the year.
56. On 14 June, the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Representatives held a
thematic session on the Bosnia and Herzegovina Judiciary, in which many delegates
expressed frustration over the insufficient prosecution of political corruption cases.

IV. Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Federation coalition developments
57. During the reporting period, the Government of the Federation worked
consistently, holding 24 regular sessions and 15 extraordinary sessions. However,
frequent disagreements over proposed legislation continued within the ruling SDA HDZ Bosnia and Herzegovina-SBB coalition, disrupting the functioning of the
Federation Parliament, which adopted only one new law and five sets of
amendments to existing legislation.
58. The stagnation of the work of the Federation House of Peoples is notable, with
only two regular sessions held during the reporting period and more than a dozen
important items of legislation still pending adoption, include legislation necessary
to fulfil the requirements for the continuation of the Extended Fund Facility of IMF.
The House session on 6 July was interrupted owing to the lack of a quorum, leaving
several items of legislation unaddressed. The House finally resumed the session two
and a half months later, on 21 September, and managed to adopt the draft Law on
Income Tax and the draft Law on Contributions, two key reform laws.
Proposed vote of no confidence against the Government
59. On 17 May, in the Federation House of Representatives, delegates from the
Democratic Front and the Social Democratic Party submitted a proposal for a vote
of no confidence against the Federation Government, noting that in March the
Federation House of Representatives did not adopt the Federation Government’s
work report for 2016 or the report on the execution of the Federation budget for
2016, and accusing the ministers of not participating in parliamentary discussions.
On 26 July, the House of Representatives rejected the vote of no confidence.
Education in the Federation
60. In June, following protests by Bosniak and Croat students, parents and
teachers, the Central Bosnia Canton authorities ended their effort to establish a new
secondary school in Jajce municipality, a “two schools under one roof”
configuration in which the students, who heretofore had attended classes together,
would have had to attend separate classes according to their national (i.e., ethnic)
curricula. The protesting students in Jajce called for the abolishment of all “two
schools under one roof” configurations, of which there remain more than 50
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
61. In September, the Embassy of Israel sent a note to the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Ministry of Foreign Affairs protesting the controversial decision in 2016 by the
authorities of the Sarajevo Canton to rename a local primary school after a Bosniak
intellectual of the Second World War who sympathized with the Ustaša regime,
“especially considering the fact that the vast majority of the Bosnian Jewish
Community was brutally killed at the hand of the fascist and Nazi occupying forces
with which Mr. Busuladžić identified himself”.

14/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

Constitutional status of Serbs in the cantons
62. On 15 September, I addressed a letter to the leadership of the Herzegovina Neretva Cantonal Assembly, urging them to act to harmonize the cantonal
constitution with the Federation Constitution in order to ensure the constitutional
equality of all three constituent peoples, specifically the Serb people, as the cantonal
constitution does not explicitly reference Serbs as a constituent people or contain
provisions providing for the use of Serb language as an official language or Cyrillic
as an official script.
63. The Herzegovina-Neretva Canton has been under the obligation to amend its
constitution in that regard since 2002, when the High Representative used his
executive authority to amend the Federation Constitution in the same manner.
Similar obligations remain outstanding in the Posavina Canton, West Herzegovina
Canton and Canton 10.
64. On a positive note, on 31 July the Sarajevo Cantonal Assembly amended its
constitution, including its provisions on the status of Sarajevo and provisions
ensuring that the three constituent peoples are each guaranteed a minimum of 20 per
cent representation in the Sarajevo City Council.
No agreement to enable local elections in Mostar
65. The responsible political parties continue in their failure to reach any political
agreement to enact amendments to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Election Law that
would enable the holding of local elections in Mostar, where there have been no
local elections since 2008. Meeting in June 2017, the Political Directors of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council called on the competent
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to “address the implementation of the
decision of the [Bosnia and Herzegovina] Constitutional Court on Mostar and thus
enable the holding of elections in this city”.

V. Republika Srpska
66. During the reporting period, the ruling coalition led by SNSD remained
functional, and the Republika Srpska government met regularly. According to
available information, the Republika Srpska National Assembly held five regular
sessions and one special session, and adopted 15 new laws and 15 sets of
amendments to existing laws.
67. However, the first split in the ruling coalition emerged over the proposed
privatization of an iron mine in Prijedor, which coalition partner Democratic
People’s Alliance vehemently opposed. In a rare political loss for SNSD, the
Republika Srpska National Assembly rejected the proposal in May. The ruling
coalition, briefly shaken, eventually returned to normal.
68. Two major political trends persisted in the Republika Srpska, both of which
have perpetuated the ongoing crisis in the country. The first was caused by rising
tensions between Sarajevo and Banja Luka over the registration of defence property,
the Republika Srpska calling into question the path of Bosnia and Herzegovina
towards Euro-Atlantic integration and repeated calls for Republika Srpska unity
with Serbia. The second trend has been the constant political power struggle
between the ruling Republika Srpska coalition and the opposition parties gathered
under the “Alliance for Change”. The struggle culminated in September with the
incident in the Republika Srpska National Assembly over the report of the Auditor
General of the Office of Supreme Auditing of the Republika Srpska and his
subsequent forced resignation.
17-18886

15/23

S/2017/922

69. On 29 August, the ruling coalition party Presidents agreed that they would
seek to suspend a Republika Srpska National Assembly declaration on the path of
Bosnia and Herzegovina towards Euro-Atlantic integration and replace it with
conclusions advocating the military neutrality of the country, in line with the
declared military neutrality of Serbia. They also indicated that the Republika Srpska
National Assembly would adopt a new law that would prevent the registration of
defence property under the ownership of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State without
prior consent from the Republika Srpska National Assembly.
70. On 17 October, the Republika Srpska National Assembly passed a resolution
on the protection of the constitutional order and assuring the military neutrality of
the Republika Srpska, which represented a serious shift in Republika Srpska policy
regarding NATO integration, abandoning the NATO Partnership for Peace path, to
which Republika Srpska representatives had committed themselves through the
Republika Srpska National Assembly conclusions in 2005, and to which Bosnia and
Herzegovina had committed itself through the decision of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency in 2009, to seek activation of the NATO membership action
plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina, which remains in force. It is my view that
decisions of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency remain in force unless they are
repealed or subsumed. Apart from declaring the Republika Srpsk a in favour of
military neutrality, the resolution targets the Republika Srpska opposition by
threatening sanctions against officials who do not comply with the policy
established therein.
71. The Republika Srpska National Assembly adopted the resolution a t the
insistence of the ruling coalition, while opposition parties argued it was
unnecessary. Under circumstances similar to the tumultuous Republika Srpska
National Assembly session on 12 and 13 September, the Republika Srpska National
Assembly leadership prevented the opposition parties from being present during the
voting.
72. Despite friction between the Republika Srpska and State -level authorities,
cooperation between the entity governments, led by Republika Srpska Prime
Minister Željka Cvijanović and Federation Prime Minister Fadil Novalić, could be
characterized as positive and pragmatic. On 4 October, the two governments held a
joint session in Sarajevo and announced cooperative efforts to battle the gr ey
economy in both entities.
Non-cooperation with the High Representative
73. The Republika Srpska government continues to deny my Office access to
official information and documents, as required under annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace. Article IX of annex 10 obliges all author ities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the High Representative. Repeated
calls by the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council reminding the
Republika Srpska authorities of their obligations in that regard have had no impact.
The practice of the Republika Srpska government of not providing information and
documents requested by the Office of the High Representative dates from 2007, and
contradicts frequent Republika Srpska claims that the entity respects the letter of the
Framework Agreement.
74. On 18 October, the President of the Republika Srpska took the unprecedented
step of informing media that he had considered arresting the head of my Office in
Banja Luka due to her alleged presence and activities in the building of the
Republika Srpska National Assembly during the session on 17 October. The
comments were disturbing and unacceptable because my staff has immunity under
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations and the authority under the General
16/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

Framework Agreement for Peace to monitor parliamentary sessions throughout the
country, which are open to the public anyway. As a matter of standard practice and
in line with the mandate of the Office of the High Representative, designated Office
staff regularly monitor sessions of parliamentary bodies across the country. The
comments were also untrue, as the Head of Office was not present at the premises of
the Republika Srpska National Assembly before, during or after the session on
17 October.

VI. Entrenching the rule of law
Draft law on Bosnia and Herzegovina courts
75. The jurisdiction of the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court is still a major
point of contention between the Republika Srpska and other political authorities,
and is preventing the adoption of a new law on Bosnia and Herzegovina courts. A
working draft included provisions for the Bosnia and Herzegovina State to maintain
its current criminal jurisdiction over organized crime and corruption, alongside
alternate provisions reflecting the view of the Republika Srpska, which seeks
limitations on Bosnia and Herzegovina State jurisdiction. An agreement was sought
within the European Union-led process of the Structured Dialogue on Justice, and in
July 2017 an updated version was offered that would preserve the Sta te-level
jurisdiction to fight specific types of crime. However, that solution was not
accepted. If work on the new piece of legislation continues, I wish to clearly
emphasize that the State-level jurisdiction must not be diminished, as it follows the
division of competencies between the Bosnia and Herzegovina State and the entities
under the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Other developments
76. In July, the criminal case against suspects in the case of the unconstitutionally
conducted Republika Srpska referendum of 25 September 2016, which violated two
final and binding decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
came to a halt. While it is a criminal offence under article 239 of the Criminal Code
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to fail to implement decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the Office of the Prosecutor in Bosnia and
Herzegovina opened an investigation and questioned the President of the Republika
Srpska on his role, the ensuing indictment presented to the Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina was brought only against members of the Republika Srpska
Referendum Commission. The Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina rejected the
indictment as not containing evidence that the persons charged therein could have
prevented the referendum as the Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
ordered, effectively closing the case.
77. Another example of the deterioration in the entrenchment of rule of law that
requires my attention is the direct rejection by the Republika Srpska authorities of
the applicability of Bosnia and Herzegovina-level judicial decisions in that entity.
Thus, the Republika Srpska authorities continue to ignore the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State Court’s decision on a prospective defence property location in
Han Pijesak, in the Republika Srpska.
Domestic war crimes cases
78. On 9 October, the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in its first i nstance
verdict, acquitted the wartime commander of the Army of Bosnia and Herzegovina
forces in Srebrenica, Naser Orić, along with fellow former Army officer Sabahudin

17-18886

17/23

S/2017/922

Muhić, of war crimes against prisoners of war. Mr. Orić and Mr. Muhić were
accused of participating in the killings of three Serb prisoners.
79. The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia had previously tried
Mr. Orić for command responsibility in relation to an incident in which several
Serbs were allegedly detained in the Srebrenica police station and subjected to
physical abuse, including instances of detainees being beaten to death. After
initially convicting and sentencing Mr. Orić in June 2006, the International Tribunal
ultimately acquitted him two years later on appeal, and ordered his release.
80. The October acquittal by the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina sparked fierce
reactions from a number of Republika Srpska politicians, who heavily criticized the
Bosnia and Herzegovina judiciary for its handling of war crimes cases i n which the
victims were Serbs. 4 The President of the Republika Srpska went further, calling on
Serbs in the State judiciary to withdraw from the institutions and organizing a
meeting with coalition partners in the Republika Srpska where it was concluded,
inter alia, that the option of holding a referendum in the Republika Srpska on the
State judiciary should remain in force.
Entity anti-corruption efforts
81. The specific legislation in the Federation on a special prosecutor and court
department for fighting corruption and organized crime, which was passed in 2014,
remains unimplemented.

VII. Public security and law enforcement, including
intelligence reform
82. The practice of improper political interference in operational policing has not
diminished during the reporting period. Tuzla Canton has yet to adhere to the basic
standards of rule of law, refusing to implement the financial independence of the
police, originally required in 2010, due to improper political influence. Sarajevo
cantonal authorities resisted the implementation of the legal and financial
independence of the Sarajevo Canton police until combined pressure from the
international community ultimately unblocked the process in July 2017. Problems
still remain in Sarajevo, and include possible legislative changes that would result
in more political control over the police. The Una-Sana Canton needs to implement
the legal and financial independence of the police in time for the 2018 budget year.
83. The appointment of a new police commissioner in Canton 10 has been
outstanding since December 2014. The January 2015 appointment of the Federation
Administration Police Director remains unresolved due to an ongoing court dispute.
The appointment of the Federation Independent Board for police remains
outstanding since 2015. The mandate of the Independent Board in Herzegovina Neretva Canton ended in March 2017 and the procedure of appointing a new Board
remains stalled. In West-Herzegovina and Sarajevo Cantons, Independent Boards
show signs of improper political interference. In May 2017, the Sarajevo cantonal
government appointed a new police commissioner.

__________________
4

18/23

“The Court and Prosecutor’s Office cannot exist at the level of [Bosnia and Herzegovina] since
the Dayton Agreement was amended to the detriment of Serbs under the pressure of the
[international community].” Milorad Dodik, SRNA, 10 October 2017.
17-18886

S/2017/922

VIII. Economy
84. Available economic indicators for the first seven months of 2017 are
encouraging when compared with the corresponding period in 2016. Early estimates
show that economic growth of 2.7 per cent has been sustained over the first three
quarters of the year. Exports are up by 16.9 per cent an d imports are up by 11.8 per
cent. Industrial production increased by 2.6 per cent. Of note are a 5.9 per cent drop
in unemployment at the end of June and a 28.7 per cent increase in foreign direct
investments in the first quarter of 2017. Other macroecono mic indicators such as
inflation and average income show no major changes compared with the previous
period.
85. Those marginal improvements in economic indicators, while encouraging,
should not be overestimated. The administrative unemployment rate is 39 .4 per cent,
which translates into nearly half a million persons registered as unemployed. Of
continued concern is the youth unemployment level, which the World Bank
estimates at 54.3 per cent. Even those with a steady income struggle to make ends
meet, with the average monthly salary of BAM 851 (approximately EUR 425) and
the average monthly pension of BAM 360 (approximately EUR 180) falling well
short of the monthly estimated consumer basket. That gives rise to brain drain. Of
137 economies subject to analysis, the World Economic Forum ranks Bosnia and
Herzegovina 135th in ability to retain talent and 136th in capacity to attract talent.
Of additional concern is the Bosnia and Herzegovina Central Bank figure of 74,837
companies having one or more blocked accounts, which is the highest number to
date and indicates serious liquidity problems in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
business community.
86. Economic ratings in the reporting period also indicate problems in several
areas, as compared with other countries in the region. The United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development World Investment Report 2017 ranked
Bosnia and Herzegovina fourth in foreign direct investment inflows in South eastern Europe in 2016. The Heritage Foundation 2017 Index of Economic F reedom
ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina ninety-second of 180 countries and thirty-sixth of
44 countries in Europe, which advanced Bosnia and Herzegovina into the ranks of
the “moderately free” countries, although with the caveat that the overall
entrepreneurial environment remains one of the region’s most burdensome. The
Human Development Report 2016 of the United Nations Development Programme
ranked Bosnia and Herzegovina eighty-first of 188 countries in terms of human
development. On 8 September, Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services affirmed the
credit rating of Bosnia and Herzegovina at “B with stable outlook”.
87. The banking sector is assessed as generally stable and liquid. According to the
entity banking agencies, the Federation and Republika Srpska bankin g sectors’ net
profit in the first half of the year totals BAM 152 million and BAM 63 million,
respectively. However, the calls by the President of the Republika Srpska to
reorganize the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina raise serious concerns.
Under the General Framework Agreement for Peace, the Central Bank is the sole
authority for issuing currency and for monetary policy throughout Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Law on the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina additionally
affirms the Central Bank as a State-level institution and provides for its full
independence from the Federation, the Republika Srpska and any other public
agency or authority, and regulates the distribution of Central Bank net profits,
including to the budget of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Any attempt to question the
Central Bank, its status or responsibilities represents a serious challenge to the State
and its General Framework Agreement for Peace-defined competencies and

17-18886

19/23

S/2017/922

institutions. Moreover, it is a threat to the monetary and fina ncial stability of the
country.
Fiscal issues
88. During the reporting period, Bosnia and Herzegovina did not benefit from IMF
disbursements, as the authorities failed to complete all the measures required for the
completion of the first performance review of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the
IMF Extended Fund Facility arrangement. Budget stability was nonetheless
maintained, mostly due to the sustained growth of indirect tax revenue (collection
was 7.8 per cent higher in the first eight months of 2017 than over the same period
in 2016) and domestic borrowing. Also of note is the 8 August settlement by the
Russian Federation of its USD 125.2 million debt to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
stemming from the commodity exchange between the former Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
was apportioned to the State (10 per cent), the Federation (58 per cent), the
Republika Srpska (29 per cent) and the Brcko District (3 per cent). However, fiscal
challenges are evident and likely to increase by the end of 2017.
89. While the financing of State-level institutions allows them to cover basic
current expenditures, it is insufficient to allow for their full functioning and the
fulfilment of their obligations. The budget for State institutions has been locked at
the same level since 2012, mainly due to political interest on the part of Republika
Srpska in weakening the State.
90. According to the Debt Managing Department of the Republika Srpska
Ministry of Finance, the total debt of the Republika Srpska as of the end of May
2017 amounted to BAM 5.38 billion. On 18 August, as has happened often in the
past, the Office of Supreme Auditing of the Republika Srpska revealed higher
deficits and debt than reported by the Republika Srpska government. In the absence
of IMF disbursements, the Republika Srpska government continued to borrow from
the local capital market, raising BAM 290 million from the issuance of treasury bills
and bonds in 2017. The total borrowing through the sale of government securities in
2017 is planned to be BAM 350 million. Since 2015, the Republika Srpska
government has been negotiating a new loan to reschedule its debt to maintain
budget liquidity, but all efforts to that end have failed thus far. The main challenges
in the forthcoming period stem from the Republika Srpska budget’s high debt
burden and low liquidity, the Republika Srpska corporate -sector debt of over BAM
10 billion, and the Republika Srpska health-sector debt of over BAM 1 billion. The
stability of the Republika Srpska pension system also remains an issue of concern.
91. Based on its budget execution report, the Federation Government reported a
surplus of BAM 60.8 million in the first half of 2017. In order to additionally affirm
its ability to service the planned expenditures, the Federation Ministry of Finance
cancelled three planned auctions of government securities of around BAM 70 million.
However, considering that the bulk of foreign and domestic debt payments, as well
as other expenditures (e.g., certain direct transfers), are due in the second half of the
year, maintaining budget stability could be a significant challenge for the Federation
Government, especially in the last quarter of the year, when most of the
expenditures are due. Fiscal pressures may also increase as a result of demands from
60,000 to 70,000 demobilized unemployed veterans for the regularization of their
status and monthly allowances at the minimum pension level of BAM 326, for
which the Government would need to provide BAM 280 million each year. Pressure
could also come from agricultural producers demanding the settlement of
outstanding subsidies and damages caused by natural disasters. There is also a
demand for a 10 per cent increase in pensions to 408,000 F ederation pensioners. As

20/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

in the Republika Srpska, maintaining the stability of the Federation pension system
remains a challenge.
92. In the first half of the year, the cantons registered a total surplus of BAM
137.2 million and hopefully halted the trend of increasing the accumulated cantonal
deficit. However, financial constraints are still evident, and they increase the
cantons’ dissatisfaction with revenue allocation (including foreign debt payment) at
the Federation level, creating political tensions a mong the cantons and between the
cantons and the Federation.
93. On 23 June, the Brcko District Assembly finally adopted the Brcko District
budget for 2017 in the amount of BAM 232.3 million, a 12.6 per cent decrease over
2016. Fiscal problems in the Brcko District result mainly from political party
disputes over budget allocations and non-transparent and fiscally irresponsible
spending.
International obligations and other issues
94. On 1 April, the Energy Community reintroduced sanctions against Bosnia and
Herzegovina, originally introduced in October 2015 but suspended in October 2016,
due to the country’s failure to follow through on its agreement to adopt a State -level
law addressing breaches of obligations arising from the Energy Community Treaty.
The outstanding obligations of Bosnia and Herzegovina are likely to feature in the
next Energy Community Ministerial Council meeting, scheduled for 14 December.
95. On 29 June, the Federation Government adopted a proposal to dismiss four
Federation members of the Management Board of the Independent System Operator
in Bosnia and Herzegovina due to the expiration of their mandates and to replace
them on a temporary, three-month basis. The proposed temporary appointments are
in contravention of the relevant legislation at the State and Federation levels and the
principle of continuity of office that guarantees the unimpeded functioning of
institutions in the case of delayed appointments.
96. Further to the Republika Srpska government’s conclusion of 16 March,
requesting that the Ministry of Transport and Communications of the Republika
Srpska initiate a review of the agreement between the Federation and the Republika
Srpska on the establishment of a joint public railway corporation as part of the
transportation corporation, concluded in 1998 under annex 9 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, the corporation has been faced with financial
constraints due to restricted financing by the Republika Srpska. That is a worrisome
trend that could pose a threat to the stability of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Public
Railway Corporation, which is the only corporation established thus far under annex
9 and is crucial for proper railway-sector coordination and harmonization.

IX. Return of refugees and displaced persons
97. Upholding the right of refugees and displaced persons to return to their
pre-war homes remains central to the full implementation of annex 7 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which requires authorities at all levels to create in
their territories the political, economic, and social conditions conducive to the
voluntary return and harmonious reintegration of refugees and displaced persons,
without preference for any particular group.
98. The continued rhetoric on the dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
Republika Srpska authorities does not contribute to a conducive environment for the
return and integration of refugees and displaced persons in that regard.

17-18886

21/23

S/2017/922

99. In addition, I remain concerned by ongoing difficulties returnees face in the
field of education in several local communities throughout the country.

X. Media developments
100. The Bosnia and Herzegovina Public Broadcasting System continued to face
challenges to its financial sustainability and political independence. Two of the three
public broadcasters have recently entered into contracts with a public electricity
company, which allows the company to collect taxes for the Public Broadcasting
System as part of citizens’ electricity bills. That is a modest step towards improving
the financial situation for those two broadcasters, and the model should be applied
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.
101. Full financial consolidation of the Public Broadcasting System will require a
permanent solution to tax collection and the serious restructuring of the entire
system. Specifically, the three broadcasters that comprise the Public Broadcasting
System should register as a joint legal entity and at a minimum joi ntly operate
finances, technical equipment and digitalization. That would allow for cost savings
and a reduction in employees (the three broadcasters currently employ some 1,500
persons).
102. Biased and politically influenced reporting plagues public broadcasting. Radio
Television Republika Srpska (RTRS), in particular, has been sanctioned by the
Communications Regulatory Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina for not complying
with the programming principles and having biased current affairs programmes.

XI. Defence matters
103. In mid-June, the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina discussed
the report on implementation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina defence review,
according to which all planned activities were proceeding without significant delay.
However, because the implementation of the new force structure is contingent upon
the activation of the NATO membership action plan, there has been no actual
concrete progress. Although the official view of the authorities is that activation of
the action plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected by the end of the year, the
lack of sufficient progress in certain areas, particularly with regard to the
registration of prospective defence property, as well as the move of the Republika
Srpska towards a declaration of military neutrality, raise questions about the
likelihood of the activation of the action plan in the near future.

XII. European Union military force
104. I welcome the conclusion of the Foreign Affairs Council of the European
Union on 16 October to continue the executive military role of the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR) under a renewed United
Nations mandate. EUFOR plays an ongoing vital role in supporting the efforts of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to maintain a safe and secure environment, which in turn
assists my Office and other international organizations in fulfilling their respective
mandates. The presence of EUFOR on the ground, including its liaison and
observation teams, remains an important contributing factor to the stability and
security of the country.

22/23

17-18886

S/2017/922

XIII. Future of the Office of the High Representative
105. The Political Directors of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council met in Sarajevo on 6 and 7 June 2017 to assess the progress in
implementing the General Framework Agreement for Peace, as well as to underline
their unequivocal commitment to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and their full support to me as the High Representative in ensuring
respect for the Framework Agreement and carrying out my mandate in accordance
with annex 10 of the Agreement and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
The Steering Board also reinforced the need to complete the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the High Representative. The
next meeting of the Steering Board is scheduled for December 2017 in Sarajevo.
106. My Office continues its fiscally responsible approach to budget planning.
Since the beginning of my mandate in March 2009, the budget of the Office of the
High Representative has been reduced by more than 53 per cent and its staff by
more than 58 per cent. Keeping in mind those significant cuts, it is important to
highlight that, given the realities of the situation on the ground and in accordance
with annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for Peace, I must remain
equipped with the budget and staff required to carry out my mandate effectively.

XIV. Reporting schedule
107. In keeping with the practice of submitting regular reports for onward
transmission to the Security Council, as required under Council resolution 1031
(1995), I herewith present my eighteenth regular report. I woul d be pleased to
provide additional information should the Secretary-General or a member of the
Security Council require it at any time. The next regular report to the Secretary General is scheduled for April 2018.

17-18886

23/23
