S/PV.9219

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9219th meeting

Tuesday, 13 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Raguttahalli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. McSwiney
Mr. Ndung’u
Ms. Curzio Vila
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2022/918)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-74639 (E)
*2274639*

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

legislation underpinning the road map is passed, rather
than taking an early recess.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in South Sudan (S/2022/918)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of South Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan; and Major General Charles Tai
Gituai, interim Chairperson of the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

13/12/2022

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/918, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan.

The graduation of the first phase of the necessary
unified forces is largely complete, with only Bentiu, in
Unity state, remaining, due to unprecedented floods in
the state. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) provided critical logistical and transport
support to that process. The second phase must now
receive urgent financial, logistical and political support
by the Government. It is essential that the ranks of
the graduating forces and their deployment plans be
finalized and implemented so that the force can begin
to serve as a truly national army. Some reports of
limited deployments of the integrated forces to hotspots
in northern parts of Warrap state and Kodok, in Upper
Nile, are encouraging.
In my recent engagements with President Kiir and
First Vice-President Riek Machar and other national
leaders, I underscored the need for consistent and
continued progress on the road map benchmarks, to
which the parties recommitted themselves just months
ago. We urge stakeholders to conceive of the road map
not as a box-ticking exercise, but rather a qualitative
process to lay the proper foundations for a stable and
democratic nation.

Mr. Haysom: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the situation in
South Sudan.

In that connection, UNMISS is mindful that legal
and technical arrangements for elections should be
finalized soon. The National Constitutional Amendment
Committee has reviewed the National Elections Act,
which is the first step in providing the legal basis for the
reconstitution of the National Elections Commission,
which will manage the electoral process. While I
commend the progress of the Committee in reviewing
the act, I note that the issue of the implementation
of quotas for women and persons with disabilities
remains unresolved. I encourage the parties to reach a
compromise on the matter so that that legislation can be
finalized at the earliest possible moment.

Since my previous briefing (see S/PV.9134), there
has been some notable progress in the implementation
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
With the adoption of essential bills, such as the
constitution-making bill, and the ratification of the road
map by the national legislature, Parliament is again
functioning. I welcome President Salva Kiir Mayardit’s
directive that parliamentarians continue working until

Further to that, I note with concern that deadlines
relating to the Political Parties Act, the Political Parties
Council, the reconstituted National Constitution
Review Commission and the establishment of the
Constitution Drafting Committee have been missed.
We consistently remind the South Sudanese that the
two-year extension should not be regarded as a holiday
break. We are concerned that delays are already having
a domino effect on subsequent key benchmarks.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings by
Mr. Haysom, Major General Gituai and Ambassador
Michel Xavier Biang, Permanent Representative of
Gabon, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to 2206 (2015),
concerning South Sudan.
I give the floor to Mr. Haysom.

2/19

22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As things stand, our position on elections remains
consistent, with the needs assessment mission having
recommended a two-phased approach. The first
phase — fulfilling legal requirements, preparing
the grounds and environment for the conduct of
elections — has yet to be completed by the parties. And
material assistance for their actual conduct should be
contemplated only upon completion of the first phase.
Accordingly, it is important that the parties receive
a unified message from the Security Council and
the international community on the criticality of the
implementation of the provisions concerning elections.
I would like to commend the Transitional
Government of National Unity for the successful
completion of the sixth Governors’ Forum, held in Juba
and supported by the United Nations. That platform
afforded government officials an opportunity to
constructively exchange views on good governance and
the relationship between the centre and the periphery.
UNMISS advocated for the inclusion of civil society
voices in the next round.
Ahead of the dry season, we are particularly
concerned by the clashes among armed militias, which
are causing displacement in northern Jonglei and Upper
Nile. We are worried about the intercommunal violence
in northern Warrap and ongoing cattle-raiding and
migration related conflicts in the Equatorias. On the
margins of the Governors’ Forum, I met several of the
governors to encourage dialogue and the development
of mutually agreed arrangements towards addressing
those challenges.
The security situation in Upper Nile State continues
to be a particular concern and has the potential to
further deteriorate. This follows a year-long fracturing
of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-Army in
Opposition (SPLA-IO) and the splintering of the KitGwang group, which has manifested in clashes along
the strategically important Nile River corridor. Violence
in the area has taken on an ethnic dimension, and I
condemn the human rights violations and abuses that
have included killings, conflict-related sexual violence,
pillaging and large-scale displacements. Thousands of
civilians have fled towards the UNMISS temporary
operating base at Kodok and to the protection of
civilians site in Malakal, which is already congested
beyond its capacity. UNMISS is coordinating with
humanitarian partners on the ground to accommodate
new arrivals and is engaging politically at the state

S/PV.9219

and national levels to bring the needed attention to the
conflict and encourage a resolution.
UNMISS convened a meeting of international
partners on 2 December to respond to the ongoing
violence and issued a public statement calling for the
Government to intervene while urging the multiple
protagonists to cease clashes and desist from any further
human rights violations. We have warned that credible
elections cannot take place in such an environment, and
that there will be consequences for those promoting
the conflict.
Here, I must flag our concern at the militarization
of the Nile River. UNMISS is calling on all actors to
respect this national asset as a highway for humanitarian
assistance and sustainable economic development. Our
hope is to deter actors from extortion and abuse along
this corridor.
On a related note, I would draw the Council’s
attention to the funding constraints of the Ceasefire
and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism, established by the peace
agreement and which is now needed to investigate the
violence in Upper Nile.
We also express concern at the pause in the
Sant’Egidio process leading the engagement with
holdout non-signatory groups. We urge all parties to
embrace dialogue to advance their interests.
We welcome the intended visit of His Holiness the
Pope to South Sudan in the first week of February in the
hopes that it will consolidate peace and understanding
between the South Sudanese political leadership.
Tensions will continue to simmer and intensify as
the electoral date draws closer. UNMISS will remain
steadfast in prioritizing the protection of civilians in all
aspects of our mandated tasks — whether responding
to pressing protection needs, like subnational violence,
or supporting a broader peace to take root, one that is
underpinned by institutions of justice, human rights
and accountability. These efforts will go a long way to
support an expansion of civic and political space and
a culture of non-violent debate and dispute resolution.
UNMISS is working in a whole-of-Mission
approach towards those objectives. This includes
support to civil society, academia and political parties
generally, while specifically exploring their roles
in supporting the constitution-making and electoral
processes. Simultaneously, we are conducting intensive

22-746393/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

key leadership engagements to encourage the political
resolution of intercommunal conflicts, by deploying
civilian-military teams to temporary operating bases.
These efforts have contributed to the overall reduction
in the number of civilian casualties, year-on-year.
We continue our efforts to address sexual and
gender-based violence. In 2022, the United Nations
police has supported over 36 police-community
relations committees, focusing inter alia on sexual and
gender-based violence. In supporting national-level
efforts, UNMISS joins the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict in encouraging the Transitional Government
of National Unity to fully implement the 2014 Joint
Communiqué of the Government of South Sudan and
the United Nations on Addressing Conflict-Related
Sexual Violence, which contains clear and time-bound
commitments to tackle conflict-related sexual violence.
We are working closely with international stakeholders
to launch community violence reduction projects in
areas of relative calm that will support ex-combatants
and communities to access alternative livelihoods.
UNMISS continues to report routinely on the
human rights situation in South Sudan. This year we
have released five public reports on violence against
civilians. In parallel, we welcome the activation of
various investigation committees on subnational
violence by the Government of National Unity,
but I urge these bodies to share their findings and
recommendations publicly. This would demonstrate
the Government’s commitment to accountability for
perpetrators, justice for survivors and a pathway to
reconciliation for all communities.
The worsening humanitarian crisis in South Sudan
is a reminder of the imperative for the parties to deliver
on their commitments in the peace agreement. Next
year’s projections estimate that 9.4 million people will
need humanitarian and protection assistance. This is
an alarming figure for a country of roughly 12 million
people. The situation is exacerbated by flooding and
localized drought. While humanitarian personnel are
working tirelessly to offer shelter, health care, food,
water, sanitation and other support, needs continue to
outstrip the resources to assist. Humanitarians continue
to give their lives in service, with nine personnel killed
on duty in 2022. We urge partners to continue to
respond generously to the humanitarian response plan.
Let me underscore that partnerships continue to
underpin the overall strategy of this Mission, particularly
4/19

13/12/2022

with multilateral institutions of the region. UNMISS is
working with the African Union, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and the reconstituted Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission in a trilateral
task force to support the permanent constitution-making
and electoral processes. We have worked closely with
these and other partners in Juba, such as the Troika
and the European Union, in good offices and conflict
prevention efforts. I want to thank the Government
of South Sudan for their strong support to the new
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework, which guides a three-year partnership
towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Based on national priorities, it recognizes that there can
be no lasting peace without sustainable development
and there can be no sustainable development without
peace in South Sudan.
In conclusion, we hold the view that the road
map is a second mortgage on the Revitalized Peace
Agreement, one which must be repaid in good faith and
within the stipulated time frames. As moral guarantors
and partners of that agreement, our collective task
is to ensure that the parties have the best possible
international support in order to help them fulfil their
commitment to the people of South Sudan. I wish to
thank the Council for its continued support towards
that goal.
The President: I thank Mr. Haysom for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Biang.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): In my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015),
concerning South Sudan, I have the honour to inform
the members of the Security Council of developments
since my predecessor’s last briefing to the Council, on
15 December 2021 (see S/PV.8931). In my statement, I
will provide a brief overview of developments in the
Committee since the beginning of 2022.
With regard to the appointment of the Panel of
Experts, following the consensus reached on the
proposed list of experts pursuant to resolution 2577
(2021), the Secretary-General appointed the five experts
to the Panel on 20 January. On 22 June, the SecretaryGeneral reappointed the same five experts pursuant to
resolution 2633 (2022).
To date, the Committee has met six times in
informal consultations.
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

On 14 February, the Committee heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
on the Panel’s workplan for the mandate renewed by
resolution 2577 (2021).
On 22 April, the Committee heard a presentation
by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the
final report of the Panel (see S/2022/359), submitted
pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 2577 (2021), and
considered the recommendations contained therein.
On 22 June, at a briefing for Member States, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of the
Panel of Experts on the final report of the Panel, submitted
pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 2577 (2021).
On 1 July, the Committee was briefed by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict.
On 17 August, the Committee heard a presentation
by the Coordinator of the Group of Experts on the
Group’s workplan for the mandate renewed by resolution
2633 (2022).
On 18 November, the Committee heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts
on the Panel’s progress report, submitted pursuant to
paragraph 18 of resolution 2633 (2022), and considered
the recommendations contained therein.
Since the beginning of 2022, the Committee has
received two requests for exemptions to the arms
embargo, both of which have been granted. In addition,
three requests for exemptions to the travel ban and
assets freeze have been received, all of which have
been granted.
Finally, I would like to thank Member States,
including those neighbouring South Sudan, for
their engagement with the Committee and their
participation in the Committee’s meetings this year.
I encourage Member States to continue to strengthen
their cooperation with the Panel of Experts and
the Committee.
The President: I thank Mr. Biang for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Gituai.
Mr. Gituai: It is my pleasure to brief the Security
Council today, just over nine months since I last briefed
the Council (see S/PV.8987). I would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Council for the invitation,
expressed in resolution 2633 (2022), adopted on 26 May
2022, to

S/PV.9219

“share relevant information with the Council,
as appropriate, on its assessment of the parties’
implementation of the Revitalised Agreement,
adherence to the [Agreement on Cessation
of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and
Humanitarian Access], and the facilitation of
unhindered and secure humanitarian access”
(resolution 2633 (2022), paragraph 23).
Furthermore, article 7.9 of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan mandates us to report to the
Council every three months.
The reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (R-JMEC) is the official oversight body
mandated to monitor, evaluate and report on the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement. R-JMEC
oversees the mandate and tasks of the Revitalized
Transitional Government of National Unity, including
adherence by the parties to the agreed timelines and
implementation schedule. R-JMEC comprises 43
members, per article 7.2, including the parties to
the agreement, other South Sudanese stakeholders,
regional guarantors, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), member countries of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union (AU), the People’s Republic of China
and the troika — the United States, the United Kingdom
and Norway — all of which participate in the delivery
of our mandate.
My briefing to the Council will focus on the
key milestones achieved in the implementation of
the Revitalized Peace Agreement since my most
recent briefing in March and critical pending tasks.
I will also highlight challenges and conclude with
my recommendations.
As reported to the Council in March, due to the
slow progress of the implementation of the Revitalized
Peace Agreement, R-JMEC urged the Revitalized
Transitional Government to prepare a road map,
including its strategy for implementing the Agreement’s
critical outstanding tasks.
The Revitalized Transitional Government duly
developed a road map setting out the path to peaceful and
democratic elections. The road map, entitled “Agreement
on the Road Map to a Peaceful and Democratic end to
the Transitional Period of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan”, has been endorsed by the R-JMEC and

22-746395/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

ratified by the reconstituted Transitional National
Legislative Assembly in accordance with article 8.4
of the Revitalized Peace Agreement. This detailed
document, developed and owned by the parties to the
Agreement themselves, contains a wide range of critical
tasks and timelines, which, if implemented fully in
letter and spirit, would ensure the conduct of peaceful
and credible democratic elections in December 2024.
I will now give a chapter-by-chapter update on
progress. On governance, the reconstituted Transitional
National Legislative Assembly passed the following
bills: the South Sudan people’s defence force bill, the
wildlife service bill, the national police service bill, the
political parties bill and the constitution-making process
bill. Other bills, such as the national prisons service bill
and the civic defence service bill, are being processed
by the Transitional National Legislative Assembly.
In addition, the National Constitutional Amendment
Committee reviewed and drafted several amendments
to the key priority legislation, including the National
Audit Chamber Act, the Public Finance Management
and Accountability Act, the Petroleum Act, the
Petroleum Revenue Management Act, the National
Election Act and the Anti-Corruption Commission
Act. It is currently reviewing the National Revenue
Authority Act, the Bank of South Sudan Act and the
Banking Act.
The outstanding governance tasks required by
chapter I include the judicial reforms in article 1.17,
the completion of the reforms of national institutions
and commissions, listed in article 1.19, and the
reconstitution of the Political Parties Council, as well
as the amendment of the National Election Act and the
reconstitution of the National Elections Commission,
in article 1.20.
On the permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements, the Revitalized Transitional
Government resolved the impasse over the unified
command structure, including the appointment of
unified commanders in April 2022. Furthermore,
approximately 49,000 of the 53,000 necessary unified
forces of phase one have been graduated. However,
phase two of the unification of forces, which will
complete the graduation of the necessary unified forces,
has not yet begun and is overdue.
Insecurity persists in some parts of South Sudan. As
highlighted in our recent joint statement by R-JMEC,
UNMISS, the AU Mission in South Sudan, IGAD and
6/19

13/12/2022

some members of the international community, R-JMEC
is deeply concerned over the escalating violence in
both Upper Nile and Jonglei states, with innocent lives
being lost, thousands displaced and livelihoods and
property destroyed. If not addressed urgently, the wider
ramifications of such violence could destabilize the
ongoing implementation of the peace agreement. It is
important that the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
(CTSAMVM), which reports to the RJMEC, be given
the necessary resources to investigate and evaluate
such incidents of violence.
There
are
critical
transitional
securityarrangements tasks that have not yet been completed,
including the funding and operationalization of
Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration
Commission programmes, as well as the strategic
defence and security review, which is critical for
security sector reforms.
With regard to humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction, some humanitarian corridors remain
open and continue to facilitate the free movement of
goods, services and people across borders, including the
voluntary return of more than 600,000 people since 2018.
However, various factors have exacerbated the already
dire humanitarian situation in the country, including
prolonged subnational violence, widespread floods,
food insecurity, reduced funding and humanitarian
access, and lack of basic services. Furthermore, the
establishment of the Special Reconstruction Fund, in
article 3.2 of the Agreement, a critical coordinating
mechanism for recovery and development efforts, is
long overdue.
As for resource, economic and financial
management, it is encouraging to note that the
Revitalized Transitional Government has initiated
reforms in public financial management, and relevant
banking and resource management laws are being
reviewed. Furthermore, policy reviews and the
management of natural resources, agricultural policies,
strategies and programmes are under way. However,
the comprehensive policy for the use and management
of the country’s water bodies, including but not limited
to the River Nile, which was prioritized in the road
map, has yet to be developed.
On transitional justice, the Revitalized Transitional
Government conducted public consultations to help
guide the legislation for the establishment of the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(CTRH). The drafting of the CTRH bill and the
Compensation and Reparation Authority bill is ongoing.
On the Hybrid Court for South Sudan, the responsibility
for its establishment lies with the African Union
Commission in collaboration with the Revitalized
Transitional Government, and it remains pending.
The making of the permanent constitution is critical
for guiding the conduct of elections at the end of the
transitional period, and some progress has been made
in this regard. On 24 October 2022, the reconstituted
Transitional National Legislature passed the 2022
Constitution-making Process bill, but it has yet to be
presented to the President for his signature. Once signed
into law, the Revitalized Transitional Government is
expected to reconstitute and appoint all the institutions
essential for the making of the permanent constitution.
During the road map phase, it is critical that the
Revitalized Transitional Government provide an
enabling environment for elections, including the
opening and preserving of civic and political space for
all in order to build confidence and participation in
the process and expedite implementation of all critical
outstanding tasks.
All actors — parties and stakeholders alike,
including partners and friends of South Sudan — need
to focus more on facilitating progress. To achieve
this, it is necessary to continue building trust among
the parties, enhance the capacity of implementers and
address subnational violence and the dire humanitarian
situation. Furthermore, the RJMEC, and the CTSAMVM
in particular, face significant operational challenges
following the withdrawal of United States funding.
I would like to close my statement with the
following recommendations to the Security Council.
The Council should increase its engagements with
the Revitalized Transitional Government to adhere
to the road-map timelines and prioritize their
implementation through the provision of predictable,
timely and adequate funding for all tasks. It should
urge Member States to provide political, technical
and logistical support to the Revitalized Transitional
Government for the implementation of the priority
areas of the road map, including the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, the
permanent constitution-making process and elections.
It should also encourage the Revitalized Transitional
Government to ensure that civic and political space are
guaranteed and protected throughout the country.

S/PV.9219

The Council should also appeal to the Revitalized
Transitional Government to urgently address the root
causes of intercommunal violence and insecurity in the
country, especially in Upper Nile and Jonglei States, and
it should further appeal to the Revitalized Transitional
Government to establish and operationalize, in
collaboration with and with the support of international
partners and friends of South Sudan, the Special
Reconstruction Fund in order to pave the way for the
mobilization of resources for post-conflict recovery
and reconstruction. It should also reach out to Member
States to consider political, logistical and financial
support for the monitoring and oversight institutions,
namely, the RJMEC and the CTSAMVM, to enhance
their operational capabilities.
Finally, I would like to appeal to the Council to
remain seized of the peace process in South Sudan
and consider undertaking regular visits to the country
as a show of solidarity. The IGAD and the AU have
responded very positively to the RJMEC’s recent
appeals for enhanced engagement with South Sudan.
The importance of consolidating our efforts, speaking
with one voice, bringing our collective leverage to bear
and pushing for timely implementation of the road map
cannot be overemphasized. For the road map to be
implemented in letter and spirit within the stipulated
timeline, the full support of the Security Council will
be of great importance, as the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of
South Sudan continues to offer the best opportunity of
lasting peace in South Sudan.
The President: I thank Mr. Gituai for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Haysom and
Ambassador Gituai for their briefings today.
(spoke in French)
We thank Ambassador Biang for his update
on the activities and programme of work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
(spoke in English)
The United States expresses its gratitude to the
leadership of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) and to the women and men of the Mission
and the police- and troop-contributing countries who

22-746397/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

serve at great personal risk to protect civilians in South
Sudan and mitigate conflict in many volatile areas.
South Sudan’s transitional leaders must deliver the
result they committed to in the peace agreement and
address such immediate issues as the ongoing violence
in Upper Nile State and the dire humanitarian situation
we just heard about from Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Haysom and Ambassador Gituai.
We are gravely concerned at the escalating
subnational and intercommunal violence, including in
Upper Nile and Jonglei States, which reportedly killed an
estimated 500 civilians and displaced another 15,000 in
Upper Nile State alone. It is abundantly clear that South
Sudan’s leaders need to resolve this crisis. We urgently
call on these leaders to act now and end the violence.
We also urgently call on UNMISS to proactively deploy
peacekeepers in hot spots in keeping with its mandate
in order to protect civilians who are under the threat of
violence. Time is of the essence to prevent any further
loss of life. Any attempt to obstruct the Mission from
providing life-saving work is simply unacceptable.
We are deeply disturbed by recent reports of human
rights violations and abuses by Government and allied
forces, particularly in Unity, Upper Nile and Jonglei
States. We have heard about killings, abductions
and sexual violence, including, as we have tragically
heard, the rape and gang rape of girls as young as
eight years old. We strongly condemn all forms of
sexual and gender-based violence in conflict, which
disproportionately affects women and girls, and we
call for immediate accountability. Given the gravity of
those crimes, we urge the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) to
facilitate a briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as
mandated in resolution 2633 (2022).
The humanitarian situation continues to worsen
each year, with 9.4 million people in need of aid. We
urgently call on South Sudanese officials to allow and
facilitate the safe access and delivery of humanitarian
assistance in South Sudan. We strongly encourage the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan to work closely
with humanitarian workers to facilitate the provision of
essential services and protection to civilians in need.
On the political situation, we reiterate our
disappointment with the decision of South Sudan’s
leaders to extend the transitional period for another
two years, despite failing over the past four years to
8/19

13/12/2022

deliver fully on the commitments they made in 2018
in the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Each missed
implementation benchmark further calls into question
the political commitment of South Sudan’s transitional
leaders. We urge those leaders to meaningfully engage
with civil society and other Agreement stakeholders in
order to make the transition to a more inclusive process.
It is critical that the region, through the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union (AU), play an active role in
holding South Sudan’s transitional leaders to the
commitments they have made. We therefore call
on IGAD, the AU and the international community
to press the transitional Government to implement
critical reforms to establish Government institutions,
implement economic and public financial management
reforms, protect human rights and maintain security.
With respect to the sanctions regime, we continue
to reiterate that the arms embargo does not prevent
the South Sudanese Government from obtaining the
military equipment needed for defence, and neither does
it impede its ability to undertake critical security sector
reform. To the contrary, the arms embargo in South
Sudan is carefully tailored to facilitate the Government’s
access to the weapons necessary to provide security for
its citizens. There is a clear exemption procedure that
the South Sudanese Government can follow to secure
swift approval for any necessary supplies. Furthermore,
the provision of non-lethal military equipment for
humanitarian or protective use requires only advance
notification to the Committee.
The United States remains committed to the cause
of peace and to the people of South Sudan.
Mrs. Aguiar Barboza (Brazil): Let me begin by
thanking Special Representative Haysom, Ambassador
Biang and Major General Gituai for their briefings.
I also welcome the delegation of South Sudan to
this meeting.
We join the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in calling upon South Sudan’s transitional
Government and the parties to the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan to engage in a constructive
dialogue and address the implementation of the
early benchmarks of the road map for a peaceful and
democratic end to the transitional period.
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We encourage inclusive negotiations among the
parties, with the participation of women and persons
with disabilities, focusing on the reconstitution of the
Political Parties Council and the National Elections
Commission. We acknowledge the importance of and the
need to convene credible elections within the foreseen
timelines. A new two-year window of opportunity
appears to be more than sufficient to ensure that the
long-awaited elections are held.
Brazil takes note with appreciation the support
provided by the African Union and IGAD for the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement.
In particular, we acknowledge the Community
of Sant’Egidio for its relevant involvement with
non-signatory groups through the peace process.
We also commend the continued graduation of the
necessary unified forces. The unification of the armed
forces is a vital pillar of South Sudan’s institutional
development. We are hopeful that the necessary unified
forces will soon become a symbol of national unity.
We are concerned about the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan, as food insecurity levels remain
alarmingly high. As Special Representative Haysom
previously stated, more than 80 per cent of the population
is in need of humanitarian assistance. We commend the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) and
all the partners that have provided relief during these
difficult times. The safety of humanitarian workers
is also worrisome, and we call upon the transitional
Government to redouble its efforts to address that issue.
In conclusion, we underscore Brazil’s support
for UNMISS. The Mission has remained crucial for
providing protection to civilians in conflict-affected
areas and for assisting internally displaced persons
fleeing grim humanitarian conditions and human rights
violations. It remains critical to a peaceful transitional
order in South Sudan.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative Haysom and our briefers for their
updates, in particular Major General Gituai. I welcome
the update from the Permanent Representative
of Gabon in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan. I also welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of South
Sudan in our meeting today.
I will make three broad points.

S/PV.9219

First, four months have now passed since the
Government of South Sudan announced a two-year
extension and subsequent road map for implementing
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. Progress
remains woefully slow. The United Kingdom welcomes
the passing of the constitution-making bill, as well
as the continued graduation of the necessary unified
forces. Such progress is long overdue, and we urge
the Government to capitalize on that momentum and
meet the remaining benchmarks within their agreed
timelines. That is essential in order for free and fair
elections to be held before the end of the agreement.
Secondly, the need for Government action to protect
its civilians is no clearer than in Upper Nile state, where
the conflict has resulted in the deaths of hundreds of
civilians, as we heard. The United Kingdom condemns
those attacks on civilians. We are gravely concerned
by the potential implications of the conflict on the
already severely overcrowded protection of civilians
site in Malakal, as well as on wider peace in South
Sudan. We call on the Government to protect civilians
and create the conditions for an inclusive dialogue
to stop the violence. Military intervention must not
aggravate existing tensions or pose additional risks to
civilians. We also reiterate our call for the Government
of South Sudan to immediately remove obstructions
and address the violence against humanitarian workers
and civilians.
Thirdly, the situation in Upper Nile and the rising
levels of insecurity across South Sudan require an
urgent response from the international community to
help save lives. The United Kingdom commends the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan for its efforts to
provide protection to civilians and for its coordination
with South Sudan. A coherent, whole-of-United Nations
approach across humanitarian, development and peace
priorities is needed. We endorse the Secretary-General’s
encouragement for the Government and partners to
apply a similar endeavour.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains
committed to the South Sudanese people’s quest for
peace, prosperity and democracy. We once again call
on the leadership to deliver real change for its people.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his
briefing on the developing situation in South Sudan.
We listened to the briefings by the interim Chairperson

22-746399/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, Ambassador Charles Tai Gituai, and
the Permanent Representative of Gabon to the United
Nations, Michel Biang, in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan. We also welcome the
Permanent Representative of South Sudan, Akuei Bona
Malwal, to today’s meeting.
The Russian Federation fully supports the
international efforts to stabilize the situation in South
Sudan and strengthen peace and security in that country.
Over the past few months, South Sudan has achieved
further success in implementing the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. The decision to extend the
transition period in the country was endorsed by key
State institutions, and the road map adopted in August
was incorporated into the Transitional Constitution.
After the first contingent of the unified armed forces
arrived at the end of August, the South Sudanese
army was joined by new recruits from Jonglei, Bahr
el-Ghazal, Unity and Upper Nile states. The National
Parliament adopted several important bills, including
the bill on the drafting of the country’s constitution and
its national police.
We call on the South Sudanese parties to work
together to implement the road map. All entities
operating within the context of the peace agreement,
including the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, must have the necessary
funding. We welcome South Sudan’s role in the region
and the country’s readiness, despite its own issues, to
help resolve the situation in the neighbouring country
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo through its
participation in the East African Community regional
force. The security situation on the periphery remains
difficult. Intercommunal violence continues unabated.
We are concerned in particular about the deteriorating
situation in Upper Nile state due to the ongoing clashes
among the wings of the Kit-Gwang faction. Meanwhile,
we note the Government’s response to those challenges,
including the establishment of two commissions of
inquiry into high-profile incidents in Mayom and
northern Tonj counties.
We strongly condemn all violations of the
Revitalized Peace Agreement and acts of violence
against civilians, including humanitarian workers in
South Sudan. We commend the mediation efforts of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
10/19

13/12/2022

on Development. We also note the work carried out in
recent months by the Community of Sant’Egidio, which
has succeeded in bringing together the two factions of
the South Sudan Opposition Movements Alliance. We
hope that the negotiations held under the auspices of
the Community of Sant’Egidio will continue. We would
also like to commend the efforts of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and Mr. Haysom to mobilize
support for the peace process in South Sudan.
We believe that further progress in the peace process
and the successful holding of the general elections
scheduled for 2025 will be impossible without effective
armed forces. The unified forces that are being formed
at the moment need international support now more
than ever before. In order to facilitate that process,
we believe that considering ways to further ease the
sanctions regime imposed on the Republic of South
Sudan would be justified. We call on our colleagues in
the Security Council to heed the legitimate wishes of
Juba, which are supported by its African neighbours in
the spirit of solidarity.
Ms. Curzio Vila (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Special Representative Haysom, the Permanent
Representative of Gabon and interim Chairperson Tai
Gituai for their briefings. I also welcome the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan to today’s meeting.
Given that this will be the last time during its current
term that Mexico will participate in a meeting on South
Sudan as an elected member of the Security Council, I
would like to make the following observations.
First, with regard to the political situation, the lack
of progress in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan over the past two years has
resulted in the extension of the transition period.
We echo the appeal made by the United Nations, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union to the Government of South Sudan to
move forward with the process in an inclusive manner
and without delay. We will follow with interest the
work of the trilateral working group in its mandate to
support the Government in preparing for elections and
in the constitution-drafting process.
We welcome the fact that some progress was made
during the reporting period in the area of legislation.
We also note the graduation of the necessary unified
forces and hope that the Government can take
advantage of that situation to ensure that the integration
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and deployment of those forces are carried out in full
compliance with international human rights standards
and in the best interests of the people of South Sudan.
Secondly, with regard to the human rights and
security situations, we have followed with deep concern
the outbreak of violence in Unity, Jonglei, Upper Nile
and Central Equatoria states, among others, which
has led to the displacement of hundreds of thousands
of people. Human rights violations have also been
reported, including serious violations against children.
We would like to underscore in particular the
regrettable increase in the number of cases of sexual
and gender-based violence. We condemn in the
strongest terms rape and sexual assault as a method
of warfare. Impunity with regard to those acts is
alarming, and we urge the authorities of South Sudan to
ensure that alleged perpetrators of rape do not occupy
positions of power and that they provide the necessary
compensation and protection to victims. We recall that
that is a sanctions-designation criterion. We deplore the
fact that that the Committee has not met to discuss that
serious issue.
The protection of civilians and the situation in the
camps for internally displaced persons are priorities for
Mexico. We urgently call on the authorities of South
Sudan to fully assume their primary responsibility
for the protection of civilians. As long as progress is
not made to resolve deep-seated differences, tensions
will resurface, such as the recent tensions in states on
the border with Abyei. We note the reconstitution of
the Committee on the Final Status of Abyei and look
forward to progress in that area, in line with the efforts
of the African Union.
Thirdly, violence has exacerbated the dire
humanitarian situation. As we heard, 8.9 million
people are in need of assistance, and 75 per cent of the
population suffers from severe food insecurity. In that
complex situation, attacks on humanitarian workers
are unacceptable. We call on the Government of South
Sudan to take urgent action to remove bureaucratic
impediments and ensure the safety of humanitarian
workers. We also commend the initiatives and efforts
to create safe spaces, such as the initiative that
Special Representative Haysom mentioned to create
a humanitarian corridor along the Nile in order to
facilitate mobility and the provision of basic services.
Fourthly, with regard to the climate situation, South
Sudan is one of the clearest examples of the tragic

S/PV.9219

impact of climate change. The destruction caused by
flooding has been followed by another relentless rainy
season. It is crucial to build capacity to cope with
such phenomena, as they are likely to continue. In that
regard, we welcome the new United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework as critical to the
adoption of a long-term approach to addressing the
causes of instability and building resilience.
I conclude by acknowledging the important work in
South Sudan being done by the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan and Special Representative Haysom,
as well as the United Nations country team and the
humanitarian community. We hope that the extension
will be leveraged in the transition phase to stabilize the
security situation and provide encouragement to and
protection for the people of South Sudan.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Special Representative
Nicholas Haysom and the representative of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for their
briefings, and welcome the representative of South
Sudan to today’s meeting.
I would like to make three points. First, the 2024
elections have set a political horizon for South Sudan. In
order to meet the magnitude of the existing challenges
before the election period, the road map adopted in
August must be immediately and fully implemented.
That includes allocating the necessary budgetary
resources and defining the legislative and constitutional
framework, as well as institution-building, starting
with the re-establishment of the National Elections
Commission and the Political Parties Council.
I welcome the start of the process of the drafting
of South Sudan’s future Constitution. It is essential
to create conditions conducive to the participation of
civil society in order to ensure the credibility of the
elections. In addition, the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) is mandated to support South
Sudan in preparing for the elections. I welcome the
role of the regional actors, whose cooperation with the
United Nations is crucial.
Secondly, UNMISS is currently the main force
ensuring the protection of the population, and we are
deeply concerned about the deteriorating security and
humanitarian situation. Peacekeepers all too often have
to intervene to put an end to the violence being fuelled
by national political rivalries. The clashes in Upper
Nile state are particularly alarming. UNMISS is also

22-7463911/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

13/12/2022

protecting the population in Bentiu from a humanitarian
disaster in the face of the ongoing floods.

for delivery. We also welcome the engagement of the
Peacebuilding Commission in South Sudan.

In the light of the foregoing, we must recognize the
reality that the protection of civilians will remain at the
heart of the UNMISS mandate as long as South Sudan’s
security forces are not fulfilling that role and have not
earned the population’s trust. In that regard, we are
encouraged by the decision to deploy the necessary
unified forces in Upper Nile and Warrap. There is an
urgent need to continue the efforts to integrate the
combatants, and to equip, pay and deploy them on
the basis of clear missions. We must also accelerate
the ongoing efforts to limit the security forces’
responsibilities and to reduce their numbers.

As the Secretary-General raised in his report
(S/2022/918), we are concerned about some benchmarks
that have already been missed, including the
reconstitution of the Political Parties Council and the
National Elections Commission, as that could result in
leaders slipping back into the status quo. Similarly, focus
must be placed on conducting the necessary security
sector reforms. We welcome the completion of the
graduation of the necessary unified forces. However, a
clear plan is now required for their deployment in order
to strengthen the security response in South Sudan. We
commend the constitution-making process bill passed
in October and hope it will provide a legal framework
to guide the development of a permanent constitution.

We hear South Sudan’s calls for more capacitybuilding. Enabling the authorities to independently
discharge their duties is of course essential in view of
the UNMISS transition. Many tasks that are carried
out by UNMISS and the United Nations country team
already support that process.
Ensuring further engagement on the part of UNMISS
will require the political will of the authorities, both
in Juba and at the local level. Significant progress has
been made over the past year on the measures defined
in resolution 2567 (2021), including on the integration
of combatants, the agreement on unified command and
the easing of the restrictions on movement of UNMISS,
which must continue. The redeployment of the forces
is the next major step that can be taken between now
and the renewal of the UNMISS mandate. Any United
Nations support will, in any event, be conditional on
the progress achieved in security sector reform and on
ensuring respect for human rights.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I would like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his briefing, and we support the crucial
work of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). We also thank the Ambassador of Gabon
for his briefing and Major General Gituai for his
update. We also welcome the Permanent Representative
of South Sudan to today’s meeting. Allow me to focus
my statement on three key areas.
First, following the adoption of the road map, South
Sudan parties are now presented with an opportunity to
achieve real gains in preparing the country for elections
in 2024. However, in order to be more effective, the
road map must be implemented in an inclusive manner,
include civil society and respect the agreed timelines
12/19

Secondly, Albania condemns the ongoing violence
in Upper Nile state and in northern Jonglei. We call
for the hostilities to cease immediately in order to
prevent further loss of lives. We commend UNMISS
for its role and the physical protection provided to those
seeking shelter at the Malakal protection-of-civilians
site, as they are putting pressure on already stretched
capacities. However, we recall that the Government
of South Sudan bears the responsibility to protect
civilians, and we urge them to take action and respond
to the situation.
Human rights violations, including sexual and
gender-based violence, have continued to worsen and
are even being used as a weapon of war by all sides.
Albania strongly condemns that and urges the South
Sudanese leaders to investigate all reports and hold
perpetrators to account, including officials accused of
overseeing systematic gang rapes. We also join other
Security Council members in urging the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan to facilitate a briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, as mandated in
resolution 2633 (2022).
Thirdly,
the
humanitarian
situation
has,
concerningly, taken a heavy toll, owing to the outbreak
of violence, food insecurity and climate shocks. South
Sudan remains one of the most dangerous places for
humanitarian actors. We urge the Government and
the local authorities to guarantee full and unimpeded
humanitarian access, protect humanitarian workers and
remove bureaucratic hurdles in order to ensure support
can reach those in need. We commend the efforts of
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

UNMISS to safeguard humanitarian access and the
increased patrols to deter violence.
In conclusion, the next two years are crucial for
South Sudan’s leaders to make gains on the electoral
and constitutional processes, to set the country on the
path towards credible and democratic elections. We call
on neighbouring States, regional organizations and the
international community to continue to monitor the
peace agreement and ensure that South Sudan finalizes
the required security sector reform and passes the
necessary legislation.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Kenya
and Ghana.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Nicholas Haysom; His Excellency Michel
Biang, Permanent Representative of Gabon and
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan; and
Major General Charles Tai Gituai, interim Chairperson
of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, for their briefings. I also welcome the
participation of our brother, Ambassador Akuei Bona
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan, in
today’s meeting.
The A3 has always stood in solidarity with the
people of South Sudan, whose patience and resilience
have been tested and overstretched by political
uncertainty, conflict and economic hardship. We
remain fully cognizant of their sobering history and
their unrelenting quest to overcome the formidable
security, political and socioeconomic challenges they
face. Our statement will focus on four issues: first, the
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan; secondly, the transitional security arrangements;
thirdly, the humanitarian and economic situation; and
fourthly, the activities of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS).
The A3 welcomes the steady progress made by the
South Sudanese parties in the implementation of the
Revitalized Peace Agreement. We welcome the decisions
by the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission (R-JEMEC) and the reconstituted
Transitional National Legislative Assembly endorsing
the 24-month road map for the peaceful and democratic
end of the transition period. The consensus by the

S/PV.9219

parties on the equitable allocation of positions in the
management of 17 national commissions and the
passing of the constitution-making process bill of 2022
are also commendable.
We call on the South Sudan parties and the
Government to commit the necessary political capital
and resources to expedite the implementation of all
pending tasks within the agreed timelines. We urge
that the implementation process continue to be fully
representational of the spectrum of all South Sudanese
populations, including all regions of the country and
political affiliations, as well as women, young people
and civil society.
The A3 welcomes the decisions taken at the
forty-eighth ordinary session of the IGAD Council
of Ministers, held in Khartoum on 30 November, to
undertake a joint ministerial visit to South Sudan and
hold a biannual extraordinary IGAD ministerial meeting
in order to review the progress in the implementation
of the Revitalized Peace Agreement. That high-level
political engagement by the region is timely and critical
in supporting and shepherding the parties to fulfil their
own commitments. The A3 reiterates the call on friends
of South Sudan and international partners to provide
financial assistance for the two IGAD-supported
peace-monitoring mechanisms — the R-JMEC and
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring and Verification Mechanism — to enable
them to sustain their essential oversight role of the
implementation process.
On the transitional security arrangements, the A3
welcomes the graduation of the necessary unified forces
in various parts of the country, thereby fulfilling one of
the key provisions of the Revitalized Peace Agreement.
As we look forward to the deployment of the forces,
we emphasize that the graduation should not be an end
in itself but should mark the commencement of the
envisaged comprehensive security sector reforms in the
country. In that regard, we welcome the enactment by
Parliament of the National Wildlife Service Act of 2022
and the South Sudan National Police Service Act 2022.
We hope the ongoing review of pending security
sector legislation will be finalized expeditiously.
The continuous training and equipping of the South
Sudan security forces will enable the Government to
effectively address the worrisome trend and recurring
localized conflicts in parts of the country, including in
Upper Nile, Jonglei, Warrap and Unity states. However,
the arms embargo imposed on South Sudan, especially

22-7463913/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

in relation to training assistance and capacity-building
programmes, as well as non-lethal items and equipment,
is a significant impediment. We reiterate the call on the
Security Council to lift those unhelpful sanctions.
The criminal justice system is a useful tool for
addressing the localized intercommunal violence,
cattle raids and boundary clashes, but it cannot be a
sufficient measure. At the local level, it is important
for responsive peacebuilding activities, as well as
intercommunal peace, dialogue and reconciliation, to
be adopted to address existing grievances. We therefore
urge the parties to expedite the implementation of the
national reconciliation and healing activities as outlined
in the Revitalized Peace Agreement.
I now turn to the humanitarian and economic
situation, which remains deeply concerning. We
welcome the signing of the 2023-2025 United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework,
which aims to support the Government of South
Sudan’s vision in transitioning from humanitarian to
sustainable economic development. Whereas the A3
appreciates the continued international humanitarian
assistance provided to South Sudan, the time has come
to also pay greater attention to supporting development
interventions to address the root causes of conflicts
and insecurity. The A3 urges the Government of
South Sudan to urgently implement the economic
and financial management reforms provided for in
chapter IV of the Revitalized Peace Agreement. The
A3 deplores, and indeed condemns, all acts of violence
directed at humanitarian workers and installations.
We urge the South Sudanese Government to take the
required measures to protect humanitarian workers and
facilitate unhindered humanitarian access to all parts
of the country.
On the fourth and last point, the A3 commends
UNMISS and the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their continued commitment to the cause
of peace in South Sudan across the four currently
mandated tasks. The responsibility lies with the
Security Council to ensure that the Mission lives up
to the expectations of the South Sudanese people as a
multidimensional peace operation. The A3 believes that
UNMISS should play a greater role in facilitating the
implementation of chapter II of the Revitalized Peace
Agreement. We hope that will be achieved during the
upcoming renewal of the mandate in March.
In conclusion, Gabon, Ghana and Kenya reaffirm
their commitment to continue accompanying the
14/19

13/12/2022

people and Government of South Sudan in their quest
for lasting peace, stability and development.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom, Ambassador Biang and Ambassador Gituai for
their briefings. I welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan at today’s meeting.
The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan is crucial
for South Sudan to establish a national governance
framework and achieve peace and development. The
signatories to the Revitalized Agreement have agreed to
a road map to extend the transitional period, providing
a new opportunity for South Sudan to fully implement
the peace agreement and complete the transition.
China welcomes the positive progress registered over
the past three months in constitution-making and the
restructuring of key institutions and encourages all
actors in South Sudan to put the interests of the people
and the country first, maintain political engagement
and continue to promote the implementation of
the Revitalized Agreement in accordance with the
parameters set out in the road map.
The support of the international community is
indispensable for the peace process in South Sudan.
At the request of the African Union (AU) Peace and
Security Council, the United Nations, the AU and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
including the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (R-JMEC), formed a technical
trilateral task force on the constitution-making process
for the permanent constitution and on electoral support.
That initiative will help South Sudan implement the key
provisions of the Revitalized Agreement. At the same
time, the R-JMEC and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring and Verification
Mechanism should receive adequate and sustained
funding. After the withdrawal of a major donor,
China swiftly dispersed its annual contribution to the
Mechanism. We will continue to provide support to the
relevant monitoring bodies within our capacity.
Given the recent escalation in violence in Upper
Nile and Jonglei states and attacks by militias on camps
for internally displaced persons, the security situation
is worrisome. China urges all militias to immediately
cease violence, stop harming civilians and refrain from
militarizing major rivers. We welcome the statement
by the leaders of South Sudan urging a resolution to
the conflict and the deployment of national forces to
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the relevant regions. We encourage the Government to
continue to take measures to ease tensions and promote
national reconciliation. We also appreciate the efforts of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan to stabilize
the situation and protect civilians.
The key to improving the security situation in
South Sudan is to enhance the security capabilities
of the Government. Since September, several cohorts
of the necessary unified forces have graduated,
an achievement that deserves our recognition and
welcome. At the same time, however, we must bear
in mind that South Sudan continues to face economic
difficulties as a result with regard to equipping and
deploying the graduated necessary unified forces
units, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and security sector reform. The country
still needs the financial and technical support of the
international community.
It must be pointed out that the Security Council
sanctions against South Sudan have already been
overtaken by events. Certain sanction measures fail
to achieve their intended effect and, on the contrary,
impose limits on South Sudan’s ability to bolster
security. As we heard in the statement made on behalf
of the three African members of the Security Council,
the Council should listen carefully to South Sudan’s
call for lifting sanctions and respond positively in a
timely manner.

S/PV.9219

to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, and
I welcome the participation of the representative of
South Sudan in today’s meeting.
Today’s meeting takes place at a time during which
South Sudan is witnessing heightened intercommunal
tensions and clashes, particularly in Upper Nile state.
We express our grave concern over the continued acts
of violence, including rape, crimes, kidnapping and the
killing of civilians, which have forced thousands of
civilians to flee their homes, put their lives at risk and
face more severe conditions.
In the light of those incidents, there is an urgent
need to intensify efforts and reduce tensions and address
their root causes, including by promoting dialogue and
peaceful coexistence among communities.
Given the progress made towards the graduation of
the necessary unified forces, we look forward to the next
steps regarding their deployment, and we emphasize the
importance of building on those efforts. That includes
carrying out the necessary security reforms in order to
address the urgent security challenges in the country.
We underline the importance of ensuring women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation, as the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan moves forward.

South Sudan currently faces an increasingly dire
humanitarian crisis, with two thirds of its population
facing food insecurity and nine out of 10 states affected
by heavy rains and floods. In addition, the Ministry
of Health has declared a measles outbreak. The
international community should increase humanitarian
and economic assistance to South Sudan. China
welcomed the signing of the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework for the period
2023–2025 between the United Nations and the South
Sudan, which we believe will contribute to finding
holistic and comprehensive solutions to South Sudan’s
challenges through development efforts.

The next period also requires redoubling efforts to
accelerate the implementation of the tasks outlined in the
timeline of the road map. The success of the Revitalized
Agreement in achieving sustainable peace and economic
growth depends on curbing intercommunal violence,
completing the security arrangements and enacting
the other necessary economic and political reforms.
In that context, we further recognize the importance
of South Sudan building on recent achievements, such
as the adoption of the draft constitution-making bill
and further advances in that area, while continuing
to strengthen its cooperation with regional and
international organizations to find the appropriate
mechanisms to achieve the desired goals.

Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom, and Major
General Gituai for their briefings on the latest political,
security and humanitarian situation in South Sudan,
which my country has also been following closely. I also
thank Gabon for updating the Council on the work of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant

In reference to the statement by the three African
States members of the Security Council on the decision
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
undertake a joint ministerial visit to South Sudan and
hold biannual ministerial meetings to review progress
of the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement,
we agree that such high-level political engagement
by the region is both necessary and timely in order to

22-7463915/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

support the country’s efforts in the implementation of
that Agreement.
Exploring ways to address the worsening
humanitarian situation in the country must be
continued, especially with high levels of hunger and
food insecurity, as two thirds of the country’s population
will suffer from extreme hunger next year — which
is a matter of deep concern. We believe that the Nile
River demilitarization initiative proposed by the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) will have an
extremely important role in addressing those situations
by establishing a humanitarian corridor that will
facilitate the transport of goods and provide life-saving
services throughout the year. We stress the importance
of unhindered access to such assistance by those in
need. We also hope that the success of that initiative will
contribute to the protection of humanitarian workers,
as eight of them have been killed this year owing to
the unfortunate attacks against them, which the United
Arab Emirates strongly condemns.
On another issue, particular importance must be
attached to the repercussions of climate change, which
are very evident in South Sudan, as they lead to the
exacerbation of food insecurity and the security situation
in the country. Appropriate and sustainable solutions
must be developed to address those repercussions in
order to support stability and alleviate the humanitarian
situation in the country. In that regard, we highlight
the need to strengthen the resilience of communities
and the importance of humanitarian operations using
renewable energy, which benefits local communities
and can mitigate long-term climate-related impacts.
In conclusion, I commend the work carried
out by UNMISS under difficult and challenging
circumstances, and thank the Special Representative
for his tireless efforts.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Haysom,
for his briefing and for the hard work he and his team
are doing in an increasingly challenging environment.
We also thank Major General Gituai for his briefing
and welcome the update from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon. We also welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of South Sudan in
today’s meeting.
Like others, we are deeply concerned by the
escalating violence in Upper Nile and surrounding
areas, including in and around the city of Kodok. Let me
16/19

13/12/2022

emphasize that it is the Government’s responsibility to
protect civilians across South Sudan. It cannot choose
to look away. It is crucial that armed intervention by
state and national authorities are aimed at protecting
civilians, including children, and preventing further
violence. We call on all armed actors to immediately
cease the violence. South Sudan’s transitional leaders,
as well as the political actors and community leaders
in Jonglei and Upper Nile bear responsibility for the
violence and for ending it. We urgently call on South
Sudan’s transitional leaders to act now. The Government
must allow the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
investigate the conflict and hold those who continue to
incite and engage in violations accountable.
We commend the efforts of the humanitarian
community and UNMISS in response to the violence in
Upper Nile, including in the protection of civilians sites
in Malakal. The key question, however, is whether the
current situation is sustainable, especially considering
the limited resources and capacity of UNMISS in parts
of the state and the lack of adequate and predictable
interventions by the Government to protect civilians.
The last time we met (see S/PV.9134), Norway
supported the Government’s commitment to a road map
for the implementation of the peace agreement. Three
months later, the parties are already behind their own
timelines, including the critical task of deploying united
forces. There is also little progress on other promises
such as fighting corruption and opening up civic space.
South Sudan leaders must deliver the results they have
promised in accordance with the timelines in the road
map and do so by dedicating sufficient resources.
Finally, as this is my last meeting on South Sudan
during our current tenure in the Council, allow me to
end my statement with the following reflection. We
have on many occasions discussed the advantage of
early action and preventive diplomacy to save lives and
reduce human suffering. A key challenge to the Council
acting early has been a lack of shared understanding of
the situation. Since independence 11 years ago, South
Sudan has been caught in a cycle of broken promises,
followed by armed conflict. That cycle continues today.
Without actual commitment from the Government, there
is a real risk that the ceasefire and the peace agreement
will break down. The region played a key role in the
comprehensive peace agreement in 2005, as well as in
the subsequent agreements in 2015 and in 2018. And as
guarantors of the peace agreement, the African Union,
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
regional and international development partners, such
as my own country, should recognize that South Sudan
is again at the brink of disaster. We must use all the
tools at our disposal to prevent it. The people of South
Sudan have suffered enough.
Mr. McSwiney (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Haysom for
his insightful briefing and him and his team for their
untiring efforts in support of the people of South Sudan.
I also thank to Major General Gituai for his briefing
on the work of the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Biang for his briefing as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan.
This sanctions regime continues to play an important
role in preventing conflict and promoting peace in
South Sudan. I also wish to welcome the presence of
the Permanent Representative of South Sudan with
us today.
The implementation of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan and advancement of the transition
process are key to building peace in South Sudan. The
passing of critical bills in recent months, such as the
constitution-making bill and the national budget, have
been welcome developments. However, we remain
concerned that the extension of the transition process
became inevitable not only due to lack of preparations
but also of political will. We now need to see progress.
The people of South Sudan cannot wait any longer
to see the peace dividends that have been promised
for so long. Elections must take place as planned by
20 December 2024, and the strict deadlines of the road
map’s calendar must be met.
It is regrettable that early benchmarks have already
been missed, and we call on the Government of South
Sudan to urgently start implementing the road map.
The freedom of speech, assembly and expression
will be critically important to ensuring free, fair
and credible elections. We remain deeply concerned
about the stifling of civic space in the country and
urge the Government to urgently address that. The
implementation process of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan must be genuinely inclusive, with the meaningful
participation of women, youth, and civil society.

S/PV.9219

The graduation of the necessary unified forces is
a welcome step forward, but agreement needs to be
found on how they will be integrated into the overall
security sector under the civilian-led authorities. We
are concerned by reports of the lack of training received
by some force members, and we encourage ongoing
training, including on human rights and conflictrelated sexual violence. The reported 60 per cent
overall decrease in violent incidents against civilians
between June and September is welcome. We hope that
reduction will continue. However, we remain concerned
at ongoing levels of subnational violence, including in
Upper Nile state. That includes horrifying instances of
sexual and gender-based violence. We again call for the
urgent implementation of the 2014 joint communiqué
on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence
to protect women and girls, to hold perpetrators
accountable and to ensure services for survivors.
The first Irish ministerial visit to South Sudan in
early September bore witness to the impact of conflict
and climate change on individuals and communities.
A fourth year of climate change-induced flooding has
directly impacted over 1 million people. Combined with
insecurity, that is fuelling a further deterioration in the
humanitarian situation and is leading to vulnerable
people being displaced multiple times.
The dangers facing humanitarian workers are also
exacerbating the situation. It is deplorable that nine
humanitarian workers have been killed so far this
year, almost double the number killed in 2021. We call
on the Government of South Sudan to create a safer
environment for aid and humanitarian workers and to
bring perpetrators of such attacks to justice.
The shocking truth is that two thirds of the South
Sudanese population is likely to face acute food
insecurity between April and July next year. That
is almost 8 million people struggling to stay alive.
That should not only sober us, but it should drive us
to seek better for the people of South Sudan. We
cannot just accept that the violence and insecurity is
so entrenched that it cannot be solved. The road map
by the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission gives us a plan to ensure a more peaceful
and prosperous future for South Sudan. What we need
now is political will to implement it.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.

22-7463917/19

S/PV.9219

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, and Major
General Charles Tai Gituai, interim Chairperson of
the reconstituted Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, for their updates on the developments
concerning the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS). I also thank the Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), Ambassador Michel Xavier Biang,
for his briefing. And I welcome the presence of the
representative of South Sudan in today’s meeting.
South Sudan witnessed noteworthy developments
during the reporting period. The parties to the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan agreed
on a road map to extend the transitional period to
February 2025. The reconstituted Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission also endorsed the road map.
The Transitional National Legislative Assembly passed
important legislation, including the constitution-making
process bill. There was also agreement on the
management positions on national commissions.
The successful graduation of the first batch of
the necessary unified forces was completed, and
their deployment plan is expected soon. The efforts
to engage non-signatory groups in the Sant’Egidio
process continued. The National Constitutional
Amendment Committee completed its review of the
National Elections Act. We believe those developments
are significant and reassuring. The engagement of the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development with the parties was an important factor
in the progress.
We hope that progress will be consolidated further
in the coming months by ensuring the inclusive
and broad-based implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement. The reconstitution of the Political Parties
Council, the Constitution Review Commission, the
Constitution Drafting Committee and the National
Elections Commission needs to be prioritized. The
effective and timely implementation of the benchmarks
of road map as well as election preparations need the
allocation of financial resources from the authorities.
The persisting incidents of violence, which result in
the killing and mass displacement of civilians, remains a
matter of concern. In that regard, the deployment of the
necessary unified forces should be expedited to ensure
security and contribute to intercommunal harmony.
18/19

13/12/2022

The humanitarian situation remains a matter of
concern. The international community, including the
United Nations, needs to step up the efforts in support
of the Government. The impediments to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance need to be removed. And
violence against humanitarian workers should be
stopped immediately.
India has been one of the largest troop-contributing
countries to UNMISS since its establishment. At
present, we have nearly 2,300 troops serving in the
country. In addition to their core mandate of protecting
civilians and medical services, the Indian contingent
in UNMISS is also contributing to the sustainable
development and welfare of the people of South Sudan.
Over the years, Indian peacekeepers have gone beyond
the call of duty by undertaking a variety of social
activities in that regard. I am glad to note that the United
Nations has consistently acknowledged the outstanding
contribution of the Indian peacekeepers in UNMISS.
In conclusion, India has long-standing relations
with the people of South Sudan. India was the first Asian
country to establish a Consulate in Juba in 2007. India
has delivered humanitarian assistance to the country
in the form of food grains and medicines, during the
pandemic and before. Our capacity-building training
programmes have been deeply appreciated by the South
Sudan Government. We will continue to support South
Sudan and its people on their journey towards securing
sustainable peace and a prosperous future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): Allow me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your presidency during this
month. My delegation stands ready to offer its support
to you and your team. In the same vein, allow me to
sincerely thank you and your delegation for the support
you have offered my country for the two years you have
served on the Security Council. We will forever be
indebted to your country.
My delegation would like to welcome and thank the
three briefers before us today — Special Representative
Haysom, Major General Charles Tai Gituai and my
colleague Ambassador Michel Biang.
My delegation takes note of the 90-day report of
the Secretary-General (S/2022/918), submitted to the
Security Council pursuant to resolution 2625 (2022),
22-74639

13/12/2022

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

which endeavoured to tackle the events that transpired
over the 90 days as of 1 September.
South Sudanese parties to the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic
of South Sudan are steadfast in its implementation,
notwithstanding the challenges they are facing given its
complexity. The 24-month extension of the transition
period started to bear results with the graduation of the
necessary unified forces. They are ready to be deployed
in due course. It has not been an easy task, especially
when the international community decided to sit on the
fence when the time for its implementation came.
The security situation in South Sudan is relatively
peaceful in the greater part of the country, especially
after the state Governments were formed and are now
taking shape in areas that were affected by subnational
conflict, such as Lakes, Warrap and Western Equatoria.
Nevertheless, Greater Upper Nile is still facing
challenges of insecurity, caused mainly by non-State
actors in Kit-Gwang factions of Simon Gatwech and
Johnson Olony. That has caused a lot of displacement,
loss of life and destruction of property. His Excellency
President Salva Kiir Mayardit, in his closing remarks
at the Governors forum last week, called for peace in
Upper Nile and promised that the Government would
remain seized of the matter.
The arms embargo, which the Council unfairly
imposed on my country, has hampered the efforts of the
Government to effectively undertake its responsibility
to secure the country from both external and internal
aggression. The communal conflicts we are witnessing
are carried out by well-armed youth. It requires betterarmed Government forces to disarm them. Externally,
South Sudan is in a volatile region, politically and
militarily, with countries in active conflicts, fragile
States and post-conflict States. Therefore, directly or
indirectly, the arms embargo compromises the security
of our country.
One of the major challenges the country is facing
is humanitarian situation, caused by both nature and
conflict. However, the impact created by nature is an

S/PV.9219

existential threat, as is well-documented in the report
of the Secretary-General. The situation is dire, and we
would like to add our voice to that of the SecretaryGeneral in calling on the international community to
come to our aid by fulfilling its pledges. On its part, the
Republic of South Sudan donated $10 million towards
the flood-mitigation effort. As much as climate change
tends to get politicized, we who are experiencing
its devastation and destruction consider it a reality
that needs to be confronted with all the tools in our
collective toolbox.
Last but not least, allow me to pay tribute to the
troop-contributing countries. Their efforts are not in
vain, and South Sudan appreciates their commitment
and service to peace and humanity.
At the same time, let me also call on the Council
to look into the question of sexual exploitation by some
in the humanitarian community against internally
displaced persons in South Sudan. Recent reports
have mentioned issues related to sexual exploitation in
Malakal and Wau civilian protection sites. Those are
deplorable acts, especially by those entrusted to protect
and safeguard those they are serving at their weakest
point. Let the law be exercised equally.
In conclusion, Mr. President, let me reiterate our
sincere appreciation to you, your delegation and your
country for your demonstration of friendship to me and
my delegation. We wish you the best of luck in your
future endeavours. To the other Council members whose
terms end this month, South Sudan valued their help
and the working relations we established with them.
Let us continue the close relations we build during their
term in the Council.
Happy Holidays and Merry Christmas.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting
so that the Council can continue its discussion on the
subject in closed consultations
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

22-7463919/19
