UNITED NATIONS

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l59 1) . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . , .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . .

1

Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/10352)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . +. . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
!
1

c

1 :

S/PV.1591

.:

I

9

;’

,

.
:’

,,

“i
. .

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
fyyures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normakly pul@hed in qukterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security CounciL The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND NINETY-FIRST

Held in New York on Monday,
Fr.es&ient: Mr. Guillermo SEVILLA SACASA (Nicaragua).

Resent:

11 October

MEETING
1971, at 4 p.m.

take the place reservedfor him in the Council chamber, on
the understanding that he will be seated at the Council
table when he wishesto speak.

The representatives of the following States:

Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,

Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America.

At the invitation of the President, Mr, L. Mojsov [Yugoslavia} too& the place reservedfor him.

3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I have
also received letters from the representatives of India and
Pakistan, in which they request permission to participate in
our debate on this item, without the right to vote. These
letters will be distniuted as documents S/l0370 and
S/10371, respectively.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 59 1)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Zambia:
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the Permanent
Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 0352).

4. In accordance with the usua! practice, and with the
consent of the Council, I shaIl invite the representatives of
India and Pakistan to take the places reserved for them in
the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will
be seated at the Counciltable when they wish to speak.

Adoption of the agenda
At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Sen (India) and
Mr. A. Shahi (Pakistan)took the placesreservedfor them.

Rze agenda was adopted.

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): Before
we continue consideration of the item on our agenda, I
should like to inform members of the Council that the
delegation of Pakistan is also a cosignatory of the letter in
document S/10364.

Complaint by Zambia
Letter dated 6 October 1971 from the Permanent Representative of Zambia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/10352)

6. I should also like to draw the attention of the Council’
to document S/10365, containing the text of the draft
resolution co-sponsored by Burundi, Sierra Leone, Samalia
and the Syrian Arab Republic, which wasintroduced at our
1590th meeting by the representative of Syria.

I. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken previously by the
Council, and with its consent, I invite the representative of
Zambia to be seated at the Council table. I also invite the
representatives of the United Republic of Tanzania, South
Africa, Kenya, Nigeria and Guinea to take the places
reserved for them in the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be seated at the Council table when
they wish to speak.

name on the list of speakers is that of the
Foreign Minister of Guinea. I invite him to be seated at the
Council table and to make his statement.
7. The fmt

8. Mr. CAMARA (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, I should like to express our satisfaction at
seeing you preside over the proceedings of the Security
Council. This month the Council has a great deal of work to
do, so many and so pressing are our concerns; but we know
that you are a highly talented diplomat and a man of very
remarkable qualities, and under your guidance the work of
,the Security Council will surely be carried out successfully.

At the invitation of the Prestient, Mr. K. 8. B. Nyirenda
(Zambia) took a place at the Council table; and Mr. S. A.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania); Mr. C. F. G. von
Hirschberg (South Afn’ca); Mr. J. Odero-Jowi (Kenya);
Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigerti); andMr. D. Gzmara(Guinea) took
the placesreservedfor them.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):I have
received a letter from the representative of Yugoslavia
which is in document S/10367, in which he requests that he
be allowed to participate in this debate, without the right
to vote. Following our usual practice, and with the consent
of the Council, I invite the representative of Yugoslavia t0

9. My delegation once again thanks the Security Council
for allowing it to participate in a debate the urgent,
important and serious nature of which is clear to all. The
Council is once again called upon to discuss a question of

1

blatant armed aggression against an independent and
sovereign African country, the Republic of Zambia, a
Member of the United Nations, a peaceful developing
country whose distinguished contribution to our Organization and to the Organization of African Unity, and as one
of the non+Jigned countries is well known to the Intern+
tional community.

those who chose aggressivenessand aggression as methods
in the Middle East and in Africa. It will also have noticed
that the representatives of jhe fascists in Pretoria and
Lisbon have chosen, as a response and as a defence before
you, the negation, falsification and whitewashing of the
crimes of which they are guilty v-is-d-visAfrican populations
and Governments .

10. On 5 October 1971, members of the armed forces and
of the police force of the fascist South African Government, proceeding from the area of Narnlbla known as the
Caprivi Strip, illegally penetrated Zambian territory. The
aggressor, as is his wont, left his visiting card, The
Government En question is the fascist regime of South
Africa, which has built up apwtheid and racial segregation
into a system of government; that racist rdgime whose
continuously arrogant, bellicose and provocative attitude
visdvis the international community no longer needs
demonstrating.

15. The Security Council will have noted from the lips of
Mr. Muller himself that it was adverse winds that carrledb
armed South African helicopters from the Caprivi Strip into
the free and independent territory of Zambia. And-why
not? -it was also adverseriver currents that carried armed
South African boats into the Republic of Zambia. What
Mr. Muller refuses to admit before the Council fs the
frequent overflights of ZambIan national territory by
aircraft and helicopters of the South African forces; the
frequent and regular violations of Zambian territory by
South African and Rhodesian troops, and the crimes they
commit against the peaceful population of Zambia. The
whole world has not forgotten the threats on the part of
the Prime Minister of the racist minority rdgime of South
Africa to invade the independent Republic of Zambia. The
reactionaries in South Africa have thus followed the insane
example of the fascist forces of Lisbon in November 1970,
when they invaded the Republic of Guinea. The resounding
defeat inflicted on them will be echoed in the defeat which
the courageous people of Zambia, rising up in arms, will
inevitably inflict in their turn.

11. Por the perpetration of its crime, the Government of
South Africa chose a time when the Council, the body
responsible for the maintenance of peace and security in
the world, was meeting to debate one of the many
monstrous acts of illegality committed by that Govemment: the illegal occupation of Namibia. It was that very
moment that the South African fascistschose to attack and
vioiate the territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia,
thus aiming a direct insult at the prestige of the Security
Council and of the United Nations itself.

16. The iii that afflicts the Council and our Organization
- as a whole is the notorious impunity enjoyed by the fascist
Governments of Portugal and South Africa. This impunity
would be impossible if Portugal and South Africa did not
enjoy the support of their NATO allies who supply them
with weapons, helicopters, tanks and aircraft which are
used against the peoples of Africa.

12. AS we said at the time, the brazenness of the
Portuguese, South African and Rhodesian aggressors stems
from the triple alliance by which they are bound and which
characterizes them. The Republic of Guinea reaffirms its
total support for the Government of Zambia, the victim of
this act of aggression. Our solidarity with Zambia is all the
more complete because we fully realize what imperialism is
aiming at in attacking African countries that are resolutely
and irreversibly committed to the side of the freedom
fighters. In addition to$ntimidation
by open threats,
pressure and economic blackmail, the Portuguese and South
African fascists are inflicting brutal aggression on independent African countries with a view to instituting their
economic and political imperialism.

17. In our opinion, it is no use deploring or condemning
the acts of war directed by Portugal and South Africa
against independent African countries. It Is a question of
taking practical, effective measures to make it materially
impossible for those fascist States to do harm and to
commit acts of aggression. The provisions of our Charter
prominently mention the sanctions to be imposed on
recalcitrants, .recidivIsts and outlaws such as the South
African fascistsand their Portuguese friends.

13. Following the monstrous act of aggression of which
my country, the Republic of Guinea, was victim at the
hands of the Portuguese colonialist forces, we stated in the
Security Council, in November 1970 [155Uth meeting/,
that a new era was beginning in the escalating violence
levelled by colonialism against progressive African COLDtries. Today events have borne out our judgement and our
assessment of the facts. I would remind the Council that in
November 1970, when the Council’s special mission was
sent to Guinea to hold an investigation there foIlowIng the
criminal Portuguse aggression of 22 and 23 November, the
Portuguese colonial forces repeated their attacks on 27 and
28 November on the northern part of Guinea. Portugal thus
demonstrated, just as its South African ally is doing today,
how little respect and consideration it has for the Security
Council and for world opinion.

18, Africa and world opinion expect the Security Council
to shoulder its full responsibilities. There can be no talk of
intemationaI peace and security In this body while a
colonial war, the dirtiest of wars, is being loosed upon the
peaceful peoples of Asia and Africa who are struggling for
their freedom and independence. It is no use advocating
dialogue of any kind with murderers who have sworn to put
an end to the noble struggle of the African peoples.
19. Two weeks ago, when President Moktar Ould Daddah,
the current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity,
came before the Council to argue Namibia’s case, on the
instructions of all the African Heads of State, we in Africa
hoped that his appeal would be heeded. Today, even more
than yesterday, it is important for the Security Council to
terminate the illegal occupation of Namibia by South

14. The Security Council will have noted the tragic
similarity in the arrogant language and haughty attitude of
2

Africa; to see to it that that Territory no longer serves as a
base from which to reconquer the neighbouring countries
which, through fierce struggle, have snatched their independence from the clutch of colonialism. Over and beyond
Namibia and its iUega1 occupation by the South African
fascists, it is clear to us that the Security Council should
now take alI necessary measures to ensure that decolonizalion becomes a twentiethcentury reality.
20. A draft resolution /s/10365/ has been submitted by
the Afro-Asian delegations in the Security Council for the
Council’s consideration. My delegation sharesthe legitimate
concern of those delegations, and reaffirms that the
measures envisaged in that document represent the mini.
mum which the peaceful population of Zambia expects of
the Council.
21. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
greatly appreciate the friendly, courteous words addressed
to me by the representative of Guinea. I am both honoured
and touched.
22. The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I
invite him to be seated at the Council table and to make his
statement.
23. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, allow me,
first of all, to thank you and the other members of the
Security Council for affording me this opportunity to
participate, without the right to vote, in the deliberations
of the Council-upon
the instructions of the Yugoslav
Government-on the complaint of the Republic of Zambia
concerning the provocative and aggressive actions of South
Africa. My Government considers the discussion of this
problem to be of exceptional importance.
24. At the 1590th meeting of the Security Council, the
representative of Zambia, Ambassador Mwaanga, presented
strong arguments and convincing evidence of the recent
military activities of the Government of South Africa
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Zambia. The numerous violations of airspace
and the crossing by military and police forces of the
Pretoria rdgime into Zambian territory seriously threaten
the security and independence of that peace-loving country,
a Member of the United Nations. The aggressive acts of
South Africa against Zambia constitute a flagrant violation
of the fundamental norms of international conduct and of
the principles of the United Nations Charter. That action is
a component part of a campaign and of broader schemes
designed to create instability and insecurity in the southern
part of Africa and in the entire African continent.

26, Tbe policy of aparfheid, based on racial hatred and
repression, in its essence and meaning is aggressive and
hegemonistic. Proof of that is also to be found in the recent
statement made by the Prime Minister of South Africa,
Mr.Vorster, at the convention of the Transvaal Organization of his National Party, in which he gave instructions to
his military forces to engage in socalled punitive expeditions and to march as far as Lusaka, if necessary. That
warmongering statement, in its substance and objectives, is
very reminiscent of the verbal arsenal used by fascistleaders
during the Second World War. Mr. Vorster’s speech is, at
the same time, the most obvious negation of the attempt
made during the recent consideration of the question of
Namibia in the Security Council by Mr.Mul.ler, Foreign
Minister of South Africa, to impress upon us the idea that
the colonial problems in southern Africa and the illegal
occupation of Namibia by the armed forces and civilian
administration of South Africa do not constitute a threat to
peace and international security.
27. It has been clearly stated in the debates in the General
Assembly and in the discussion in the Security Council that
Persistent provocations and threats by South Africa against
the neighbouring independent African States and, in particular, the demonstration of its military power, are in great
measure also the result of the conciliatory attitude of some
great Powers towards the policy and practices of South
Africa. Moreover, that is also the main reason why so far
our Organization has not been able to put into effect the
numerous resolutions on the liquidation of apartheid and
colonial domination in Africa. We are convinced that the
lack of readiness on the part of some members of the
Security Council more resolutely to commit themselves to
the efforts aimed at ending the occupation of Namibia
represents encouragement even for the recent acts of
aggressionagainst Zambia by South Africa.
28. Since we are fully aware of the fact that the
demonstration of military power and the violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia, as well as
the proclaimed policy of South Africa in the southern part
of Africa, constitute a threat to international peace and
security, it is essential that the Security Council take
energetic action against South Africa.
29. It is our considered opinion that the Security Council
should, at this stage of developments, most resolutely
demand of South Africa that it desist from aggressiveand
provocative acts against Zambia. Should South Africa fail
to comply with that demand, then it will be necessaryfor
the Security Council to undertake, with a senseof urgency,,
further measures in conformity with the provisions of the
Charter relating to matters of peace and security. It is
obvious that peace in Africa cannot be secured so long as
there continue to exist coloniaI strongholds, racial discrimination and apartheid on that continent. Given the situation,
we are of the opinion that the Security Council as a whole
should more resolutely commit itself to resolving those
problems, since they are the most direct source of
instability on the African continent.

25. The great majority of States Members of the United
Nations, among them Yugoslavia, have time and again most
resolutely pointed out that the remaining strongholds of
colonialism, racial discrimination and the policy of apurtheid constitute a serious source of instability and a
perpetual threat to peace and security, not only in southern
Africa but also elsewhere in the world. The recent
discussion in the Security Council on the aggressivepolicy
of Portuguese coIonialists towards Guinea and Senegal and
the actions and military pressures by South Africa against
Zambia serve as the best confirmation of such a danger.

30. Relations between Zambia and Yugoslavia are very
close and friendly, although those countries are geographically far apart. Their close ties originate not solely from
3

the common policy of non&gnment
extensive bilateral co-operation.

but also from

33. The representative of the Yugoslav Government,
speaking in Belgrade on 7 October about the most recent
threats to the Republic of Zambia, said:
“Yugoslavia most strongly condemns the acts of South
Africa and extends full support to the Republic of
Zambia and her people in the struggle for preserving their
sovereignty and freedom. We consider it necessaryfor the
international community to take the most urgent measures for protecting Zambia and preventing the Pretoria
r@ne from continuing its aggressive policy towards
Zambia and other peaceloving African countries.”
32. We are confident that this aggressivepolicy of South
Africa towards Zambia will meet with firm resistance not
only from African countries but also from all the nonaligned and other peace-loving countries. That is clearly
confumed also by the fact that 46 Member States of the
United Nations have given their support to Zambia in a
letter addressed to the President of the Security Council
/S/lO364J.
With its consistent policy of commitment to
the emancipation of Africa, to the promotion of equitable
cooperation and to the advancement of international
relations, Zambia has gained great prestige throughout the
world. The Third Conference of Heads of State and
Government of Non-Aligned Countries was held in Lusaka,
the capital city of Zambia, in September 1970. This further
confirms the importance and prestige which Zambia enjoys
today. In recent years, Lusaka has become a symbol of
Peaceful actions and initiatives for the solution of vital
problems of the contemporary world. We are confident that
the acts of aggression against Zambia by South Africa will
meet with condemnation and resolute resistance by Cle
entire international
community. In that the Security
Council should play a decisive role. Indeed, it is bound to
do so under the United Nations Charter.
33, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I call
upon the representative of I&a.

tions and the unjust and inhuman measures taken by the
ta&t colonial and minority r&imes of Pretoria, Salisbury
and Lisbon; but when it comes to taking action to remove
or reduce the impact of those measures, to working oul
plans for United Nations action in order to ensuremajority
rule and to eliminate the intolerable discriminatory measures, the United Nations as a whole, and the Security
Council in particular, seem completely unable to move, The
reasons for inaction are well known and I do not believe
that we shall gain anything by going over them ag,$n and
again; but we must realise that this inaction, this status quo
established by the United Nations system, encouragesthe
very evils which we have time and again vowed to do away
with. It increases the threat to peace in the whole of
southern Africa and makes it more and more difficult for
the independent African countries to build their own social
structure-economically, politically or by what might be
called the social amelioration of their own people-in peace
and ‘freedom. Unfortunately, conditions outside their own
borders do not allow them to do so.
37. The present complaint by Zambia is well founded.
Indeed, even the Prime Minister of South Africa wasnot so
categorical a few days ago about the intrusion of South
African forces into Zambia on several occasions as washis
Foreign Minister when he spoke before the Council on
8 October /1.59&h meeting]. Even when denying the facts,
the Foreign Minister did not omit to utter a threat that
should the South African authorities decide that any part
of South West Africa, which South Africa illegally occupies,
should be entered by anyone from the neighbouring
countries of Angola, Botswana, Zimbabwe or Zambia, the
South African forces would pursue them and take whatever
measures might be necessary to teach the bIacks a lesson.
South Africa knows, of course, that with a war budget of
nearly 3 million dollars and armed forces of all kinds, actual
or potential, of nearly ISO,OOCl men, the independent
African States on the border of South West Africa would
have little chance of defending themselves effectively
against that massive military strength.
38. However, Zambia comes in for special attention for
three good reasons, First, Zambia’s opposition to apartheid
in all its aspects is total and, we are glad to say, allows no
compromise. President Kaunda is a staunch supporter of
nonal@unent and a determined opponent of upurtheid. He
is therefore a stecial target for the Pretoria racist minority
rdgime. Secondly, Zambia stands in the way of the South
African policy of working out a system of dividing the
African countries by various inducements. That policy
implies that if some of the African countries would accept
apartheid in South Africa, South West Africa and the
Portuguese colonial Territories they could enter ‘into
normal relations with those countries with some financial
and economic benefit for themselves.

34. Mr. SEN (India): First of all, I wish to offer you,
Mr. President, sincerest congratulations on your Presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are certain that
this subject and the issues connected with it are so
important and will require such sympathetic treatment that
tith you in the Chair the Council may hope to make some
progress in this matter.
35. i am grateful for this opportunity to expressour views
on the nature of the complaints that have been brought
before the Council with increasing frequency. Today it is
Zambia against South Africa. A little while ago it was
Senegal against Portugal, and some months ago it was
Guinea against Portugal. The time has come, we think,
when the Council should take a comprehensive view of
these complaints in the perspective of what is happening
between the Territories controlled by Portugal, South
Africa and Mr. Ian Smith on the one hand, and the
independent African countries on the other.

39. Lastly, it is absolutely essential to South Africa that
countries like Zambia be effectively undermined to cmatc
the soded “third Africa”. The United Nations study on
industrialization, foreign capital and forced labour in South
Africa points out that it should be clear that what is at
stake is the future of a large part of Africa. South Africa’s
basic purpose in putting forward its new programme Is to
protect itself, But in order to do so it must first undermine

36. It is common ground among all of us that we hate
awtheid, that we strongly resent the innumerable humilia4

the independence of the black African States. So it is not
simply a question of keeping the whole question of
apwtheid open. The consequences of South African policy
within independent African countries will also be very
serious. 1 mention these facts only to show that Zambia has
attracted and is likely to attract the special attention of the
South African Government.
40. When these complaints come before the Security
Council-from Zambia, Senegal, Guinea or anywhere elsethe defence is either that the incidents complained of did
not take place or that they were justified. The Security
Council has recently investigated some of these denials and
found them to be without substance. However, not enough
attention has been paid to examining the pretexts. For
South Affica, for instance, the justification is that this
Territory of South West Africa (Namibia) is under its
control. It forgets that whatever control it has in that area
is illegally exercised, and that it has no right to be there.
That aspect of the matter is already before the Security
Council in a different context, and we shall soon have to
discuss seriously how South Africa’s illegal control of this
Territory can be quickly and effectively terminated. Meanwhile, that is no justification for a State to take aggressive
action against a sovereign State from the territory of a third
country it is illegally occupying.
4 1, The General Assembly has already indicated that so
Government of the
majority of the population continues, or so long as the
colonial and racist form of domination is not brought to an
end, it will be perfectly legitimate for freedom fighters and
liberation forces ta continue their struggle by all available
means. We believe the time has come when the Security
Council can accept those two ideas in a formal decision.
The Council can and should accept the legitimacy of the
struggle for liberation from colonialism, which is right and
lawful and can be waged by all means. It can and shoufd
accept that the struggle of peoples to put an end to the
oppression of the vast majority of the people of any
country by a racist minority regime-as is taking place in
various parts of southern Africa-is equally legitimate, and
that the oppression should be brought to an end by all
possible means. Secondly, it can and should be made clear
by the Council, in a formal declaration, that South Africa
has no justification whatever for being in South West
Africa.
long as the oppression by a minority

42. Once we had definitely and clearly stated those legal
principles it would be simpler to deal with all the
complaints by several independent sovereign States. We are
fully aware of the difficulties that will be created in various
quarters in defining those legal principles. But at the same
time we believe that unless those legal principles are
squarely faced and clearly stated this Council and other
United Nations bodies will not make much progress.
43. Any action taken to suppress a liberation movement
or the movement for equal rights of the people of a country
would then be automatically unjustified, and those who
Perpetrated it could be treated as aggressors.Similarly, the
South African presence in South West Africa would be that
of an aggressor, and both the international community and
all States individually or collectively would be within their
rights in ending that aggression.

44. I know that that would not suit South Africa, for it
has been established beyond doubt that South Africa has
very little use for the United Nations, and certainly hasno
desire to abide by any of its resolutions or decisions. As
early as January 1953, the then South African Prime
Minister, the late Mr.Malan, said, “Personally I would
rather be a member of NATO then a Member of the United
Nations. It is a better safeguard for world peace.” If South
Africa continues to defy the United Nations and to confuse
the cause of the freedom fighters by calling them cornmunists and trying to punish them both inaide and outside
its territory by all means at its disposal, should we not ease
South Africa’s task by expelling it from an organization
that is certainly not a safeguard for the type of world peace
South Africa wishes?
45. We should like to make still another suggestion to the
Council. These frequent complaints by African States and
the effects of South Africa’s policies and actions undertaken with the full cooperation of Lisbon and Salisbury
persuade us that the Security Council would do well to
keep these problems under periodic review. I know that
several organizations of the United Nations system deal
with apmtheid, decolonisation and United Nations administration-such as it is-of Namibia. While those efforts
continue, to us it seems necessary that peace and security in
that area, which is being constantly threatened by South
Africa, should be kept under continuous review by the
Council. Perhaps once in three months, or as frequently as
the Council may decide, the Council could consider this
problem in its various aspects, decide what action could be
taken to restore the rights of the people both of the
colonial areas and of such areas as South Africa, Namibia
and Zimbabwe, and examine in detail, with as much
publicity as possible, the effectiveness, or lack of effectiveness, of the economic sanctions and other restrictions the
Council may have from time to time decided upon in
respect of any territory or any Government.
46. We know only too well the inhibitions of various
Governments towards taking the forthright action permitted by the Charter in such situations. We believe that if
some of the suggestions we have made are followed we shall
progress towards the elimination of colonialism and neocolonialism, and also of the oppression by minority regimes
of vast majorities. Simultaneously, we shrill then be
prepared to remove all those evils, whatever they may be, in
all their forms and manifestations, whatever the climes and
conditions in which colonialism and neo*olonitdism may
prevail.
47. The Council will no doubt take such specific action on
the present Zambian complaint as it can, but we do not
believe that efforts on specific issues will be fully effective
unless we relate them to broader perspectives and ultimate
goals, The alternative is to deal with those problems from
day to day, and to hope for the best. We cannot build on
hope unless it is backed by suitable plans and solid
determination.
48. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom Spanish): I
thank the representative of India for the kind words he has
addressed to me, which have made me very happy.
49. I call upon the representative of Pakistan.

50. Mr. SHAM1 (Pakistan): Before I touch upon the item
on the agenda, Mr. President, I wish to voice my delegatlon’s respectful tribute to you for the great wisdom and
sagacity, combined with the senseof chivalry, with which
you are conducting the proceedings of the Security
CounciJ *
51, The Pakistan delegation Is grateful to you and to the
members of the Security Council for granting its request to
participate in this debate without the right to vote.

57. First, he asserted the socalled right of pursuit even to
the extent of saying that the pursuers would defend
themselves even in foreign territory. The statement made
by Mr.Vorster on 5 October to the effect that the South
African Government reservesthe right to pursue the
socalled terrorists-who are really freedom tighters“wherever they might be” was not denied by the Foreign
Minister of South Africa.
58. Second, in total and inimitable oblivion of the
position of the United Nations regarding the Territory of
Namibia, Mr. MuIler did not broach the question of what
justified even the presence, not to mention the action, of
the armed forces of South Africa on the boundary between
Zambia and the Caprivi Strip-which is nearly a thousand
miles from the border of South Africa,

52. The background to my delegation’s desire to speak in
the Council on Zambia’s complaint is Pakistan’s close and
anxious concern with the situation in southern Africa,
which has been expressed in the Council continuously for
many years now. However, two special reasons have
prompted my delegation to address the Council on this
particular occasion.

59. Third, his statement left no doubt whatsoever that
violent incidents arc taking place as a result of South
Africa’s suppression of those very elements which seek to
bring down not the Pretoria regime but its illegal occupation of Namibia, These elements not only represent the
forces of freedom: they are fighting in a cause with which
the United Nations has totally identified itself. They are
therefore combating an adversary of the United Nations.

53, One Jies in the sympathy and admiration evoked from
us by Zambia’s bearing of a burden that should be
shouldered really by the entire membership of the United
Nations. Along with the Democratic Republic of. the
Congo, the People’s Republic of the Congo, the Repubhc of
Guinea, tJle Republic of Senegal and the United Republic
of Tanzania, Zambia has become the object of continuous
threat and pressure from the Pretoria-Salisbury-Lisbon
alliance which seeks to perpetuate a racist and colonialist
order in southern Africa, The menace which these States
have to face, the sacrifices which they have to make and the
slrugglc which they have to sustain cannot but command
the spontaneoussupport of all of uswho seek to realize the
aims of the United Nations Charter.

60. From General Assembly resolution 214.5 (XXI) of 27
October 1966, which ended South Africa’s Mandate over
Namibia, to Security CounciJ resolution 283 (1970) which
called upon aJJ States to take specific action that would
emphasize the illegality of Soutll Africa’s presence in
Namibia and assert the authority of the United Nations
over that Territory, the Organization is committed to the
very cause which is being upheld by those whom Pretoria
calls “the terrorists”. If it is the moral duty of the
Organjzation to protect them from the repression of South
Africa, how much more is it incumbent upon the Organization to give all support to Zambia and the other African
States which are being made the objects of punitive action
by the Pretoria r&ime?

54, The second reason is that the armed incursions which
form the subject of Zambia’s complaint contained in
document S/10352 of 6 October and of Ambassador
Mwaanga’s statement /159&h meeting] are nothing but
aggressive manifestations of South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia. As such they underline the threat to
international peace and security which is caused by South
Africa’s military presence in that Territory of the United
Nations, Consequently, they demonstrate the fact that the
poJicies pursued by the Pretoria regime constitute not only
an outrage but also a serious danger to the sovereignty and
territoral integrity of independent African States in that
region.

61. There can be no doubt now about how steadily-for
lack of effective action by the Security Council-the
situation in southern Africa is deteriorating to the point
where it is posing a multiple danger to peace far more
widespread than that caused by friction between two
States. The intimidating military posture of South Africa
and its strategy of pushing its defence line to the north,
thus creating a system of buffer States around itself, are
clearly illustrated by the building of a major base in the
Caprivi Strip, located in Namibia, and by the continuous
pressure of mounting raids on the territory of neighbouring
African States.

55, It is not necessary for me to dwell upon the facts
narrated by Ambassador Mwaanga in his statement. He
made it very clear that the incident of 5 October wasnot an
isolated one but the culmination of a series of systematic
and premeditated encroachments on Zambia’s airspace and
territory committed by the armed forces of South Africa.
The fact that, on behalf of his Government, he offered to
receive a visiting mission of the Security Council which
would verify the complaint, on the sole condition that the
missionwould also be given uninhibited accessto Namibia,
demonstrates the genuineness of the complaint as well as
the moral integrity of the Zambian Government.

62. My delegation would urge the Security Council to
adopt the draft resolution [S/l 036.51 which wasintroduced
by Ambassador Tomeh on behalf of Burundi, Sierra Leone,
Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic at the Council’s
1590th meeting. To our mind, that draft resolution
represents the mJnimum action required on this occasion. It
is necessary to stress that the magnitude of a particular
incursion by South Africa into the territory of Zambia is
not an index of the seriousness of the situation that is
developing in that region. Each incident is part of a

56, fn his reply, the Foreign Minister of South Africa has,
of course, denied the truth of Zambia’s complaints [ibid.].
But, as some members of the Council have already
remarked, his statement wasnoteworthy in several respects.
6

continuous process the implications of which cannot be
judged without bearing in mind the vast disparity between
the military power of South Africa and that of the
independent African States such as Zambia.
63. Finally, the delegation of Pakistan would like to
express the hope that, as Zambia’s complaint is being
considered in the middle of a wider debate by the Council
over the question of Namibia, the members of the Security
Council will not let themselves be daunted by the economic
power at present commanded by the Pretoria regime. Let it
not be forgotten that that power is due to the fact that the
regime in question disposes of economic resources which
really belong not to a 20 per cent racial minority but to the
entire people of South Africa, the overwhelming majority
of whom are non-white. Let the illusion now be dispelled,
too, that any arms transaction with Pretoria can have any
effect other than that of reinforcing apartheid and thus
condemning the southern region of Africa to living in a
state which is the very an tithesis of peace.
64. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I am
grateful to the representative of Pakistan for his generous
references to me. I feel deeply honoured.
65. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I have asked to
be allowed to speak on a point of order. If there are no
more speakers to be heard I respectfully request, in
accordance with rule 33, paragraph 1, of the Provisional
Rules of Procedure of the Security Council, that the
meeting be adjourned for an hour, in view of some
consultations that are going on, so asto enable the Council
to continue its discussion.

members that it will be possible for the Council to cmsjder
the draft this evening, since the modifications have been
made in a spirit of co-operation and understanding and the
text has been altered, so that we hope it wiIl receive the
unanimous support of the Council.
70. The situation along the Namibian-Zambian border is
not an easy one; it is tense. We believe that a resolution
adopted at this stage could have some impact upon that
situation .
71. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I have the greatest sympathy for
the conciliatory words just spoken by the representative of
Somalia, but like the representative of France I feel that we
need a little more time. So far as my delegation is
concerned I must ray that we were not approached for
consultations on the draft resolution to begin with, and
now we have before us an informal paper with some
amendments. 1 hardly think that we are in a position to
take a decision this evening. I believe that in these
conditions it would be much more sensible to adjourn and
meet again, Mr. President, when you felt the time wasright
for concluding our deliberations. It is now very late. We
have been under great pressure, with a very heavy schedule.
Most of us have appointments with our Foreign Ministers. I
think it would be much more convenient for all of us ifwe
could have a little more time for consultations and for
reading the new draft carefully. We could then meet again
at a more convenient time. I think this would be in
accordance with the practice we have followed in the past,
and would also be the more constructive approach.
72. Mr, JAMIESON (United Kingdom): I should like
briefly to support the proposal of the representatives of
France and Italy to adjourn until some time tomorrow,
Like the representative of JtaJy, J am very glad that more
moderate counsels now seem to have prevailed or to be
prevailing. I would only comment that it might perhaps
have been better if consultations had taken place before a
draft which clearly was likely to be totally unacceptable
wassubmitted. We are glad that there is now the possibility
of arriving at a draft which might present fewer difficulties.
At the same time I would say that I have only just seenthis
revised draft resolution and I think I shall have to take
instructions asto my delegation’s position on it.

66. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): I
take it that the proposal made by the representative of
Syria is generally acceptable. I think we can adopt it
immediately and adjourn for an hour, so that during that
time we may have consultations which may prove useful in
finalizing our work.
67. Mr. KOSCIUSKO-MORIZET
(France) (interpretation
It is already 5.50 pm., and it seems to me
that it might be rather late to resume our meeting this
evening, in view of possible commitments on the part of the
various delegations. In these circumstances, would it not be
better simply to adjourn the meeting?

from French):

73. Mr. KOSCIUSKOMORIZET
(France) (interpretation
porn &et&r): I feel rather embarrassed, because I did not
make a formal proposal; I merely made a working sugges-’
tion. I see that the draft resolution has just been distributed
to us and personally I am prepared to vote immediately, if
that is the general desire. But, if several delegations believe
that they should receive instructions from their Governments and have time to think matters over, I am prepared
to request an adjournment until tomorrow. In any event I
will concur with the opinion of the Council.

68. The PRESIDENT (interpretation jfom Spanish): Possibly the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic may
agree with the representative of France and, with his
consent and that of all other members of the Council, we
might adjourn until tomorrow morning, thus leaving more
time for the consultations to which he referred,
69. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to support the
proposal made by the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic. Since the presentation of the draft resolution
/S/10365/ at our last meeting, consultations have taken
place between members of the African group and delegations around this table. As a result, certain revisions have
been made. In fact a modified version of the draft
resolution /S/lO365/Rev.l]
is being circulated to delegations at this moment. It is the hope of the Afro-Asian

74. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): I, for my part,
made the suggestion only in order to facilitate the work of
the Council, What was uppemlost in my mind was the
availability of the Ambassadors with whom consultations
would be conducted. If the Ambassadors will be available
tomorrow we will gladly agree to adjourn the meeting.
7

75. However, there is one correction which 1 should like
to make concerning the draft resolution which I introduced
at the last meeting. I did approach two or three coReagues
on the Council, but met with onIy silence from them;
nothing at all by way of comment.
76. Mr. FARAH (Somalia): I should like to comment very
briefly on the procedure adopted in preparing, and perhaps
in submitting, draft resolutions to this Council. Invariably
when a matter relates to Africa, the initiative is undertaken
by the Afro-Asian group. Invariably the first initiative
always meets with a wall of silence. For example, in the
case of the working document which my delegation, on
behalf of the Afro-Asian group, circulated to the members
of the Council five days ago on the question of Namibia, it
will be remembered that I appealed to delegations through
the President, saying that the Afro-Asian members would
be happy to have delegations consult with them on the text
of that draft, to enable the work of the Council to go
forward. I regret to inform you that, although five days
have passed, only one delegation has found it convenient
and expedient to contact my delegation. As members of the

Council we have a collective responsibility on issues of
world peace and security, and we trust that the spirit which
moves the Afro-Asian group will also move other delegations.
77. The PRESIDENT (inferprelurion porn Spanish): I
believe we have reached a solution: a fact which we must all
celebrate, I hope that the proposal I am about to mske will
win your acceptance. The Ambassador of the Syrian Arab
Republic does not presshis initial proposal that the meeting
be adjourned, and resumed in an hour’s time, following
consultations and exchanges of opinion. We could, then,
adjourn the meeting now and meet again tomorrow at
330 pm. to continue the debate on the complaint of
Zambia against South Africa. That wiIl give time for further
exchanges of view and fresh consultations regarding the
second draft. I think we will make more headway this way,
and will be able to take a final decision tomorrow on the
draft or on possible further amendments,
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nolions
publicolions
fht world.
Consult
your
or Gtntvo.

may be obtained
bookslore
or writt

from booksforts
and distributors
lo: United
Hafions,
Soles Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

Ihroughou)
New York

UNIES

Los publicaliens
des Nofions
Unies
sonf tn ven)t
dons
16s libroirits
tf Its agtncts
dipositoirts
du mondt
tnlitr.
Informer-vous
oupr+s
de vobt librairis
ou odrrssaz-vous
61
Notions
Unier, Section dcs vtnlts,
New York ou Gtnlivt.

HAH

IlOflYqHTb

HBAAHHfl

OPTAHHSAUHM

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicocionts
de lar Nociones
Unidos
cs16n
tn ladas porter dtl mundo.
ConsulIt
a su librtro
Vtnfas,
Nutva York o Ginebro.

Litho in United Nations,

New

York

Price: $U.S.

0.50

06bEAHHEHHblX

(or equivalent

tn vtnla
o dirijast

HAL(Hfl

UNIDAS
en librtrlos
o: Nacionts

in other

currencies)

y cosos disfribuidoros
Unidos,
Stccibn

dt

fjg13o-August

1973-2,050
