S/PV.8679

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8679th meeting

Friday, 6 December 2019, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Norman-Chalet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Ipo
Ms. Morrison González
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Velásquez
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Mabhongo
Mr. Allen

Agenda
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa and the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (S/2019/913)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-39660 (E)
*1939660*

S/PV.8679

Central African region

women and peace and security, and the establishment
of a regional civil society network, namely, the Civil
Society Coalition for Conflict Prevention, Peace and
Security in Central Africa.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Central African region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Central Africa and the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (S/2019/913)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. François Louncény Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa, and Mr. Sasha
Lezhnev, Deputy Director of Policy at the Enough
Project.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/913, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Central Africa
and the activities of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa.
I now give the floor to Mr. Fall.
Mr. Fall (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on the
United States presidency for December. I wish you
great success. I thank you for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the situation in Central
Africa and the activities of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) since the
publication of the report (S/2019/913) submitted for the
Council’s consideration.
Overall, the political and security situation in Central
Africa remains worrisome. The subregion continues to
face security, humanitarian, socioeconomic and human
rights challenges. In addition, the security concerns
related to climate change have deepened. However, we
welcome the key progress made over the past 11 months
on structural reforms, peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
including the finalization of all the major reform
documents of the Economic Community of Central
African States, the adoption of the regional action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on
2/17

06/12/2019

Most of the States of the subregion will hold new
elections between 2020 and the end of UNOCA’s
current mandate, in August 2021. In that connection,
efforts continue to promote national dialogue and
the participation of women and youth in governance
and peacebuilding.
Terrorism continues to pose a threat to the
stability of the African subregion, in particular in the
Lake Chad basin where Boko Haram remains active.
My colleague Mohamed Ibn Chambas and I were in
Nigeria in November to complete our tour of the four
States of the Lake Chad basin, undertaken jointly with
Mr. Angel Losada Fernández, European Union Special
Representative for the Sahel. Ms. Michèle Coninsx,
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, joined us in Chad. We came to
the conclusion that support for the implementation of
the regional strategy for the stabilization, recovery and
resilience of the Boko Haram-affected areas of the Lake
Chad basin region should be one of our priorities.
Climate change continues to have an impact
on the lives of women and men in Central Africa,
often with direct implications for peace and security.
On 20 November, the Government of the Republic
of the Congo declared a state of natural disaster
and humanitarian emergency in three northern
departments, due to serious flooding affecting
approximately 50,000 people. It should be noted that
several other Central African countries are also facing
severe natural disasters related to climate change. I
call on international partners to provide humanitarian
assistance to the Governments concerned.
I went to Luanda from 25 to 29 November to
participate in the forty-ninth meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa. The Committee discussed
the geopolitical and security situation in Central Africa
and held a debate on climate change and its impact on
peace and security. At the end of its ministerial meeting,
the Committee adopted the Luanda declaration on the
impact of climate change on peace and security in
Central Africa.
The Central African subregion continues to face
maritime security challenges, in particular in the Gulf
19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

of Guinea. On 7 November, an attack on an oil tanker
was reported north-west of São Tomé. On 20 November,
the Interregional Coordination Centre for Maritime
Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea, located in
Yaoundé, reported another attack near Malabo, which
led the Government of Equatorial Guinea to place its
security forces on high alert throughout the country.
Special Representative Ibn Chambas and I are planning
to conduct a joint visit to the Centre in early 2020 to
assess the maritime situation in the Gulf of Guinea
and to determine the specific areas where the United
Nations could lend integrated interregional assistance.
I am encouraged by the efforts made by the
countries of Central Africa to build their capacity for
subregional cooperation by strengthening ECCAS.
That subregional organization is in the process
of accelerating its preparations for the holding in
Libreville of the ninth extraordinary summit of Heads
of State and Government on 18 December, which will
be devoted to reforming the Community. During the
summit, the leaders of Central Africa are slated to
approve ECCAS’s institutional reform programme,
and the conclusions of the summit will constitute an
important step in that reform process. Here I would
reaffirm the full commitment of the United Nations to
work hand in hand with ECCAS and its member States
as well as their partners to implement the reform and to
contribute to building ECCAS’s capacities.
As the Council is aware, the Government
of Cameroon held a national dialogue from
30 September to 4 October that produced a series of
key recommendations aimed at addressing the crisis in
the North-West and South-West Regions of the country.
However, I remain concerned by the level of violence
that continues to threaten the lives of the people of
Cameroon, as there are reports of ongoing human rights
violations and abuses by all parties.
Humanitarian personnel have also been attacked,
which highlights the scale of the insecurity. More than
700,000 people may now be displaced because of the
conflict in the two regions. Other reports also indicate
that thousands of people have died or been injured. I
call on international partners to support the national
efforts that are under way to address the humanitarian
needs of the population.
Following the national dialogue, a number of
measures were taken, including the release of certain
prisoners, which is a welcome development. The swift

S/PV. 8679

implementation of the recommendations from the
dialogue will be yet another step towards a lasting
solution to the crisis. From 19 to 24 November, the
Government of Cameroon dispatched delegations to the
North-West and South-West Regions to raise awareness
on the conclusions of the national dialogue.
The President of the African Union Commission,
Moussa Faki Mahamat; the Secretary General of
the International Organization of la Francophonie,
Louise Mushikiwabo; and the Secretary-General of the
Commonwealth, Patricia Janet Scotland, recently paid
a visit to Cameroon to meet with national stakeholders,
including President Paul Biya, on the situation in the
country. In their final joint statement, the three officials
encouraged all stakeholders to continue on this path of
wisdom and responsibility, especially with respect to
the Government’s implementation of the conclusions of
the national dialogue.
Following the announcement made by President
Paul Biya on the holding of the legislative and
municipal elections in Cameroon on 9 February 2020,
the head of the opposition party, the Mouvement pour
la renaissance du Cameroun, Maurice Kamto, reported
on 25 November that his party would not be taking
part in the elections, stating that the conditions would
not be met for the voting to take place in the NorthWest and South-West Regions. He also called for a
review of the electoral code. Other political parties also
expressed some reservations as to their participation in
the elections.
In response, during a press conference held on
2 December, the Minister of Territorial Administration
and the Minister of Communication assured everyone
that the conditions were in place for peaceful elections.
As the Secretary-General underscored in his report
(S/2019/913), it is important to pursue dialogue with
all stakeholders so as to quell the underlying tensions
among those who feel marginalized. It is vital that we
build on the momentum created by the national dialogue
by ensuring inclusiveness in the implementation of
the recommendations of the dialogue, including on
greater decentralization, development assistance and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The
holding of peaceful, inclusive and credible elections in
2020 will to a large extent depend on such efforts and
will be a crucial test for democracy in the country. It
will also make clear the level of determination on the
part of national stakeholders to move towards genuine

19-396603/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

stability and socioeconomic development and lasting
peace for all the people of Cameroon.
The United Nations remains committed to working
in close cooperation with the national authorities and
other stakeholders and to support local initiatives
geared towards promoting the participation of women,
young people and other marginalized groups. In
parallel, it is crucial that all actors on the ground step
up their efforts to protect and promote human rights
and fight impunity.
In Chad, the security situation in the three
provinces that share a common border with Libya and
the Sudan and are in a state of emergency continue to
pose a threat to the building of a lasting peace. That
will require an ongoing multidimensional commitment,
especially at a time when Chad is preparing for the
legislative elections, which have long been delayed and
which are now slated for the first quarter of 2020, and
the holding of presidential elections in 2021.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, efforts
must continue in order to create a political environment
conducive to the holding of presidential elections
in 2021. The Permanent Secretary of the National
Dialogue Council is continuing his consultations with a
wide range of national stakeholders, including political
parties and civil society, with the support of the United
Nations through the Peacebuilding Fund, in order to
prepare for an inclusive national dialogue for 2020.
I call on the national authorities and all stakeholders
to continue to work jointly to contribute to the holding of
a genuinely inclusive and constructive dialogue that will
create conditions conducive to peacebuilding and to the
holding of peaceful, inclusive and credible presidential
elections. Unwavering international assistance to
stabilize the Pool Region is also necessary, as well
as financial contributions, which are essential for the
Government to effectively implement the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme.
(spoke in English)
I would like to reiterate my appreciation to
the Security Council for its continued support for
UNOCA and myself to facilitate the implementation
of our mandate. The Council’s support was once
again evidenced through its presidential statement
of 12 September (S/PRST/2019/10) welcoming the
completion of UNOCA’s strategic review.
4/17

06/12/2019

The Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs and UNOCA are working together in
cooperation with the relevant United Nations entities to
ensure the full implementation of the strategic review
recommendations. We will continue to update the
Council as appropriate.
The President: I thank Mr. Fall for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lezhnev.
Mr. Lezhnev: I thank you, Madam President, for
the opportunity to brief the Security Council today.
I would like to focus my remarks on what the
Council and the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) can concretely do to help
transform and prevent violent conflict in this oftenforgotten region.
Above all, I believe that the Council and UNOCA
should strategically focus on the financial aspect of
crises in the region. I would argue that this would be
most effectively done through enhanced engagement
with international partners on transparency reforms
that can help to prevent conflict, as well as with the
private sector and anti-money-laundering bodies, and
by refocusing sanctions to target networks of spoilers
to peace processes. These steps would help to give the
region a much better chance of achieving peace. Within
that framework, I would highlight two main challenges
and four recommendations.
The first challenge relates to conflict resources
and money-laundering. Rebel groups, criminal units
within armies and their facilitators generate hundreds
of millions of dollars each year from trading in conflict
resources such as gold, diamonds, tantalum and other
minerals. They are a key driver of conflict, as armed
commanders and their backers want to continue making
money, thereby breaking peace agreements through the
continuation of such interests.
The Council can have an impact on conflict
commodities since they are traded regionally and
internationally. The Panels of Experts on the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo report extensively on how gold, diamonds and
other minerals are critical resources for armed groups
and on how they are smuggled across to Cameroon,
Uganda, Rwanda and Chad and on to the United Arab
Emirates, among other countries.
19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

The key to combating such interests is to follow
and target the middle-men, financial facilitators and
corrupt officials who enable the trade in those conflict
commodities. Such networks are often involved in
arms trafficking in exchange for diamonds and gold.
For example, my organization reported last year that
conflict gold from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo might well be reaching Western consumers
through an international corporate network coordinated
by a Belgian tycoon with refineries in Uganda, Dubai
and Belgium.
Together, these rogue actors make up criminal
networks, whose presence is growing in Central Africa.
Facilitators such as Dan Gertler, Aziz Nassour and
others have made hundreds of millions of dollars from
corrupt deals and continue to operate in the region,
many with impunity. Unless there are consequences
against such facilitators, they will continue to fund
armed groups and perpetuate instability.
The second challenge that I wanted to highlight
is preventing mass violence through transparency
reforms. Many presidents in the region have been in
power longer than the average age of the population,
some for up to 40 years. Meanwhile, the median age
is, for example, 18 years in Cameroon and 22 years
in Gabon.
Citizens in Central Africa are growing impatient
with non-democratic regimes. The youth populations
are increasingly vocal about the need for change and
reform, as we have seen throughout the region.
That strong dichotomy is creating serious stability
risks, as the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral highlighted. Most countries in the region are
at the top of the Fragile States Index, and five countries
in the region were highlighted by the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum last week to be in the
highest risk category for mass killings.
Arguably, the greatest factor in preventing the
reform processes is money. Every country in Central
Africa ranks in the bottom third of the Transparency
International Corruption Perceptions Index, and a
majority of countries in the region are in the lowest
20 per cent. Such corruption is starting to be exposed
by various regional reports but, in order to protect the
illicit interests, regimes often entrench themselves and
repress populations.

S/PV. 8679

The best way to prevent these countries from falling
into instability is to assist them to reform. The youth and
others want to see real reforms. From the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Cameroon, young people
and civil society are tired of corruption and of seeing
their limited natural resources diminished without
any benefit to them. They are demanding that the
Governments enact transparency and anti-corruption
measures, from holding officials who have stolen funds
accountable for their actions to requiring State-owned
companies to undergo independent audits. The old
models of off-budget accounts and secret State-owned
companies that dispersed patronage are not appropriate
to the youth generation.
I would like to say a few words about solutions, for
which I offer four recommendations.
First, I would propose engaging the banking and
gold sectors. Contrary to belief, illicit spoilers of peace
processes do not mainly hold their money in cash.
They have bank accounts and use financial interests
in order to pay business partners and spend the money
abroad. Banks and other financial institutions therefore
play a critical role in enforcing sanctions and enacting
anti-money-laundering
measures.
Multinational
correspondent banks are particularly important because
they act as clearing agents for wire transfers abroad and
can take a range of actions to combat money-laundering
and conflict financing.
The Security Council and UNOCA should
proactively engage banks and other financial institutions
on sanctions implementation and other anti-moneylaundering steps. The Wolfsberg Group, an association
of 13 global banks that aims to develop frameworks and
guidance for the management of financial crime risks,
may be a good starting point. The Council could convene
a session with the Group on sanctions implementation
and anti-money-laundering/combating the financing of
terrorism issues and perhaps set up an ongoing working
group to follow up on such issues. UNOCA could also
meet regularly with banks in the region to follow up on
sanctions implementation issues, including those raised
by the Panels of Experts.
Similarly, I would argue that the Council should
engage the global gold sector on the issue of conflict
gold, since it is a major source of financing identified
by the various groups of experts. The Council played
a constructive role in helping to address the blood
diamonds trade, and could do the same with regard to

19-396605/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

conflict gold. Specifically, I would advise the Council
to work with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
and convene key gold traders, refiners and banks to
highlight the need for better implementation of the
red flags in the 2015 FATF typology report on gold,
money-laundering and terrorist financing risks. The
FATF made excellent recommendations that have not
been properly implemented.
Secondly, I would recommend engaging
anti-money-laundering bodies and financial authorities.
The FATF and regional FATF bodies can play critical
roles in combating conflict finance, and the Council
and UNOCA should engage them as part of their
conflict-prevention efforts. The regional FATF bodies
are potentially very important actors in countering
conflict financing and related corruption because they
conduct mutual evaluations of countries’ anti-moneylaundering/countering the financing of terrorism
regimes and their implementation. They also work to
strengthen the national financial intelligence units
(FIUs) on these issues. The Task Force against MoneyLaundering in Central Africa (GABAC) is the Central
African FATF-style regional body, but it and the F1Us
in the region need significant support and engagement
to be effective.
The Security Council can play a role here,
building on resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March,
which recognizes the essential role of the FATF. The
Council should make supporting regional anti-moneylaundering efforts part of UNOCA’s mandate in order
to stem the flows of illicit finance and conflict finance.
Specifically, I would recommend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General coordinate
with GABAC and key FIUs in the region and raise related
issues in his high-level dialogues with Governments in
the region. UNOCA should also work with GABAC,
the FATF and the World Bank to ensure that mutual
evaluations and risk assessments are conducted in a
timely, effective and non-political manner.
Thirdly, I would like to highlight sanctions issues.
Targeted sanctions are a very important financial
tool for the Council to pressure spoilers to a peace
process. However, too often, they are enacted against
individuals or those persons who are least affected
by sanctions because they do not travel or have bank
accounts abroad, such as many rebel leaders.
To be effective, based on our experience and
research, sanctions should target the networks that
6/17

06/12/2019

spoil peace processes. Rebel leaders who break peace
accords have companies, as do traffickers, facilitators
and family members who collaborate with them, each
profiting from the spoils of war. Importantly, those
players are much more likely to have bank accounts
abroad and conduct business there, and they would
therefore be more greatly impacted by sanctions. The
Council and others use the network sanctions approach
very effectively with regard to North Korea and Iran
and should do so similarly in Central Africa.
In that vein, I would recommend that the Council
empower the Panels of Experts and other expert groups
with the mandate to investigate the networks that
facilitate the spoilers and by supporting them with an
additional expert on regional facilitators and enhancing
their mandates to investigate the networks.
My last recommendation is to work with key partners
to help Governments to enact transparency reforms. The
United Nations cannot force Governments to root out
corruption, nor should it. However, key international
partners, such as the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative (EITI) and civil society coalitions, work with
Governments on transparency reforms and, in my view,
the United Nations should work closely with them. For
example, the IMF is urging the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to publish beneficial
ownership information of key companies and improve
their anti-money laundering/combating the financing
of terrorism regimes.
UNOCA can meet regularly with EITI
multi-stakeholder groups throughout the region, as
well as IMF teams and civil society coalitions, to find
out what transparency reforms are their priorities. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, not
pushing but just referencing, could then raise those
issues when speaking to Heads of State from the region.
We believe that can be quite effective. I would argue
that the Security Council should include reporting on
financial transparency in the mandates of the mission.
Similarly, the Council should engage the
Governments of destination countries on conflict
resources. For example, the United Arab Emirates,
with respect to conflict gold, can do more as it pertains
to various reforms related to transparency. Those
steps would reinforce the calls for transparency and
bring them to the attention of the highest levels of
Government. That would be an important conflict19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

prevention tool, informing the Heads of State that there
are key reasonable steps that they can take and that
they can do more to prevent a much wider crisis with
disastrous human impacts.
I thank you again, Ambassador Norman-Chalet, for
this opportunity to brief the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Lezhnev for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): It is nice to see you
presiding over the Council, Madam President.
The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts of the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) and thanks the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Fall, for his briefing and
his work and that of his team. We welcome the efforts
of UNOCA in monitoring political peace and security
developments and trends in Central Africa this year.
We also welcome the good offices deployed, the work
on conflict prevention and mediation, support to
peace and security initiatives and efforts to enhance
coherence and coordination in the subregion. I would
like to say how important we also think it is that the
Special Representative continue his efforts to support
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) and its members in their work to strengthen
and reform the organization. UNOCA should look
to enhance its work on early warning and analysis,
alongside greater coordination with United Nations
country teams in the subregion, going forward. With
that focus on conflict prevention in mind, let me turn to
some specific country areas within UNOCA’s mandate.
The United Kingdom continues to share the
concerns set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/913) about the deteriorating humanitarian
and security situation in the North-West and SouthWest regions of Cameroon. We welcome reports and
information that humanitarian access in areas of
Cameroon controlled by the Government of Cameroon
have improved significantly over the past few months.
However, all parties need to do more to ensure that
humanitarian access is protected. I must particularly
condemn attacks on health infrastructure, personnel,
schools, teachers, parents and children, as set out in the
UNOCA report. Human rights violations and abuses
committed by all sides must stop, and all allegations
must be investigated.

S/PV. 8679

Let me say how much the United Kingdom
welcomes the steps of the Government of Cameroon to
convene a national dialogue and, alongside that, secure
the release of detainees. The Government of Cameroon
now needs to ensure that the key recommendations
from the national dialogue are implemented, including
strengthening bilingualism in the educational and
legal systems, decentralization by granting special
status to the North-West and South-West regions
and taking steps to engage diaspora groups. I again
stress that those are the own intentions and policies
of the Government of Cameroon. But we believe that
urgent follow-up on those recommendations is vital to
maintaining momentum. Put simply, words need to be
matched by actions. Failure to do so will only cause
the already concerning situation to deteriorate further.
The United Kingdom remains willing, as it has been
throughout, to continue to support the Government of
Cameroon in carrying out those recommendations and
urges all United Nations bodies to do likewise.
A united approach on Cameroon is important. The
recent Commonwealth-International Organization of
La Francophonie-African Union joint visit to Cameroon
helped promote the restoration of peace in the NorthWest and South-West regions. We look forward to
hearing about the follow-up recommendations based
on that joint visit. It is imperative that the regional and
wider international community continue to support
credible peacebuilding efforts, including through the
mechanism of the Peacebuilding Fund, and urgently
respond to the growing humanitarian need. We believe
that regional and subregional organizations, such
as the African Union and ECCAS, play an integral
role. We hope for further joint visits by the United
Nations and the African Union to Cameroon and
neighbouring countries.
Let me welcome the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights technical mission
to Cameroon, which was conducted at the invitation of
its Government, and urge prompt, continued and full
cooperation among all sides to ensure the protection of
civilians and accountability. It is important that there be
follow-up to the visit, including on impunity. Freedom
of political expression must be respected at all times,
including in the run-up to the forthcoming legislative
and municipal elections.
Let me turn briefly to the situation in the Lake Chad
basin. Special Representative Fall reminded us, in his
briefing and report, of the impact of climate change in

19-396607/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

that area. The UNOCA report highlighted deplorable
high levels of violence and human displacement,
resulting from Boko Haram and Islamic State in West
Africa attacks on civilian and military targets. The
United Kingdom recognizes the important role of the
countries of the region in supporting stability in the
Lake Chad basin, including through the Multinational
Joint Task Force, and the hosting of refugees. A
number of us were able to hear from the Executive
Secretary of the Lake Chad Basin Commission during
the Peacebuilding Commission’s annual session this
week on the progress made with respect to the regional
stabilization, recovery and resilience strategy for areas
affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad basin region.
All I would say is that I believe that we need to
do more to ensure the full implementation of resolution
2349 (2017) to tackle security, humanitarian and
development crises in the region. We fully support the
cooperation between UNOCA and the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel. We are very
pleased to hear about the joint visits between Special
Representatives Fall and Chambas. We look forward
to an update when reports on those visits are ready, as
well as any conclusions that they draw together on the
way forward.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress made
to date by President Touadera and the authorities of
the Central African Republic since the signing of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic in February. We also welcome
the reactivation of the Central African RepublicCameroon and Central African Republic-Democratic
Republic of the Congo bilateral commissions and the
advocacy role played by UNOCA in helping to bring
them about. We remain extremely concerned about the
ongoing political challenges and human rights situation
in Burundi and its humanitarian consequences. The
election scheduled for next year is a critical moment
for Burundi. We urge the Government to work with all
parties to ensure a fair and peaceful election.
Let me conclude by again noting that the report
and the briefing set out a number of areas where the
United Nations, in the form of its Secretariat, agencies,
funds and programmes, and Member States can
support countries and the region in the areas of conflict
prevention and conflict resolution. We all need to rise
to that challenge, and UNOCA is key to doing so.
8/17

06/12/2019

Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to deliver this statement on
behalf of the African countries members of the
Security Council — South Africa, Côte d’Ivoire and
Equatorial Guinea.
We, too, would like to congratulate Mr. François
Louncény Fall and the entire team of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) for his
detailed and informative briefing on the situation
in Central Africa and the work of the Office. Allow
me also to thank Mr. Sasha Lezhnev for the relevant
information he just provided. We would again like to
thank the Secretary-General for the recommendations
provided in his report (S/2019/913), in which he
confirms that regional offices are the platform for
progress in conflict prevention, in particular UNOCA,
whose work has been effective in promoting peace and
stability in the Central African subregion.
Against that backdrop, we will continue to support
UNOCA in its ongoing work to create synergies for
the purposes of promoting bilateral cooperation among
neighbouring countries and strengthening cooperation
with regional organizations — in particular the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community and the Gulf of Guinea Commission — in
the areas of peace, security and conflict prevention. We
also strongly believe that UNOCA needs to strengthen
its cooperation, mutual coordination of priorities and
ensure a clear division of tasks with other United
Nations organizations operating in the region and with
the United Nations Regional Office for West Africa
and the Sahel, as set out in presidential statement
S/PRST/2019/10, of 12 September.
We hope that the extension of UNOCA’s mandate
until 31 August 2021 will enable the Regional Office
to closely follow the electoral-cycle process in the
subregion, that the elections scheduled therein will
be held in a peaceful and tranquil environment and be
transparent, peaceful and inclusive, and that they will
address the problems of the present reality and the
threats facing the subregion, above all those related,
inter alia, to mercenary activities, terrorism, piracy
and organized crime, as those threats are currently
a major cause for concern in the area as a result of
the amplification of the uncontrolled circulation of
weapons and the conflicts taking place in the area, all
of which pose a serious threat to the peace and security
of States in the subregion.
19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

At the same time, we must continue to strongly
condemn the terror and attacks perpetrated by Boko
Haram since 2009, the year in which the Security
Council also raised the alarm about the group. Boko
Haram’s attacks continue to lead to devastating losses of
human life and pose a major threat to stability and peace
in Central and West Africa. We also recall presidential
statement S/PRST/2011/21, of 14 November 2011, which
strongly condemned the ongoing attacks carried out by
the Lord’s Resistance Army in parts of Central Africa,
which pose an ongoing threat to regional security.
In response to all those situations, in February,
during the first presidency of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2457 (2019) on the initiative to silence the
guns. This resolution will undoubtedly contribute
to safeguarding peace and security on the African
continent, and we hope that it will constitute a turning
point for the future of Africa, which recognizes that
silencing the guns will contribute greatly to saving
future generations from the scourge of war and building
an integrated, peaceful, secure and prosperous Africa.
We appreciate the efforts that the Central African
States have taken to achieve political, social and
economic stability in the subregion, as reflected in
the report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of UNOCA (S/2019/913) delivered by his Special
Representative. We welcome the national dialogue that
recently took place in Cameroon, which we believe
is a positive and significant step towards resolving
the disputes that have yet to be reconciled. We
appreciate the recent tripartite visit of the joint mission
to the country by the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, the
Secretary-General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie, Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo, and
the Commonwealth Secretary-General, Ms. Patricia
Scotland, which served as an opportunity to exchange
views on the implementation of the outcomes of the
national dialogue.
In that context, we align ourselves with the
declaration of the tripartite visit of the mission and
urge the Cameroonian authorities to support and
implement the outcomes of the national dialogue. The
rapid implementation of the outcomes of the dialogue
would not only demonstrate a commitment to the will
of the people of Cameroon, but would also serve as
confidence-building measures, which we believe would

S/PV. 8679

pave the way for reconciliation, peace, stability and a
return to normal life in the affected regions.
We appreciate the continued efforts to bring all
parties to the negotiating table. We encourage the
relevant parties to the conflict to heed the call to join
the negotiations, which are fundamental to resolving
differences of opinion. In the same vein, we urge
all parties to approach the negotiations in a spirit of
compromise and to strive towards achieving lasting
peace and stability in Cameroon. We would also like to
take this opportunity to congratulate the Government
of Cameroon for having hosted on 22 November the
extraordinary summit of Central African Heads of
State on the economic and monetary situation in the
CEMAC zone.
We appreciate UNOCA’s efforts to continue strongly
promoting the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic in the
countries of the subregion. We also welcome the work
of the joint bilateral commissions between the Central
African Republic, Cameroon and the Republic of the
Congo. At the same time, we encourage the resumption
of the work of the joint bilateral commissions between
the Central African Republic and all its other neighbours
in order to address cross-border issues. We strongly
hope that UNOCA, together with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, will support initiatives
aimed at enhancing the capacity of the national security
forces, in accordance with resolution 2447 (2018). Côte
d’Ivoire, with its first-hand experience in dealing with
post-conflict situations, contributed to the adoption of
this resolution.
We welcome the tripartite agreement signed by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Government
of Angola and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which paves the way
for the establishment of a mechanism for the safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable return of refugees.
We also commend the Government of Angola for
hosting from 26 to 28 November the 49th meeting of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.
While we also appreciate the measures that the
Governments of the region have implemented to
address the humanitarian situation, we nevertheless
remain concerned about the high number of internally
displaced persons, refugees and asylum seekers in the

19-396609/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

Central African subregion. Displaced persons need
to earn sustainable livelihoods and have their rights
and dignity respected, yet their circumstances are
compounded by the destabilizing activities of armed
groups and continued attacks on communities that
also remain exposed to the harsh realities of climate
change, malnutrition, cholera and Ebola, for which
the international community must provide adequate
technical, health and financial assistance.
In conclusion, we would like to emphasize that
strengthened cooperation between the Security Council
and the African Peace and Security Architecture of the
African Union, which also reinforces the Council’s
subregional initiatives to advance the women and
peace and security agenda, as set out in resolution 2493
(2019), adopted on 29 October during South Africa’s
presidency of the Council, will serve to advance the
implementation of that agenda and its priorities by
ensuring and promoting the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at all stages of peace processes.
Lastly, South Africa, Côte d’Ivoire and Equatorial
Guinea reaffirm their support for the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whose
mission of good offices and preventive diplomacy
continues to be relevant in the quest for peace, stability
and socioeconomic development in the States of
Central Africa.
Ms. Morrison González (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the briefers for the
information they have given us today.
We welcome the good offices of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in
promoting peaceful solutions in the subregion through
dialogue, confidence-building and reconciliation
among the parties. We want to highlight its advocacy
work with the countries of the subregion on the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central
African Republic, and its contribution to the resumption
of the activities of the joint commission of the Central
African Republic and the Congo. We also underscore
their enormous efforts towards a peaceful resolution
of the crisis in the North-West and South-West regions
of Cameroon.
We are sorry to see the deterioration of the security
situation in some parts of the region, especially in the
Lake Chad area, as a result of Boko Haram’s attacks and
the worrying situation in Cameroon. We also condemn
10/17

06/12/2019

the abuses committed against civilians, particularly
the abduction of adults and children by the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
The adverse effects of climate change, such as
increasingly frequent and large-scale droughts and
floods, are a challenge for Central Africa and continue
to be of great concern. The incidence of extreme
weather events hurts farming and has a negative impact
on people’s health and food security. In that regard,
we welcomed the extraordinary ministerial meeting
in Brazzaville of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and its Governments’ adoption
of a common subregional position on the contribution
of Central African forests to the global fight against
climate change and commitment to reducing threats to
the world’s second-largest rainforest and mobilizing
more global support for the subregion. We believe this
initiative will make a positive contribution to improving
the living conditions of those who live in forests and in
urban centres alike.
The humanitarian situation in various parts of
Central Africa continues to be of great concern,
particularly in Cameroon, where the escalating
violence and insecurity have affected the lives of
hundreds of thousands of civilians, especially women
and children. The security is exacerbating the high
rate of sexual abuse and exploitation, as well as the
incidence of murders, abductions, arbitrary detentions
and forced recruitment. We deplore and strongly
condemn the killing of a humanitarian actor in northwestern Cameroon on 1 December and urge regional
organizations to continue to intensify their mediation
and dialogue efforts among the parties in order to
build the confidence and political will needed to build
sustainable peace throughout the country.
In conclusion, we commend the work of Mr. Fall,
UNOCA and ECCAS for their efforts to promote a
peaceful solution to the crises in the region. We urge
all the countries of Central Africa to expand the
democratic space and take concrete steps to improve
the processes of dialogue with the various political
actors and civil society, with a view to addressing the
common problems caused by armed groups, illegal
activities and transhumance, in order to develop a
safe region, respect for human rights and sustainable
stability, which would enable its human and social
wealth and natural resources to be used more effectively
and thereby transform its economy, offering greater
19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

opportunities for socioeconomic development for each
individual country and the region at large.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): We would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Fall and Mr. Lezhnev for
their briefings. As the Special Representative said, the
political, security and humanitarian situation remains
very fragile in several States in Central Africa. I would
like to take this opportunity to make a few remarks.
First, we remain concerned about the situation
in Cameroon. While 9 February 2020, the date
scheduled for the next legislative and local elections,
is fast approaching, the situation is still complicated.
On the one hand, we commend the Cameroonian
authorities for holding a national dialogue and for the
recommendations that followed it and the release of
political prisoners. Those are encouraging signs. We
would also like to commend all the parties for their
commitment to Switzerland’s mediation in order to
resolve the crisis in the English-speaking regions. On
the other hand, the situation on the ground has not yet
changed substantially. The English-speaking regions
unfortunately continue to be the scene of hostilities
and human rights abuses by all parties, while an entire
generation is at risk of being denied access to education.
In addition, the recommendations of the national
dialogue have been neither endorsed nor implemented.
We therefore call on all the parties to work for
concrete results. That applies to both the national
dialogue and mediation. Only through dialogue and
negotiation can solutions be found. Nor should we forget
the other crises in Cameroon, on the humanitarian
front and with regard to the problem of Boko Haram’s
terrorism. The lack of coverage of the humanitarian
plan, which has reached only 41 per cent, only increases
the country’s challenges. We call on all partners to do
their best to contribute to that end.
Secondly, we would also like to take this opportunity
to revisit the climate and security issue. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/913) notes several positive
developments. Among them are Gabon’s adoption of
new penal and penal procedure codes that substantially
increase the penalties for environmental crimes, as well
as the adoption by the Economic Community of Central
African States of a subregional common position on the
contributions of Central African forests to the fight
against climate change. We welcome the increased
attention to the effects of climate change, ecological

S/PV. 8679

change and natural disasters on the stability of Central
Africa and encourage the mission to continue on that
path. As the report points out, we must recognize that
we can and must do more.
Lastly, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
remains a major issue in the region, and we should
therefore provide the various missions covering Central
Africa with a robust mandate to enable them to tackle
it. We should also work closely with regional partners
that are already active in that context, such as the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region.
As for Belgium, we are working closely with the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the judicial authorities in Belgium have had
no hesitation in starting investigations of individuals
suspected of being involved in trafficking.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General François Louncény Fall
for his briefing on the situation in the Central
African region. We also listened carefully to Mr. Sasha
Lezhnev’s briefing.
Russia has consistently supported the activities of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
as an important tool for implementing preventive
diplomacy. The challenges facing the countries of
the subregion are unquestionably complex, and in
that regard it is crucial for regional actors to be at the
forefront in matters of crisis prevention and conflict
resolution. We welcome the focus of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) on
achieving the institutional reform that it needs to
strengthen the capacity of an organization that is so
important to the subregion.
Central Africa plays a key role in countering the
spread of terrorism on the African continent. The
penetration by radical and terrorist elements of the
subregion has been accompanied by illegal trafficking
in weapons, drugs and mineral and other natural
resources. We were troubled by the information
that Boko Haram still has military capacities and
is capable of conducting major attacks, and that its
activity in Chad and Cameroon is not decreasing.
Extremists are attacking civilians, United Nations and
non-governmental organization personnel, and military
checkpoints. The significant influx of foreign terrorists
into Boko Haram, including militants from the Islamic

19-3966011/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

State, is seriously worrying. We believe that regional
efforts to develop coordinated approaches to the fight
against any manifestations of terrorism are extremely
important, and the activities of the Multinational Joint
Task Force are a good example of that. It is crucial
to ensure its adequate financing. For our part, we
are ready to continue working in various formats in
the interests of eliminating the terrorist threat on the
African continent. We are focusing in particular on
identifying sources of financing for local terrorists and
their contacts with other international radical groups.
We are closely monitoring the developing situation
in the Central African Republic. We support President
Touadera’s efforts to reform the security sector and
enhance the capacity of the armed forces as soon
as possible. The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed
on 6 February, is an important foundation for the
continuing resolution of the situation in the country.
Russia will continue its full support to the national
reconciliation process by coordinating efforts with all
involved in the quest for ways to normalize the situation.
One of the other factors in the instability in the
Central African region is piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
Unfortunately, the criminal raids on foreign vessels,
including hostage-taking, continue. Russia has had a
positive experience of participating in the international
efforts to combat piracy in the north-western Indian
Ocean in the framework of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. We hope it can be useful for
resolving similar issues in the Gulf of Guinea.
We are concerned about the ongoing activities of
the Lord’s Resistance Army, which is still engaging
in illicit looting and robbery in various parts of the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and South Sudan, and combating it should
remain a priority for the States of the Central African
region. We hope that the concept developed under
the auspices of the African Union and ECCAS for
eliminating this threat will get results.
We are also closely following the development of
the situation in Cameroon. The issue of the country’s
English-speaking provinces has deep historical roots,
and the only way to reach a solution to such accumulated
problems is at the negotiating table, while respecting
human rights and ensuring the rule of law. We urge all
the parties in Cameroon to show maximum restraint
and refrain from the use of any form of violence. In that
12/17

06/12/2019

connection, we welcome the national dialogue that took
place from 30 September to 4 October and hope that the
recommendations based on its outcome will be put into
practice as soon as possible.
In conclusion, we would like to remind the Council
that the challenges and threats facing Central Africa
are inextricably linked to one another and the States
of the region themselves are interdependent. The
destabilization of the situation in one country can bring
down its neighbours’ security too, and it is therefore
extremely important not to cross the line between
prevention and interference in internal affairs.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. François Louncény
Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), for his briefing, and to
commend the efforts and activities of UNOCA in
Central Africa in its fulfilment of its mandate. I would
also like to thank Mr. Sasha Lezhnev for his valuable
briefing. Today I will focus on three aspects of the issue.
First, with regard to the security and political
situation in Central Africa, the recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/913) gives a clear overview
of the deteriorating security situation in a number of
countries in the region resulting from problems to
do with election processes. We have seen political
and security tensions increase in Cameroon since the
contested presidential elections there in October 2018,
and they are likely to continue to worsen, given the
stark differences in views in the country’s North-West
and South-West regions. In Chad, the postponement of
legislative and local elections since 2015 has continued
to have repercussions affecting the security situation,
especially in the north and some parts of eastern Chad.
We hope that elections will be held in the first quarter
of 2020, in accordance with the announcement by the
National Independent Electoral Commission. We also
look forward to an inclusive national dialogue that can
halt the bloodshed and ensure political and security
stability in the countries of the region that are dealing
with political divisions and deteriorating security.
This is especially important in view of the fact that a
number of major events in the region are approaching,
including the presidential elections to be held in the
Central African Republic and Burundi in 2020, which
we hope will include all political parties, ensure the
participation of international observers, and will be
held in a stable security environment. All of this will
19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

undoubtedly have positive effects for the stability and
prosperity of the region as a whole.
We stress the importance of cooperation
between the Governments of the region and regional,
subregional and international organizations such as
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the Central
African Economic and Monetary Community, the Lake
Chad Basin Commission and other relevant actors. The
security situation in the region continues to be a source
of concern in the light of the ongoing violence and armed
conflicts, which have unfortunately claimed the lives of
many innocent civilians. We stress the need for radical
solutions to end the conflicts and hold those responsible
to account. We condemn in the strongest possible terms
the criminal acts and suicide bombings carried out by
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army, which
hinder progress on all fronts and constitute a serious
and direct threat, as Mr. Fall said. International and
regional cooperation is essential if we are to overcome
those challenges.
Secondly, we deplore the worsening humanitarian
situation in the region in general, given the large numbers
of those in need of urgent humanitarian assistance and
the growing numbers of refugees and people forced
into displacement as a result of violence and outbreaks
of cholera, Ebola and other diseases. We share the
Secretary-General’s concerns about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in a number of countries in the
region and urge them to continue cooperating with
regional and international organizations. They should
work harder to alleviate human suffering and address
the various threats facing the region, including the
environmental risks posed by climate change and its
impact on agriculture, as well as the lack of rainfall and
the drying up of various lakes.
The third and final aspect I would like to discuss
is cooperation with UNOCA and other organizations.
Since this is the Council’s last meeting about Central
Africa during Kuwait’s membership of the Council, I
would like to take this opportunity to stress that over
the past two years we have seen a number of Central
African countries make good progress, which we
have commended and looked forward to building on.
Other countries, however, still have a long way to go.
There are many and diverse challenges that require
meaningful cooperation among Governments and
regional and international organizations if we are
to meet the aspirations of the peoples of the region

S/PV. 8679

to achieve security, stability and a dignified life,
especially given the fact that those countries enjoy a
wealth of natural resources.
In conclusion, I once again thank Mr. Fall and the
UNOCA team for their outstanding efforts.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me too thank Special
Representative Fall and Mr. Lezhnev for their very
comprehensive and interesting briefings.
As the electoral process remains an important
factor for stability in Central Africa, we commend the
further positive developments towards the consolidation
of democratic governance. Special Representative Fall
described some achievements made in the region during
the reporting period.
Poland praises the crucial work carried out by the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) in terms of good offices, mediation and
preventive diplomacy. Bearing in mind the upcoming
elections in several countries of the region, we expect
that the Governments of those States will make every
effort to establish the necessary conditions leading
to timely, inclusive, credible and peaceful electoral
processes and will ensure the meaningful participation
of women and young people. We encourage the
authorities of the countries of the region to continue
building trust among all stakeholders as a precondition
for the establishment of a stable and constructive
political environment.
Poland the welcomes the recent decision of the
Cameroonian authorities to convene a national dialogue
as a significant step towards addressing the difficult
situation in the country. At the same time, we are deeply
worried about the continued reports of serious human
rights violations and abuses attributed to all sides of
the conflict. Let me stress that all those responsible
for these serious violations and abuses of human rights
should be investigated and held accountable.
Poland appreciates all the efforts the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
in Cameroon, including its recent technical assessment
mission. In the light of reports from that visit, we call
on all parties on the ground to immediately stop the
violence and work together in good faith, including
for a process of open and inclusive dialogue to reduce
tensions and devise a long-term political agreement.
The security situation in the region remains fragile.
Recent developments in the northern and eastern parts of

19-3966013/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

Chad are of increasing concern. We are also worried that
Boko Haram and the Lord’s Resistance Army continue
to provoke serious insecurity across significant parts
of the region. This shows that multilateral initiatives
to combat those organizations require the continued
support of the international community.
While appreciating the United Nations and
European Union efforts made so far, Poland recognizes
the key role of regional partners in bringing about
reconciliation and building dialogue in Central Africa.
We welcome the recent consensus on the plan for the
institutional reform of the Economic Community of
Central African States, and we look forward to its
swift adoption.
Poland recognizes the leading role of UNOCA in
enhancing the coordination and coherence of measures
taken, as well as in fostering synergies among all
United Nations presences in Central Africa. I would
therefore like to express our full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Fall, and
his entire team.
Mr. Velásquez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
the comprehensive briefings by the briefers joining
us today.
Peru recognizes and supports the important work
that the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) has been doing in Central Africa. We
specifically welcome its significant contributions to the
resumption of the joint commission between the Central
African Republic and the Congo, the implementation
of the national dialogue processes by the Governments
of Cameroon and the Congo, and the relaunch of the
national framework for political dialogue in Chad.

06/12/2019

and the Sahel, given the positive impact it can have
on combating terrorist organizations such as the Boko
Haram and armed groups like the Lord’s Resistance
Army. We also underscore the synergies that UNOCA
can develop with the Economic Community of Central
African States in such areas as institutional reform and
combating the illicit trafficking in natural resources by
armed groups.
We are deeply concerned about the continuing
violations of human rights committed not only by armed
groups, but also by security forces. We therefore call on
the Governments of the subregion to devote their efforts
and resources to the fight against impunity through
meaningful reforms of their justice systems and the
establishment of effective accountability mechanisms.
To that end, cooperation with organizations specializing
in the promotion of and respect for human rights is
very welcome.
We also stress the importance of the connections
that UNOCA can and must develop with civil society
in areas such as gender equity, human rights and
the supervision of electoral processes, as well as in
encouraging the private sector to contribute to the efforts
to build a stable, peaceful and prosperous subregion.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Peru’s full support for
the work of UNOCA and stress the need for it to be
supported by the international community, in particular
those countries and regional bodies with special
influence on the region.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, allow me
to thank the briefers, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Fall and Mr. Lezhnev, for their
comprehensive briefings and recommendations.

Notwithstanding, we note with concern the
persistence of a dynamic of insecurity and instability
in the area, including incidents of intercommunal
violence, the exacerbation of political tensions and
repression, extremism, the activities of armed groups,
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation and
human rights violations, especially, as was noted
earlier, in the north-western part of Cameroon.

We have noted from the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/913) that the situation in Central
Africa remains volatile and highly charged by political
and security challenges. Nevertheless, we should not
overlook the positive progress that has been made in
the region since the beginning of the year, including the
peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic.

We believe that the urgency of attending to those
problems requires regional organizations to play a
constructive and complementary role. We encourage the
timely strengthening of the cooperation that UNOCA
enjoys with the United Nations Office for West Africa

Undoubtedly, the region is currently under close
observation by the international community. We
have heard on so many occasions that multilateral
and bilateral efforts to support the region are being
prepared and delivered. We need to collectively seize

14/17

19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

that momentum in order to assist countries of the
region in their efforts to address various challenges to
ensure a better future for the region. We also welcome
the strategic review of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), which provides a
clear picture on how it can effectively support regional
efforts in Central Africa.
Allow me to focus my comments on the
following points.
First, the root causes of conflict should be
comprehensively addressed. We share the view of
the Secretary-General that an inclusive, genuine and
credible electoral process remains the key factor for the
region. The Governments of the region must regain the
trust of their peoples, especially after years of conflict
and political distrust. They must also earn one another’s
trust. Good neighbours create good communities. The
international community should work together with the
Governments concerned to provide capacity in enabling
trust. In short, trust is important and partnership is key.
Peace and stability remain fragile. The region
is plagued by threats from armed groups, the illicit
exploitation of and trade in natural resources, and
communicable diseases. The violence committed
by the Lord’s Resistance Army and Boko Haram has
significantly affected the stability of the region. This
must stop.
Secondly, partnership between regional and
subregional organizations, in collaboration with the
United Nations, is needed. Indonesia adheres to the
principle that neighbours know best. As natural first
responders, regional and subregional organizations play
a very important role in enabling the region to solve
this crisis. We recognize the important work done by
the African Union and other subregional organizations
for the region.
We would also like to underline the importance of
a clear division of labour between UNOCA and other
United Nations entities. To that end, we encourage
stronger UNOCA support for strengthening the capacity
of the Economic Community of Central African States.
Regional challenges persist. It is our obligation, in
accordance with our mandate as the Security Council,
to continue providing support to countries of the region.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Fall and Mr. Lezhnev for their briefings.

S/PV. 8679

While the overall situation in the countries of
Central Africa has been stable of late and positive
progress has been made, challenges remain. The
activities of Boko Haram, the Lord’s Resistance Army
and other armed groups and terrorist organizations
still pose serious threats to the countries of the
region, especially the Lake Chad basin. Moreover, the
humanitarian situation does not allow for optimism.
Underdevelopment, extreme poverty and other deepseated factors perpetuate a range of serious challenges,
including terrorism and intercommunal conflicts.
China commends the collective efforts of the
countries of Central Africa to tackle these challenges.
We welcome the extraordinary summit of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), to be
held later this year, and support the Summit’s planned
approval of ECCAS reform measures. China also
commends Special Representative Fall and the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
for their active work and good offices mediation and
conflict prevention in their endeavours to resolve issues
in the region.
China wishes to stress the following three points.
First, it is critical to highlight the importance of
the development perspective. A deep knowledge of how
development impacts peace and stability and relates
to specific issues provides the basis for an in-depth
analysis of regional issues. Most of the challenges in
Central Africa are, in essence, related to insufficient,
unbalanced and non-inclusive development. The
countries of the region should be more conscious of the
centrality of development so as to resolve the root causes
of the said issues. The international community should
support the countries of the region in their development
endeavours and promote cooperation in economic
and social sectors. UNOCA should strengthen its
development perspective and integrate it into conflict
prevention efforts.
Secondly, we need to respect host-country
ownership. The mediation and good offices of the
international community and the United Nations
should be based on the consent of the host countries.
The situation in some countries poses no threat to
international peace and security, and those countries
want no United Nations intervention. The United
Nations and the Security Council should fully respect
their positions. China supports regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and ECCAS,

19-3966015/17

S/PV.8679

Central African region

in their efforts to solve African issues in the African
way, through unity and self-empowerment.
Thirdly, United Nations agencies in the region
and subregional organizations should strengthen
coordination. The United Nations has an extensive
presence in Central Africa, such as the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Office of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region
and the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Burundi. All parties should enhance
communication and avoid stepping on each other’s toes.
China appreciates the efforts of countries of the region
to address those challenges. UNOCA can strengthen
communication and coordination with ECCAS, the
Lake Chad Basin Commission, the secretariat of the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram in
order to facilitate and complement each other’s work.
China stands ready to continue to work more closely
with countries in Central Africa, continue to support
the work of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and UNOCA, and play a constructive role in
helping those countries maintain security and stability,
achieve greater economic development and improve the
humanitarian situation.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): At the outset, let me too
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Mr. Lezhnev for their insightful and
comprehensive briefings and recommendations.
I would like to start by commending the important
work of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) in the Central African region.
UNOCA plays a crucial role in stabilizing the region
and is essential to preventing any further escalation. We
would also like to expressly welcome the good offices
role that the Special Representative can play.
We also would like to express our concern about
the precarious situation in the region, which continues
to be beset by challenges, such as the effects of climate
change on security and stability. I think it is worth
noting, in this context, how many times the Special
Representative referred to this nexus in his briefing and
in how many different circumstances he considered this
nexus to be relevant. We agree with his assessment.
16/17

06/12/2019

Of course, there are also other challenges, such
as cross-border terrorism, particularly by the Lord’s
Resistance Army and Boko Haram, conflicts between
farmers and herders, and small arms proliferation.
Those threats destabilize the region, exacerbate
the humanitarian crisis and undermine chances for
political dialogue.
We would like to underline that many of the issues
at hand do not stop at national borders and have to be
tackled jointly, which is why one of UNOCA’s key
tasks should be to promote regional integration through
organizations such as the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS). We would
like to encourage UNOCA’s close cooperation and
coordination with other actors in the region, including
other United Nations bodies, such as the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel or country offices,
as well as more specialized bodies, including United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies, like the Office of
Counter-Terrorism or the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate.
It is also important for UNOCA to work on
addressing the effects of climate change in order to
ensure stability and security in the region. At the same
time, we believe that it should strengthen its focus on
the women and peace and security agenda and support
more inclusive political processes. The engagement
of civil society is also critical. In addition, strategic
cooperation with regional groups, especially ECCAS,
should be strengthened. Together with UNOCA and the
African Union, ECCAS can play an important role in
preventive diplomacy.
We would like to express particular concern about
the deteriorating situation in Cameroon and its negative
impact on the entire Central African region. We
very much regret that the situation has not improved
following the grand national dialogue and that violence,
unfortunately, continues on both sides. We deplore
the incident on 1 December of secessionists targeting
a passenger aircraft with gunfire, which constitutes
unacceptable violence against civilians. We urge
the Government of Cameroon to swiftly publish and
implement the recommendations of the grand national
dialogue. Special status for Anglophone regions, for
example, is a promising approach, but needs to be
further substantiated.
We also add that we very much appreciate
Switzerland’s mediation efforts and would also welcome
19-39660

06/12/2019

Central African region

regional and wider African engagement. Before
concluding, I would like to reiterate that we strongly
believe that we should keep an eye on the situation
in Cameroon and consider further how UNOCA can
contribute to resolving the conflict.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
I would like to join other colleagues in thanking
Special Representative Fall for his briefing today. We
commend his efforts to bring prosperity and security
to Central Africa, and the United States is grateful for
his work in Cameroon to facilitate a peaceful resolution
to the crisis in the Anglophone North-West and SouthWest regions. I would also like to thank Mr. Lezhnev for
his candid assessment and concrete recommendations
to address the challenges in the region.
As the Council seeks to highlight the most pressing
concerns to international peace and security, we
must clearly state that we are increasingly concerned
by rapidly worsening humanitarian and human
rights situations in Cameroon. Credible reports
detail persistent human rights violations, including
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary and unlawful detention
and torture, all conducted with impunity.
What started as a political and human rights crisis
in the region has become a humanitarian situation
requiring immediate attention. Parties to the conflict
limit humanitarian access, and a worsening security
situation has reportedly left as much as 65 per cent of
the North-West and South-West regions of Cameroon
out of bounds to aid workers. Since 2016, when the
protests in Cameroon started, nearly 3,000 people have
died as a result of the ensuing violence, including 300
defence and security personnel.
The conflict has created more than 500,000
internally displaced persons and nearly 50,000
refugees. On 5 November, UNICEF reported that
around 1.9 million people, most of them children, were
estimated to need assistance. This is an increase of
80 per cent compared to last year and an almost 15-fold
increase since 2017. We call on separatist groups and
the Government of Cameroon to ensure humanitarian
access to these areas to deliver life-saving assistance
to those who now find themselves in need. We express
our condolences to the family of a local aid worker,
who was kidnapped and executed by unknown armed
men on 30 November during the official conduct of his

S/PV. 8679

duties. We also call on all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
as applicable, as well as the protections they provide.
The situation in Cameroon warrants immediate
action from all parties, including the African Union
and regional Heads of State. As this month is about
doing and not just talking, I want to briefly list a few
helpful steps that could be taken to restore a measure
of stability.
We urge the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and our partners to take a
more assertive role in resolving Cameroon’s conflict and
to continue to urge both the Government of Cameroon
and separatist groups to enter into open-ended dialogue
without preconditions, relinquishing their focus on
a military solution. We also fully support the Swissled mediation process between the Government of
Cameroon and the separatists, and we urge both sides
to take concrete actions to move the initiative forward.
The United States also appreciates the work done
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall
to build regional support for the full implementation
of the 6 February Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. The
United States supports the agreement and believes it
to be the best pathway to lasting peace, security and
stability in the Central African Republic. In a spirit of
reconciliation, we urge UNOCA to continue working in
coordination with the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, the African Union and neighbouring countries
to rally regional political support for the timely and
effective implementation of this agreement.
We would like to again thank Special Representative
Fall for all the hard work he does in UNOCA. Over
the coming year, we look forward to supporting his
promotion of peaceful electoral processes, as well
as his cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, so as to bring peace and prosperity to
Central Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
As there are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers, I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

19-3966017/17
