At its 1996th meeting, on 29 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representatives of Burundi, the
German Democratic Republic, J amaica, Lesotho, Somalia and Sweden to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the question.

wana, Guinea and Viet Nam to parttc1pate, without
vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2040th meeting, on 26 Octobcr 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Guyana,
Lesotho, Niger and the United Republic of Cameroon
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

At its 1998th meeting, on 30 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representative of Ethiopia to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

At its 2042nd meeting, on 28 October 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Ghana,
Mauritania, Somalia and the Sudan to participate,
without vote. in the discussion of the question.

At its 1999th meeting, on 31 March 1977, the Council decided to invite the representative of Guyana to
participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
question.

At the samc meeting, the Council also decided to
extend an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, to the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid.

At its 2036th meeting, on 24 October 1977, the
Couneil decided to invite the representatives of Nigeria
and Tunisia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "The question of South Africa:
letter dated 20 October 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12420)"P

At its 2043rd meeting, on 28 Octobcr 1977, the
Council dccided, at the request of the representatives
of Benin, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius, 14
to extend an invitation to Mr. Horst Gerhard Klcinschmidt undcr rulc 39 of the provisional rules of proccdurc.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at
the request of the representatives of Benin, the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya and Mauritius, 1=1 to extend invitations
to Mr. M. J. Makatini and Mr. David Sibeko under
ru1e 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2045th meeting, on 31 October 1977, the
Council decided, at the rcquest of the representatives of
Benin, the Libyan A rab Jamahiriya and Mauritius, 15 to
extend an invitation to Mr. Elias L. Ntloedibe undcr
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2037th meeting, on 25 October 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Saudi
Arabia and Togo to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the question.
Resolution 417 ( 1977)
of 31 October 1977

At its 2038th meeting, on 25 October 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Algeria
and Senegal to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

The Security Council,
Recalling its resolution 392 (1976) of 19 June 1976,
strongly condcmning the racist régime of South Africa
for its resort to massive violence against and wanton
killings of the African people, including schoolchildren
and students and others opposing racial discrimination,
and calling upon the South African racist régime
urgcntly to end violence against the African people and
to take urgent steps to eliminate apartheid and racial
discrimination,

At its 2039th meeting, on 26 October 1977, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Bots12 Ibid., Supplement far Octobcr, November and Decemhcr
1977.
13 Ibid., document S/12423.

11 //,id.,
1·' //,id.,

4

document S/12429.
document S/12432.

tion, and to submit a first report not later than 17
February 1978.

Noting with deep anxiety and indignation that the
South African racist régime has continued violence and
massive repression against the black people and all
opponents of apartheid in defiance of the resolutions of
the Security Council,
Gravely concerned over reports of torture of political
prisoners and the deaths of a number of detainees, as
well as the mounting wave of repression against individuals, organizations and the news media since 19
October 1977,
Convinced that the violence and repression by the
South African racist régime have greatly aggravated the
situation in South Africa and will certainly lead to
violent conflict and racial conflagration with serious
international repercussions,
Rea,ffirming its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the South African people for the elimination
of apartheid and racial discrimination,
Affirming the right to the exercise of self-determination by ail the people of South Africa as a whole, irrespective of race, colour or creed,
Mindful of its responsibilities under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international
peace and security,
I. Strongly condemns the South African racist
régime for its resort to massive violence and repression
against the black people, who constitute the great majority of the country, as well as al! other opponents of
apartheid;
2. Expresses its support for, and solidarity with, al!
those struggling for the elimination of apartheid and
racial discrimination and ail victims of violence and
repression by the South African racist régime;
3. Demands that the racist régime of South Africa:
(a) End violence and repression against the black
people and other opponents of apartheid;
( b)
Release al! persans imprisoned un der arbitrary
security laws and ail those detained for their opposition
to apartheid;
( c) Cease forthwith its indiscriminate violence
against peaceful demonstrators against apartheid, murders in detention and torture of political prisoners;
( d) Abrogate the bans on organiz:itions and the
news media opposed to apartheid;
(e)
Abolish the "Bantu education" system and ail
other measures of apartheid and racial discrimination;
(f) Abolish the policy of bantustanization, abandon the policy of apartheid and ensure majority rule
based on justice and equality;
4. Requests ail Governments and organizations to
t~ke ail appropriate measures to secure the implcmentatton of paragraph 3 of the present resolution;
5. Further requests all Governments and organizations to contribute generously for assistance to the
victims of violence and repression, including educational assistance to student refugees from South Africa;
6. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Special Committee against Apartheid, to follow
the situation and report to the Security Council, as appropriate, on the implementation of the prcsent resolu-

Adopted unanimously at the
2045th mectin,:.

Resolution 418 (1977)
of 4 Novemher 1977

T/1e Sernrity Council,
Reca!ling its resolution 392 l 1976) of 19 June 1976.
strongly condemning the South African Government for
its resort to massive violence against and killings of the
African people, including schoolchildren and students
and others opposing racial discrimination, and calling
upon that Government urgently to end violence against
the African people and to take urgent steps to climinate
apal'fhcid and raci:il discrimination,
Recognizing that the military build-up by South
Africa and its persistent acts of aggression against the
neighbouring S1ates scriously disturb the security of
thosc States,
Furtlzer recognizing that the cxisting anns embargo
must be strengthencd and universally applied, without
any rescrvations or qualifications whatsocver, in ordcr
to prcvcnt a further ,:ggravation of the grave situation
in South Africa,
Takinr; note of the Lagos Declaration (or Action
against Apartheid, rn
Gravely concerned that South Africa is at the threshold of producing nuclcar weapons,
Strongly condemning the South African Government
for its acts of repression, its defiant continuance of the
system of apartheid and its attacks against neighbouring
independent States,
Considering that the policies and acts of the South
African Government are fraught with danger to international peace and security,
Recalling its resolution 181 (1963) of 7 August
1963 and other resolutions concerning a voluntary arms
embargo against South Africa,
Com·inced that a mandatory arms embargo needs to
be univcrsally applied against South Africa in the first
instance.
Acting therefore under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations,
1. Determines, having regard to the policies and
acts of the South African Government, that the acquisition by South Africa of arms and related matériel constitutcs a threat to the maintenance of international
pcacc and security;
2. Decides that all States shall cease forthwith any
provision to South Africa of arms and related matfriel
of ail types, including the sale or transfer of weapons
and ammunition, military vehicles and equipment, parami litary police equipmcnt, and spare parts for the aforementioncd, and shall ccase as well the provision of ail
1
"

5

United Nation~ publication. Sales No. E.77.XIV.2, sect. X.
