United Nations

S/PV.4630

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4630

th meeting
Tuesday, 22 October 2002, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Belinga-Eboutou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Jiang Jiang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Mauriès
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mr. Jingree
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Strømmen
Mr. Konuzin
Mr. Mahbubani
Mr. Mekdad
Ms. MacKenzie
Mr. Williamson

Agenda
Strengthening cooperation between the United Nations system and the Central
African region in the maintenance of peace and security
Letter dated 21 October 2002 from the Permanent Representative of Cameroon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2002/1179).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-65330 (E)

*0265330*

S/PV.4630

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations system and the Central African region in
the maintenance of peace and security
Letter dated 21 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Cameroon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2002/1179)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burundi, the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Congo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Denmark, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Gabon and Japan, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Francophonie of the Congo.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Adada
(Congo) took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Agba Otikpo Mezode, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mezode
(Central African Republic) took a seat at the side
of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

2

At the invitation of the President, Mr. She
Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
took a seat at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Santiago Nsobeya Efuman Nchama,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and Francophonie of Equatorial Guinea.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsobeya
Efuman Nchama (Equatorial Guinea) took a seat
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, Minister of State and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Francophonie of Gabon.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ping
(Gabon) took a seat at the side of the Council
Chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nteturuye
(Burundi), Mr. Laotegguelnodji (Chad), Ms. Løj
(Denmark),
Mr. Aboul
Gheit
(Egypt)
and
Mr. Motomura (Japan) took the seats reserved for them
at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Emmanuel Mbi,
Country Director for South-Central Africa and the
Great Lakes Region of the World Bank.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Emmanuel Mbi, Country Director for
South-Central Africa and the Great Lakes Region of
the World Bank, to take a seat at the Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of

S/PV.4630

objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Julia Taft,
Director for the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and
Recovery of the United Nations Development
Programme.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Julia Taft, Director of the Bureau for
Crisis Prevention and Recovery of the United Nations
Development Programme, to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Ivan Šimonović, President of the Economic and
Social Council.
It is so decided.
I invite His Excellency Mr. Ivan Šimonović,
President of the Economic and Social Council, to take
a seat at the Council table.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“In my capacity as Chairman of the African
Group for the month of October 2002, I have the
honour to request an authorization for
Ambassador Amadou Kébé, Permanent Observer
of the African Union to the United Nations, to
intervene in the debate on ‘Strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system
and the Central African region in the maintenance
of peace and security’ in the public meeting of
the Security Council to be held on 22 October
2002, in accordance with rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council.”
That letter has been published as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/2002/1178.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Amadou
Kébé.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Amadou Kébé to take a seat at the
side of the Council Chamber.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 October 2002 from the
Permanent Representative of Cameroon to the United
Nations, which reads as follows:
“In accordance with General Assembly
resolution 55/161, of 12 December 2000, I have
the honour to request an authorization for
Ambassador Nelson Cosme, Deputy SecretaryGeneral of the Economic Community of Central
African States, to participate in the public
meeting of the Security Council to be held on
Tuesday, 22 October 2002 on ‘Strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system
and the Central African region in the maintenance
of peace and security’, in accordance with rule 39
of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Security Council.”
That letter will be published as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/1181.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation to Mr. Nelson
Cosme.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Nelson Cosme to take a seat at the
side of the Council Chamber.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 21 October 2002 from the Permanent
Representative of Cameroon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which has been published under the symbol
S/2002/1179.
In the course of this meeting, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to give the floor first to
representatives of non-member States. If I hear no
objection, I shall consider that the Council agrees to
that proposal.
It is so decided.
I now give the floor to Mr. Tuliameni Kalomoh,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

3

S/PV.4630

Mr. Kalomoh: On behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, who is away from Headquarters, I am greatly
honoured to convey to the members of the Council his
best wishes for the success of this important meeting. I
also wish to welcome to New York the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs who have travelled from their capitals
to participate in these deliberations on strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
Central African region in the maintenance of peace and
security. I should also like to recognize the central and
most commendable role played by your country,
Cameroon, and by you personally, Mr. President, as
President of the Security Council for the month of
October in initiating this crucially important event.
Members of the Council have before them an
information note prepared by the Secretariat on the
occasion of this meeting. Member States are also aware
of the report recently submitted to the fifty-seventh
session of the General Assembly on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS). Given
that we are here today specifically to examine the issue
of cooperation in the maintenance of peace and
security in Central Africa, I should like to highlight the
following specific points in that domain.
The United Nations has long been committed, and
remains actively involved, in assisting Central African
States to realize their goals to promote sustainable
peace and development. To that end, the various
departments, offices, bodies, programmes and agencies
of the United Nations system are working closely with
Central African States, both individually and jointly, as
indicated in our information note.
The current political, social, economic, security
and humanitarian situation in several countries in the
subregion is a source of serious concern. Several of the
11 member States of the Economic Community of
Central African States have been afflicted by armed
conflicts, cross-border tensions and armed incursions
resulting in the deaths of innocent people, the wanton
destruction of infrastructure and millions of refugees,
returnees and displaced persons. The dire consequences
of those conflicts have seriously undermined Central
Africa’s efforts to ensure sustainable stability, peace
and development for its peoples. Troubling violations
of human rights have also been widely reported in the
subregion, contributing to a climate of tension.

4

Critical cross-cutting issues, such as those
relating to ethnic tension, the cross-border circulation
of weapons, the movement of armed groups, bandits
and refugees, the absence of national dialogue, disputes
over citizenship and land and inadequate economic
resources, are common to the region. These crosscutting issues need to be addressed in earnest in the
search for peace, security and development in both
individual countries and the subregion as a whole. The
high costs of these cross-border threats, including the
rapid spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the
persistence of other deadly diseases, represent
additional destabilizing factors.
Intensive efforts have been made at the national,
subregional, regional and international levels to help
stabilize the situation in the Central African subregion
and to lay the foundations for durable peace and
stability. But a lot more needs to be done. The United
Nations has responded in many ways to the peace and
security challenges facing the subregion. In particular,
it has sought to promote the development and
enhancement of the subregion’s capabilities for early
warning and prevention, as well as peace consolidation
over the long term.
The Secretary-General has also, from time to
time, dispatched Special Envoys to the subregion, and
the Security Council, in its wisdom, has authorized the
development of peacekeeping and peace-building
operations in various parts of the subregion in response
to specific situations. For instance, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), as part of its mandate authorized
by the Security Council, is in the process of
implementing
a
programme
of
disarmament,
demobilization and repatriation of foreign armed
groups, which affects not only the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, but also Rwanda, Burundi,
Uganda and the Sudan.
The success of our initiatives depends primarily
on the political will of the countries of the subregion
and the cooperation of the international community as
a whole, which, in particular, must provide the
necessary funds to support concrete projects. This is
the case, for instance, with the programmes of
demobilization and reintegration. Unless adequate
resources are made available, ex-combatants are
unlikely to be successfully reintegrated into their home
communities.

S/PV.4630

The reintegration issue is especially relevant in
the consolidating of peace agreements reached in the
subregion. Successful reintegration packages require a
comprehensive approach by the entire United Nations
system, working hand in hand with the World Bank.
This approach should address the security and human
rights aspects, as well as the economic and
developmental aspects, of reintegration into society.
The United Nations contribution to the peace and
security concerns of the Central Africa subregion
included the creation in May 1992 of the Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, which has as its mission the promotion of arms
limitation, disarmament and confidence-building
measures among States of the subregion.
Despite these various efforts, however, Central
Africa continues to encounter tremendous pressure in
the political, economic, social and security areas that
perpetuates the political and military crises in the
countries directly affected and beyond. Many of the
crises and their consequences frequently affect or
otherwise threaten to spill over into neighbouring
countries.
As indicated in our information note, we believe
that the restoration and consolidation of lasting peace
in the countries of the Central Africa subregion remain
the primary responsibility of the Governments and
peoples concerned. The United Nations and the rest of
the international community can only offer assistance.
We therefore hope that today’s meeting will offer the
opportunity to Central African States to reaffirm their
commitment to the peaceful solution of conflicts
between and among them and to policies that promote
inclusive and participatory governance based on
democratic principles, respect for human rights and the
rule of law.
At the same time, we call upon the international
community to continue to support the efforts of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) countries so as to promote sustainable peace
and development and curb the widespread proliferation
of weapons and mercenaries in the subregion. In this
connection, the Security Council’s continued interest in
and attention given to developments in the Central
Africa subregion, which has contributed significantly
to the creation of greater awareness of the need for
immediate and effective action to stabilize the situation
in Central Africa, is very essential.

It would be important that the international
community undertake the economic stabilization of
Central African countries that are emerging from
conflicts and embarking on democratic reforms. As
stressed in our note, we strongly believe that policies
promoting human rights and the rule of law and the
development of inclusive and responsive governance
would facilitate the consolidation of peace and the
stabilization of the countries of the subregion.
The Central Africa region is richly endowed with
human and natural resources. A climate of sustainable
peace backed by constructive national and regional
policies and supportive international cooperation would
help direct these resources to the improvement of
conditions in the subregion. Important steps have been
taken to that end but much remains to be done. I wish
to reassure the participants gathered here today, that the
United Nations will continue to work with the
countries and the peoples of Central Africa to help
them build a more peaceful and prosperous subregion.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs for his
statement. I give the floor to Mr. Emmanuel Mbi, the
Country Director for South Central Africa and the
Great Lakes countries of the World Bank.
Mr. Mbi: It is an honour for the World Bank to
participate in this public meeting of the Security
Council on the important question of the strengthening
of cooperation for peace and security in Central Africa.
Over the last couple of years, developments in
Central Africa — Angola, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda — have created a window of opportunity for
the return of peace and stability in the region. Events
have accelerated over the last months with the signing
of the two agreements of Luanda and Pretoria between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda. Now, more than ever, effective coordination
among all parties interested in supporting the
consolidation of peace and stability in the region is of
utmost importance.
In this context, I would like to make three broad
remarks on the World Bank’s engagement in Central
Africa. My first broad point is an observation: in
Central Africa, as well as in other regions, conflict and
development are intrinsically linked.

5

S/PV.4630

The conflicts in Central Africa illustrate a finding
of recent World Bank research: deep political and
economic development failures are among the key root
causes
of
conflict.
Political
exclusion
and
mismanagement of economic rents, combined with
widespread poverty, have created explosive situations
that are easily ignited by relatively minor incidents.
Often, in Central Africa as elsewhere, the fundamental
problem is a failure to develop political institutions to
accommodate the diversity of society in a context of
rapid demographic growth, large rural/urban migrations
and extreme poverty. The conflicts in Central Africa
also show how conflict has become a major
development issue for Africa. The human suffering
caused by conflict is immense.
But conflicts also wipe out decades of
development efforts. In Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the gross domestic product per
capita today is lower than it was in 1990, 12 years ago.
Throughout Central Africa, physical damage is
intensive and extensive; markets have become highly
fragmented and inefficient, which has forced many
communities to return to autarky; many institutions
have collapsed; social services are no longer delivered;
and HIV/AIDS is spreading.
Moreover, conflicts are taking a heavy toll on
neighbouring
countries’
development
efforts.
Population movements and the inflow of refugees,
border instability, disruptions of trade flows, all
threaten the stability of neighbouring countries.
Conflicts tend to follow cyclical patterns, as we
have seen in many Central African countries. Research
shows that there is a probability of 0.5 that countries
that have had a conflict will return to war within five
years of a peace agreement. Unless peace dividends are
rapidly provided, post-conflict Governments are often
too weak to maintain political and social stability. In
the uncertain and unstable period that characterizes
most post-conflict situations, international efforts can
tip the scale and effective post-conflict recovery can go
a long way towards preventing further conflicts from
erupting. This is a critical lesson for our work today in
countries like the Central African Republic, Rwanda,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo or the Republic
of Congo, to name a few. It is in this context that the
World Bank has been called to play an increasing role
in a number of Central African countries.

6

My second broad point is that the World Bank
intervenes through a variety of complementary
instruments and approaches. The Bank has devoted
considerable attention to addressing post-conflict
situations worldwide and in Africa. Currently, the Bank
is engaged in 16 conflict-affected countries in Africa,
with programmes focusing on economic stabilization,
for example, in Congo-Brazzaville, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda; infrastructure
reconstruction in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; support to private sector and agriculture in
Rwanda; social services delivery in Burundi;
HIV/AIDS prevention in the Central African Republic;
demobilization and reintegration in Rwanda; and
community-based rehabilitation in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
Overall, the portfolio in all 16 conflict-affected
countries now totals some 80 projects with a value of
about $5 billion. The recent rules on our funding will
soon make it possible to provide a relatively large part
of our new support in the form of grants.
Let me make a brief comment on these
programmes. What we have learned over the years is
that, in post-conflict countries, priorities based on
general experience may be misplaced and conventional
wisdom may not work. Some reforms might be
atypically important because the economy is atypically
sensitive to them. Others that are usually critical for
reducing poverty may be counterproductive. We are
therefore paying particular attention to the political
economy of recovery in post-conflict countries.
Let me also add that our lending programme is
only part of our work. We are also providing
substantial technical assistance and capacity-building
support. Such support is often critical, as was
demonstrated by the success of early policy advice in
Rwanda after the 1994 genocide and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2001. We are also helping in
designing
consistent,
comprehensive
and
implementable recovery programmes and in mobilizing
donors to support it.
But these efforts are only one component of a
broader effort undertaken by the international
community to restore peace and stability. Consolidating
peace requires intervening across a broad range of
activities — political, military, economic and
humanitarian. Economic assistance can make an
important contribution to peace and stability, but it
cannot ensure them. Aid can be only one element of a

S/PV.4630

broader, holistic strategy aimed at ensuring a
comprehensive and coordinated treatment of all key
dimensions of recovery. In this context, we are looking
towards the United Nations system, and in particular
the Security Council, to provide the type of leadership
needed to create an environment in which we can make
a contribution to a peace process in Central Africa.
I would like to underline that, even at a technical
level, no single agency can hope to provide the needed
support on its own. The Bank is therefore committed to
working in partnership with others and in particular to
developing a strong collaboration on the ground with
the United Nations agencies, and in particular the
United Nations Development Programme.
My third broad point is to call attention to a
special programme that we have developed over the
past year, which I believe complements the efforts
made by the United Nations, and in particular by its
peacekeeping forces. This is the Multi-Country
Demobilization and Reintegration Programme (MDRP)
for the Greater Great Lakes Region of Africa.
It is very much the spirit of partnership that
shapes the Greater Great Lakes Regional Strategy for
Demobilization and Reintegration, which seeks to
enhance the prospects for stabilization and recovery in
the region. The Strategy was designed on the premises
that no single donor or agency can address the
complexity of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration issues in the region, and that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of excombatants are necessary to establishing peace and
restoring security, which are themselves preconditions
for sustainable growth and poverty reduction.
Governments of the region also recognize the regional
dimension of these challenges and have expressed their
support for a regional disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration framework.
Extensive efforts by regional bodies and the
international community are under way in the security,
political and economic recovery spheres. The Regional
Strategy for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration needs to be seen within the broader
context of these efforts. It aims to complement national
and regional peace initiatives by providing support for
the social and economic reintegration of ex-combatants
and cannot substitute for political solutions to the
conflicts.

The
Multi-Country
Demobilization
and
Reintegration Programme was then developed to
operationalize the Strategy I just mentioned. The
MDRP brings together, in a first instance, nine
countries — Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Namibia, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Zimbabwe — involved in or affected by the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as over 30 partners from regional organizations,
donor countries, United Nations agencies and the
international financial institutions, many of which I am
pleased to see represented here today.
The Programme objectives are, first, to provide a
comprehensive
framework
for
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) efforts;
secondly, to establish a consistent mechanism for donor
coordination and resource mobilization; and thirdly, to
serve as a platform for national consultative processes.
The Programme will be implemented over a period of
five years, from 2002 to 2006. Preliminary figures
indicate that there is a potential for 350,000
ex-combatants to be demobilized and reintegrated
under the MDRP. This figure includes both former
members of national armies and members of irregular
armed groups.
Countries in the greater Great Lakes region would
qualify for support from the MDRP on the basis of
several general and country-level eligibility criteria.
Foremost among these are Government participation in
the regional peace process and the adoption of key
policy measures. In view of the importance of
flexibility and timeliness of financing to exploit
emerging opportunities, the country-level criteria focus
on the establishment of appropriate institutional
arrangements and the elaboration of a national
programme in consultation with the international
community.
Two committees have been established to
facilitate the participation of national, regional and
international stakeholders: one to address policy issues
under the Programme, and one to address for financing
issues. In addition, a regional technical coordination
group consisting of national programme managers was
created to assist in harmonizing individual DDR
efforts. Continued dialogue among stakeholder focal
points ensures regular cooperation at the technical
level.

7

S/PV.4630

The specific contributions of partners — that is,
donors, United Nations agencies, and local and
international non-governmental organizations — to the
DDR process would be based on their respective
comparative advantages and may differ from country to
country. The World Bank’s role in implementing the
strategy and Programme is three-fold: first, as manager
of the MDRP secretariat; secondly, as administrator of
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund; and thirdly, as cofinancier of national programmes.
The MDRP was launched in April 2002. To date,
it has supported the preparation of demobilization and
reintegration programmes for Rwanda and Angola, the
first meeting of Technical Coordination Group in
Luanda in August 2002, a technical workshop between
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of Rwanda in relation to the implementation
of the Pretoria Agreement in September, and a joint
mission during which four teams visited Angola,
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda from 23 September to 4 October 2002.
Today offers yet another opportunity to reiterate
the critical need to ensure that our individual and
collective efforts in support of peace and security in
Central Africa not be devised separately and in
abstraction, but that they complement each other and
further the regional approach we have all endorsed.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to Ms. Julia Taft, Director of the Bureau for Crisis
Prevention and Recovery of the United Nations
Development Programme.
Ms. Taft: It gives me great pleasure to be able to
present some highlights of the role of the United
Nations Development Programme as it helps to
maintain peace and security in the Central Africa
subregion.
It is well known that impoverishment can be a
cause and a consequence of conflict. Unstable
situations thwart development efforts. But lack of
development can also be a contributory factor to
instability. As the speaker from the World Bank
underscored, there is a consensus that the two are
interdependent.
This interdependence between poverty and
conflict determines the UNDP entry point to conflict
prevention and peace-building. The interdependence

8

further means that development programmes must
contribute to the political purpose of consolidating
peace and preventing future conflicts, as well as serve
their normal purpose of improving conditions of life
and relieving hardships. Hence, new and effective
strategies, tools, and partnerships with new partners
such as the World Bank, the other funds and
programmes of the United Nations system, and
international and national civil service organizations
are all becoming part of a sustained effort to meet these
challenges.
In 2001 the United Nations Development
Programme Executive Board endorsed this broad
relationship and the connection between the role of
UNDP in development and peace-building, and
supported our strategy of response as well.
While conflict is by no means limited to Africa,
that continent has experienced an especially large
number of conflicts and complex emergencies. The
Central Africa subregion has been one of the areas
most affected by ongoing or recurrent conflict. The
extent and the impact of these conflicts on
development underscore our urgent need to assist the
Governments whose normal development operations
have been overwhelmed by the implications of conflict.
The parameters of the strategic framework for the
United Nations Development Programme are conflict
prevention, recovery, peace-building, and capacitybuilding of regional and subregional organizations.
Conflict prevention efforts focus on capacity-building
of national institutions and actors to do better conflict
analysis and to identify risk factors and a range of
appropriate responses.
Recovery interventions focus on developing
strategies to bridge the relief-to-development gap, with
emphasis on the reintegration of ex-combatants and
civilians displaced by war, as well as on communitybased rehabilitation and reconstruction. Recovery also
supports the rebuilding of governance and socioeconomic institutions to promote political and social
inclusion, the rule of law and effective and fair
administration of justice to prevent relapse into
conflict. In the area of peace-building, UNDP has been
heavily involved in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, removing small arms from
communities, rebuilding social capital and launching
reconciliation processes.

S/PV.4630

Let me highlight one regional example to
illustrate the range of activities we are engaged in. As
part of its global mandate to address the consequences
of the availability and use of illicit small arms, UNDP
has undertaken a range of activities in the Great Lakes
region to assist States and communities where the
transition from armed conflict to economic recovery is
currently impeded by continuing insecurity and
violence.
The United Nations Development Programme
will be launching a cross-border project in November
2002 that aims at reducing armed violence through
community recovery activities, voluntary disarmament,
strengthening capacities of the Republic of the Congo
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
facilitating the repatriation of Democratic Republic of
the Congo ex-combatants and refugees. In addition,
UNDP, in close collaboration with INTERPOL and the
World Customs Organization, is currently developing a
multi-country programme to improve the capacities of
States in the region to control the illicit proliferation of
small arms. In addition to an assessment of zones of
high-risk trafficking in illicit small arms and the
development of a training programme for border and
customs officials, the project aims to contribute to the
development of regional security frameworks within
the Great Lakes region.
The United Nations Development Programme
also provides support to the Nairobi secretariat in
implementing the Nairobi Declaration on Illicit Small
Arms and Light Weapons as part of its effort to
implement regional inter-governmental initiatives to
address small arms.
At the country level, UNDP carries out a number
of programmes that are worth mentioning briefly. In
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, within the
framework of the Peace Accords, programmes to kickstart economic recovery in war-affected regions and to
reintegrate the Congolese ex-combatants are critical to
breaking the link between insecurity and chronic
underdevelopment. In that context, UNDP has been
asked by the Government and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to take a lead
in DDR in collaboration with the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), the World Bank and other
partners. In addition, UNDP will provide technical
expertise and training to Government officials in how
to secure weapons collection, management and

destruction procedures to assist in the development of
needed registration and identification systems and to
undertake assessments to identify optimal disarmament
strategies and weapons availability and distribution
patterns. UNDP is also currently collaborating with
MONUC and civil society organizations in promoting
increased awareness and sensitization on small arms
among local communities.
Through its Reintegration of Ex-combatants and
Collection of Weapons Project in the Republic of the
Congo, started in June 2000, UNDP has reintegrated
approximately 8,000 ex-combatants in return for the
voluntary surrender of more than 12,000 small arms
and explosives, all of which have been destroyed.
In Rwanda, UNDP has supported over the past
four years the Rwanda Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme for over 16,000 troops. A
national summit on unity and reconciliation is planned
for the end of October 2002, with the support of UNDP.
We are also seeking to address the problem of the
resettlement of the internally displaced population of
over 170,000. A policy research institute on national
and regional peace and conflict prevention issues, the
Centre for Conflict Management, affiliated with the
National University of Rwanda, was established by and
continues to be supported by UNDP.
In Burundi, in addition to the ongoing internally
displaced persons and returning reintegration
programme, UNDP will support the Government in the
formulation of a programme to address the reinsertion
and the reintegration of ex-combatants.
In Angola, we are also concerned about and
involved in the ex-combatant issue. Following the
peace agreement between the Government and UNITA,
we formulated a private regional recovery programme
to enhance municipal governments to help them
provide services for returnees. Our initial proposal is to
begin in two provinces, and as soon as the Government
of Angola approves our project, we will initiate a major
effort to mitigate the effects of war in those provinces.
In the Central African Republic, in 2001, the
Government requested UNDP and the United Nations
to reorient the objectives and the strategies of their
national programme of disarmament and reinsertion.
During the initial implementation period of the project,
thousands of items of ammunition and small arms were
collected and publicly destroyed in a “flamme de la
paix”. UNDP has also provided direct training of

9

S/PV.4630

national officers on basic procedures in handling
weapons and explosives safely. In Chad, we are also
engaged in the reintegration of ex-combatants, as well
as mine-clearance activities.
Finally, I would like to say that some of our
efforts in Cameroon have really been to support a very
important role the Government has played in the
creation of mechanisms to preserve peace and security
in the subregion. The joint Central African RepublicCameroon Commission has been actively encouraged
and assisted by the United Nations country team in
dealing with the circulation of arms and human
trafficking. Thus, Cameroon has an important role in
the context of the six-monthly ministerial meetings of
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa.
Additionally, the areas of support to the
Government from UNDP include advocacy, the
preparation of programmes to halt the proliferation of
small arms, capacity-building through the United
Nations Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa, as well as technical support to the
National Human Rights Institution of Cameroon.
Let me just say that those highlights are only a
few of the concrete measures that UNDP is
undertaking. We obviously need to do more, and we
look forward to integrating and expanding our efforts
in collaboration with others. UNDP remains committed
to ensuring priority support for those programmes that
contribute to peace and security throughout the Central
African subregion now and in the years to come.
The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to His Excellency Mr. Simonovic, President of the
Economic and Social Council.
Mr. Simonovic: United Nations SecretaryGeneral Dag Hammarskjold, who gave his life in an
effort for peace in the Central African region, is said to
have remarked that the Organization was not
established to get us to heaven, but save us from hell.
Today’s open debate in the Security Council, 41 years
since his death, finds us working together to help bring
peace and a brighter future in a region that has known
too much misery.
We are increasingly aware that peace-building
requires a comprehensive approach that encompasses a
wide range of political, developmental, humanitarian
and human rights programmes and mechanisms.

10

Actions are needed that focus on fostering sustainable
institutions and processes in many areas. That has been
emphasized in the outcome of a number of Security
Council debates. Moreover, the President of the
General Assembly last week underlined the fact that
peace and security are closely linked to issues of
poverty and that reducing poverty is the single most
important and challenging of the Millennium
Development Goals.
As a central intergovernmental body in the
economic and social field for coordination in the
United Nations system, as well as for undertaking
studies and making recommendations to other entities,
the Economic and Social Council has mandated
functions that can help in examinations and actions
dealing with root causes of violence and with
humanitarian assistance, economic and social
reconstruction and development and human rights
processes that are at the heart of peace-building.
The Central African region is confronted with a
myriad of cross-cutting challenges arising out of a
number of conflicts that have ravaged the subregion.
As many members have noted, several of the 11
countries in the region have been affected by civil
conflicts, including Angola, Burundi, the Central
Africa Republic, Chad, the Republic of the Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, which
have resulted in major loss of life and large-scale
destruction of economic and social infrastructure and
have created millions of refugees, returnees and
displaced persons. Not surprisingly, of the 11 countries,
all those experiencing conflicts, with one exception,
are in the low development category of the United
Nations Development Programme 2002 Human
Development Report.
The Economic and Social Council recognizes the
importance of cross-border influences and linkages in a
number of conflicts in Africa and, in its ministerial
communiqué of 2001 on supporting the sustainable
development of Africa, it called for the exploration of
the feasibility of creating a subregional United Nations
coordinating capability, possibly by using existing
United Nations regional offices, which would assist the
United Nations system in setting integrated policies
and strategies, ensure the harmonization of activities
and lend support to national and subregional peacebuilding efforts and initiatives, while supporting
subregional integration. The Council will continue to
advocate for the creation of such capability.

S/PV.4630

The Council believes that it is imperative for the
countries of the subregion to own and lead their own
reconstruction. The Central African region has
enormous potential, with a population of 100 million,
and vast untapped natural resources. The Council
deplores the illegal exploitation of those resources,
especially because the sustainable development of
those resources can serve to alleviate the humanitarian,
economic and social consequences of conflict and put
those countries on the path to long-term growth. We
will add our voice to that of the Security Council in
calling for an end to that practice.
The Economic and Social Council welcomes the
recent positive developments in the region: the
withdrawal of troops from the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; the signature of the ceasefire agreement
between the Burundi Transitional Government and two
rebel movements, on the occasion of the Dar es-Salaam
regional summit of 7 October; and the decision to
deploy an international observation force to the Central
African Republic to promote calm, particularly on the
country’s border with Chad. We believe that these are
positive signs that the subregion is emerging from the
nightmare of civil conflict and that they will serve to
create a conducive environment for rebuilding
economies and relaunching economic growth.
You, Sir, addressed the Economic and Social
Council in your capacity as President of the Security
Council when that body recently commemorated the
tenth anniversary of the signing of the General Peace
Agreement for Mozambique, and a number of those
who are here in this Chamber were also present at that
meeting. On 4 October 1992, after 16 years of civil
conflict, the parties to that agreement undertook to do
everything in their power to achieve genuine national
reconciliation. In the decade that has elapsed since
then, Mozambique has been an African and a United
Nations success story, as well as an example of how
peace and development interlink. We need such success
stories elsewhere in Africa as well.
This past July the Economic and Social Council
adopted a resolution that we hope will lead to very
useful and positive steps by the international
community in support of African countries emerging
from conflict. This is the agreement to establish, upon
request, an ad hoc advisory group, at the ambassadorial
level, to examine the humanitarian and economic needs
of the country concerned; to review relevant
programmes of support; to prepare recommendations

for a long-term programme of support that integrates
relief, rehabilitation, reconstruction and development
in a comprehensive approach; and to provide advice on
ensuring the adequacy and coherence of international
assistance.
Guinea-Bissau is the first country to request that
such an advisory group be formed. We are now
working out the details of arrangements, and I hope
that we will be able to establish the ad hoc advisory
group on Guinea-Bissau this Friday, 25 October. The
advisory group will have inter-agency support in the
conduct of its work, and we look forward to the
analysis and report that the Economic and Social
Council should receive by mid-January. In performing
its task, the Economic and Social Council Group will
closely cooperate with the Security Council’s Ad Hoc
Working Group on Africa.
Let me conclude by saying that at the recent
commemoration of 10 years of a successful peace
agreement, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique affirmed that post-conflict recovery and
peace-building are even harder to manage than
peacekeeping and peace negotiations, as pressures are
high for the delivery of quick and sustained results and
for continuous proof that peace is more profitable than
war. This is a sobering thought, and we should keep it
in mind when discussing the prospects for Central
Africa.
Let me thank you once again, Sir, for organizing
this debate and for inviting the Economic and Social
Council to participate.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Francophonie of the Republic of the Congo and current
Chairman of the Economic Community of Central
African States. I invite him to take a seat at the Council
table and to make his statement.
Mr. Adada (Congo) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the 11 member countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) —
Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central African
Republic, Chad, the Congo, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Rwanda and
Sao Tome and Principe — which my country is
currently chairing, I should like first of all to convey
my heartfelt congratulations to you, Sir, for the
dynamism with which you have been guiding the work

11

S/PV.4630

of the Council during this month. It is with justifiable
pride and great determination that the subregion
whence you hail is participating in this debate, to
which you were kind enough to invite the international
community today.
May I also, on behalf of all my colleagues,
commend the efforts that the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, has been deploying towards peace and
sustainable development in Africa as a whole. We are
particularly grateful to him for the attention and
interest that he has consistently accorded to questions
of peace and security in our subregion.
We are therefore quite optimistic as to the
outcome of today’s very timely debate, as very
favourable prospects are currently emerging in Central
Africa.
Less than two months ago, from 26 to 30 August
2002, the eighteenth ministerial meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa was held at Bangui, in the
Central African Republic. The Committee, an
instrument for preventive diplomacy, has just
celebrated its tenth anniversary.
Let me welcome here the existence of this
valuable forum for coordination, which has enabled our
States, in spite of the disputes that have sometimes
divided them, to maintain an ongoing dialogue with a
view to easing tensions. Thanks to this Committee, the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
(COPAX) was established, though it has not yet
become truly operational.
The Bangui meeting noted that there was a
generally positive trend in the geopolitical and security
situation in the subregion. This is due in particular to
the goodwill of the parties to the conflict and to various
mediation efforts, both subregional and international,
and especially to a genuine awareness on the part of the
majority of actors involved. In Angola, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic, to name just a few, real progress has
been made which must be consolidated. Hence the
importance of this meeting, which should help us
develop our peace-building capacities through specific
actions in the areas of disarmament, demobilization
and the social and vocational reintegration of the
former combatants.

12

Peacemaking efforts in Central Africa are a
priority today, since they are essential for peace,
political stability and, ultimately, the economic
recovery and development of post-conflict countries.
We all are well aware that demobilization and
reintegration processes, if poorly carried out or
incomplete, inevitably lead to continuing violence and
insecurity, as, for some former combatants, the use of
weapons represents an automatic solution for their
daily subsistence.
Therefore, directly following the cessation of
hostilities, national programmes must be crafted that
would allow us to rebuild the confidence of an entire
segment of the population which needs to be
reintegrated into civilian life. But this requires
resources that are not always available to countries that
have been bled dry by the trials of war — hence the
need for assistance from the international community.
To illustrate what I have just outlined, I should
like to recall my country’s experience after the end of
the civil war, following the agreement on the cessation
of hostilities and the peace accords signed in 1999.
A programme was set up jointly with the United
Nations Development Programme whose results were
encouraging but limited: 8,009 ex-militia members
received assistance with reintegration, within the
framework of a process aimed at reaching 10,000
former combatants; 11,114 weapons and pieces of
ammunition were collected, and a “Flame of Peace”
weapons-burning ceremony was held to destroy them;
and almost 1.8 billion CFA francs were earmarked for
some 2,609 micro-projects.
The process is ongoing, because there are still
about 25,000 former militia members who wish to
benefit from those programmes. Steps have already
been taken in this regard with the United Nations and
other partners. The World Bank has agreed to provide
$5 million in funding.
Similar problems have arisen and will continue to
arise throughout the subregion, and it is important for
the United Nations to consider them urgently and
pragmatically. That is especially true in the case of
Angola, for which, on 15 August 2002, the Security
Council established a Mission — a timely and
appropriate response, since it is designed to, inter alia,
provide humanitarian assistance to vulnerable groups,
ensure the social and vocational reintegration of

S/PV.4630

demobilized soldiers, promote economic recovery,
prepare for elections and lead the demining effort.
We hope, therefore, that that Mission and other
initiatives undertaken by the international community
will constitute an adequate response to the appeal made
in Bangui by the Advisory Committee on Central
Africa Security Questions for peace-building activities
in Angola, such as the demobilization and reintegration
of former combatants and the promotion of
reconstruction and economic recovery in the country.
We would like to make a similar appeal with
regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where, as we have already emphasized, for the first
time in years, there is a glimmer of hope that peace will
return, particularly as a consequence of the withdrawal
of foreign troops and the negotiations for an inclusive
dialogue.
Now is an appropriate time to request the
strengthening of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) in terms of personnel and to ensure its
effective deployment so as to prevent any reversals.
Now is also the time for an important reintegration
component to be incorporated into the mandate of
peacekeeping operations and for a substantial budget to
be allocated for such missions.
Also with regard to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we called on the international community
as a matter of urgency to respond generously to the
global appeal for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo for 2002, which was launched on 27 November
2001 by the United Nations and its partners for
humanitarian action.
An urgent appeal was also directed at the
international community, in particular at the bilateral
and multilateral donors for Burundi, in support of
peace and improved living conditions in that country,
as a follow-up to the commitments entered into at Paris
and Geneva during the donor conferences on Burundi.
We also call on the United Nations and the
bilateral partners to implement an essential component
of the Libreville communiqué of 2 October 2002,
issued at the conclusion of the summit meeting on the
situation between Chad and the Central African
Republic: the deployment of an inter-African observer
force on the border between those two countries, which
have decided to normalize their relations. I have no

doubt that the United Nations will view that initiative,
which we are undertaking on behalf of the subregion,
with great interest.
We would like in particular to focus the Council’s
attention on the difficult problem of the weapons that
are circulating in our subregion. In this regard, with a
view to assessing the scope of the problem and seeking
an appropriate response, a subregional conference was
convened in Ndjamena, Chad, two years ago, where
recommendations were adopted that we are working to
implement.
In that context, next year we plan to organize a
workshop on the implementation by the countries of
Central Africa of the Programme of Action adopted at
the conclusion of the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects. We are seeking the help of the United
Nations in organizing that workshop and in
establishing a subregional policy on disarmament and
the monitoring of the traffic in weapons.
For all of those reasons, we support the initiative
of the President of the World Bank to give specific
consideration to the problems of the economic recovery
and development of post-conflict African countries —
an initiative launched recently at Dar Es Salaam,
Tanzania, during a meeting of the economic ministers
of those countries.
As Council members may have noted, the
problems of Central Africa require urgent measures to
be taken with a view to consolidating the process of
restoring peace as well as of establishing sustainable
peace through substantial accompanying efforts on the
part of the countries concerned. As we said earlier, we
need the Council to join with us in our determination to
escape once and for all the cycle of war and to help us
to enhance our local capacity for peace-building.
There is an urgent need for such an effort, but it
must also be a lasting one; the paths already exist, but
they must be cleared sufficiently, dug more deeply and
reinforced.
We have our own subregional structure for
cooperation — the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) — which our heads of State
decided to reactivate and which recently carried out
missions in support of peace and security. That must be
encouraged and helped.

13

S/PV.4630

The Advisory Committee has also demonstrated
its usefulness and effectiveness, and we call for it to be
maintained and for further financial assistance to be
provided to help it.
We have also expressed our desire for the holding
of a conference to bring together all the countries
neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo so
as to establish a legal and political framework to ensure
peace and security in our subregion.
Finally, an international conference on the Great
Lakes region — an idea that is often discussed —
needs to be convened with a view to guaranteeing
peace, stability and development in this part of the
continent, which has for too long been subjected to
violence and division.
On behalf of ECCAS, I appeal for the support of
the international community, represented by the
Security Council, for the implementation of all specific
initiatives to build peace and stability in a region that is
called upon to play a major role on the international
stage because of its enormous potential.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and La
Francophonie of the Congo for his kind words
addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Agba Otikpo Mezode, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Central African Republic. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Mezode (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): I would like first of all to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. You have been
demonstrating great leadership in the exercise of your
functions. I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor.
I also want to welcome your excellent initiative to
convene this public meeting of the Security Council on
the subject of cooperation between the United Nations
system and the Central African region in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I am
particularly pleased because my country has benefited,
and continues to benefit, from the support of the United
Nations system.

14

The Central African Republic has, indeed,
experienced many crises, in the settlement of which the
Security Council has been involved. The first of these
stemmed from recurring political and military mutinies
by a portion of the army in 1996 and 1997; the second
from two coup attempts. The first of these was a
military ethnic attack that took place in May 2001 and
had tragic consequences; the second took place in
November 2001, and it almost led to a conflict
involving the entire subregion.
With regard to the crises in 1996 and 1997, I will
simply say that the support of the international
community was decisive, first through the InterAfrican Mission for the Implementation of the Bangui
Agreements, and then through the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA),
whose positive actions are being continued in an
outstanding manner by the United Nations
Peace-building Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA).
The Council will recall that MINURCA worked
effectively in the peacekeeping process and in the
successful organization of the legislative and
presidential elections of 1998 and 1999. Following the
positive developments brought about by MINURCA
and continued by BONUCA, the then head of
Government decided to come to New York on a
working visit on 15 and 16 May 2000, when a special
meeting was organized at the initiative of the
Secretary-General.
In his speech, the head of Government made the
following observations. First, the work of national
reconstruction remained fragile and limited in its
effects due to two recurring factors: lack of security,
related to a particularly unstable subregional
environment; and the spread of poverty, the result of an
economy unable to generate sustainable growth
because its foundations had been decayed by the
scourges of corruption, poor administration and
diseases such as HIV/AIDS. Secondly, the country’s
security situation was the most disabling handicap to
the process of peace and democracy, as well as poverty
eradication, because of the profound military-political
crisis.
A presentation was submitted requesting support
under two headings: support for the restructuring of the
defence and security forces and support for the
financing of our autonomous development, including

S/PV.4630

the reintegration of military personnel to be
demobilized and of young and adult arms traffickers, as
well as support for the host communities. But today we
must also look to the recruitment of young Central
Africans, who must be educated in a republican spirit.
At that time, the amount required was calculated to be
approximately $47 million over a period of four years
in the first area and $8 million in the second area. That
amount would have to be increased today. That
presentation convinced the Security Council, which
made an appeal for support of the Government’s plan
of action in the area of peace, security and stability and
for relaunching the economy of the Central African
Republic, the only solution for generating sustainable
resources to meet the cost of sovereignty and to ensure
social peace. I have reiterated this here and in the
General Assembly on many occasions.
The coup d’état of 28 May 2001 was
unanimously and harshly condemned by States and
international organizations. We acknowledge that. But
on the ground, it was necessary to save the institutions
of the Republic. In accordance with the Constitution,
the President of the Republic, our head of State,
launched an appeal. One country, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
spontaneously
responded,
sending
equipment to the loyalist troops so that they could
resist and repulse the attackers. They also sent a
contingent to protect the President, who in the opinion
of all observers was undeniably elected by universal
suffrage. That action was welcomed by all.
With respect to the coup d’état of November 2001
and its consequences, summit meetings were held by
various regional and subregional organizations. The
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CEN-SAD) met
on 3 December 2001 and decided to create a force to
maintain peace and security in Central Africa,
following consultations between the United Nations
and the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). On 4 and 5 December 2001, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CEMAC) took note of the conclusions of the
Khartoum Summit. On 16 January 2002, the
Brazzaville Summit decided to create an ad hoc
commission on the Chad-Central African crisis. The
eighth ministerial-level ordinary session of the Central
Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution met at Tripoli on 26
January 2002 and urged the Security Council to
consider the possibility of urgently deploying a

peacekeeping force to consolidate peace and security in
the Central African Republic. Finally, on 2 October
2002, there was the Summit of CEMAC heads of State
and delegation on the Chad-Central African crisis. That
Summit’s communiqué was the subject of a statement
(S/PRST/2002/28) by the Security Council at its
4627th meeting, held on 18 October 2002. We are
happy to note that the Council welcomed the final
communiqué. You should know, Mr. President, that I
bear a message for you in that connection.
I would like to note that the outcomes of all those
special and regular meetings affirmed the need for the
creation of a mechanism for the prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts and the need to
make it operational. But it is often difficult to make
such mechanisms operational because they lack the
required resources.
My second observation concerns the existence of
those mechanisms within the various regional,
subregional or continental organizations, such as the
African Union, CEN-SAD and the Economic
Community of Central African States. Some of those
mechanisms have sometimes been criticized for a
certain inertia, which is due to the fact that the relevant
documents have not been ratified. As for the Council
for Peace and Security in Central Africa (COPAX), the
National Assembly of the Central African Republic
will be discussing it during its present session.
However, I would like to add that those mechanisms
must work in concert to be more effective, because the
task is immense.
With respect to the international economic and
financial organizations, as well as the international
community at large, I would like to recall that the
Central African Republic is a post-conflict State. There
was very real destruction to social and economic
infrastructure and loss of human life following the
mutinies and the recurring coups d’état. Observers who
have visited the Central African Republic since 1997
can bear witness to that. The various post-conflict
Governments of the Central African Republic have
always expressed their firm resolve to emerge from
conflict, but the fact that we are a post-conflict country
is not always taken into account when the situation in
our country is assessed. However, the Security Council
constantly calls for the international community and
international
development
institutions
and
organizations to focus attention on the Central African
Republic. We are grateful for what has already been

15

S/PV.4630

done. But it is possible to do a little more, it being
understood that in the medium and long term it is the
Central Africans alone, in partnership, who will bring
about the development of their own country.
The task of socio-economic reconstruction today
needs a stable and peaceful environment so that the
fight against poverty can produce results through the
dynamic of lasting sustainable development. Peace,
democracy and stability must be founded on a peaceful
social situation. To claim otherwise would be
unrealistic. The Central African Republic does not for
the moment have the resources to alleviate the social
situation: the payment of salaries, pensions, grants and
so on. Those observations recurrently appear in the
reports of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Central African Republic. It would be a grave risk not
to integrate those observations into the framework of
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations system and Central Africa in the maintenance
of peace and security.
The United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa met
in Bangui last August. Today we are pleased to hold
the presidency of this Committee and will continue to
do so until the next meeting, which will again be held
in Bangui. We hope that positive results will be
achieved through the recommendations and resolutions
of the past meeting. Participants understood the efforts
made by my country to contribute to preserving peace
in the subregion. I hope that in six months their
meeting will help them to gauge the progress achieved.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Central African
Republic for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Jean Ping, Minister of State and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and
Francophonie of Gabon. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Ping (Gabon) (spoke in French): First of all,
I would like to associate myself with the statement that
was made by His Excellency Mr. Rodolphe Adada,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the
Congo, on behalf of the member countries of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS). I also wish to commend the excellent
initiative taken by Cameroon, a Central African
country, in convening, under that country’s presidency,

16

a meeting of the Security Council devoted to the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations system and Central Africa in the maintenance
of peace and security. This initiative bears witness to
the Security Council’s commitment to seeking
solutions to the different conflicts that thwart peace,
stability and development in the subregion.
This meeting is a fresh opportunity to examine
the progress that we have made together in the
maintenance of peace and security and to reach
agreement on ways of strengthening our cooperation at
a time when we see glimmers of light in the Central
African subregion, which has been clouded for many
years now by the persistence of many crises and armed
conflicts.
Central Africa is evolving at the pace of a twofold destiny. First of all, the destiny of abundance,
characterized by a sort of divine providence that has
bestowed upon our immense subregion vast natural
resources — diamonds, leather, manganese, oil, and
rich forests — necessary not only for its own
development but also for that of the rest of the world.
Thus, the Congo basin, characterized by rich and
abundant biodiversity, is a major asset to the
development of the countries of the subregion and also
an ecological preserve for the world — a real set of
lungs for the planet.
This fortunate side of life contrasts with an everpresent aspect — that of numerous crises, armed
conflicts and scourges, such as tuberculosis and
HIV/AIDS, as well as steadily rising poverty. It goes
without saying that, in such a context, the assets of the
subregion can be seriously jeopardized if nothing is
done to support the efforts our States are making to
find proper answers to the many ills they are
confronting.
If present conflicts were to persist, they could
also have grave negative effects — first of all, on other
bordering regions; then, on the entire African
continent; and, lastly, on the rest of the world.
Therefore, it is urgent that the international community,
represented by the United Nations, focus all of its
action on the subregion in order to help restore peace
and security. This is why it is necessary to consolidate
cooperation between the United Nations system and the
States of our subregion. This particular cooperation has
developed since the United Nations General Assembly
adopted resolution 46/37 B on 6 December 1991,

S/PV.4630

which created the Standing Advisory Committee on
Questions of Peace and Security in Central Africa. In
fact, with the assistance of this Committee, we have
established several mechanisms in the ECCAS for the
prevention, management and settlement of conflicts,
mechanisms that deserve the support of the
international community. Among the most important of
these, we have the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa (COPAX), the Central African
Multinational Force, the Defence and Security
Commission and the Central African Early Warning
System. In addition, and along the same framework of
the aforementioned Committee, we have adopted many
recommendations and decisions that are aimed at
promoting and strengthening peace in Central Africa.
Together we have undertaken multifaceted actions in
areas as varied as respect for and strengthening of
human rights, of democracy, the rule of law, the
development of legal and collective security
instruments, the strengthening of subregional
cooperation in the field of security through the
organization of several joint military exercises,
manoeuvres and patrols in our different States. All of
these initiatives clearly show that the Standing
Advisory Committee is the priority framework for our
shared action in the field of peace, security and the
development of the subregion.
Since this Committee stems from the United
Nations, we believe that its budget should not be left to
the sole responsibility of the States of the region,
which are already confronting heavy debt and
enormous economic and financial difficulties. In these
conditions, would it not be wise to place the financing
of this Committee’s programmes within the regular
United Nations budget? This would enable the
Advisory Committee to have consistent material and
financial resources, and thus to become the pivotal
instrument for more effective and more concrete
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central African States. It could thus be not only a
framework for reflection and for development of
proposals, but also, and above all, a means of action
and of coordination of our shared initiatives in the field
of the maintenance of peace and security.
Over recent years, the international community
has observed the mediation efforts made by the Central
African countries themselves, in cooperation with other
African countries, in order to alleviate tension in the
subregion, particularly in the Democratic Republic of

the Congo, in the Republic of the Congo, in Angola,
Rwanda, Burundi, Chad and the Central African
Republic. Above and beyond these mediation efforts,
we have also speeded up the process of subregional
economic and social integration by developing transborder cooperation, with the implementation of shared
development programmes as the foundation. This
integration policy has led to the creation of two
concentric international organizations pertaining to the
subregion — namely, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC).
Under the leadership of its President, Gabon has
been at the very heart of these diplomatic efforts. As
everyone knows, His Excellency El Hadj Omar Bongo,
has conducted many peace negotiations in the
subregion. At present he is working side by side with
Vice President Zuma of South Africa for the
consolidation of the national reconciliation process that
is under way in Burundi. It is also at his initiative that
the CEMAC heads of State just met on 2 October 2002
in Libreville in order to examine the prevailing
situation between the Central African Republic and
Chad.
It was decided on that occasion to send a
contingent of 300 to 350 troops from Gabon,
Cameroon, the Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Mali.
That contingent will be charged principally with
monitoring the border between the two countries and
making it secure. An important meeting of the military
authorities of the countries concerned is now being
held at the Gabonese military headquarters in
Libreville. But we are expecting a swift response to the
requests for logistical assistance that we have
addressed to the international community as a whole.
President Bongo’s efforts have been joined by
those of other African heads of State, inspired by the
will to establish an atmosphere of confidence and to
strengthen the spirit of dialogue, cooperation, fraternity
and solidarity that characterizes our identity. The
establishment in the Central African Republic in
January 1997 of the Inter-African Mission to Monitor
the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements, and in
March 1998 of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic, whose forces were under the
command of a Gabonese general, illustrate the new
willingness of our subregion’s leaders to settle disputes
by peaceful means.

17

S/PV.4630

Along the same lines, we welcome the positive
evolution of the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, thanks in large part to the signing of the
Luanda and Pretoria Agreements, which made possible
the withdrawal of foreign troops. The same applies to
the situation in Angola, marked by the end of the
longest war in Africa and by the signing, in April 2002,
of a Memorandum of Understanding addendum to the
Lusaka Protocol between Government forces and those
of UNITA.
We should like to note, however, that the efforts
being made by our States will remain dead letters if
they do not receive from the international
community — and more particularly from the United
Nations — substantial material, human and financial
support. That is why it is more necessary than ever that
the United Nations strengthen the peacekeeping
capacity of our States. In order to do that, strategies
should be developed that emphasize training, the
organization of joint peacekeeping exercises and,
above all, the creation of partnerships between donors
and troop-contributing countries.
In the process of post-conflict peace-building,
there is an aspect that we wish to stress: the financing
of the reconstruction of countries destabilized by
conflicts. The international financial institutions — the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank —
have a decisive role to play. They must soften and
adapt their conditionalities for countries, such as the
Central African Republic, that are involved in a
process of national reconstruction and reconciliation,
giving priority to structural adjustment and financing
programmes that are in accord with the objectives of
peace.
We welcome the presence here of Mr. Mbi,
representative of the World Bank. His participation in
this debate shows that problems related to international
peace and security affect development. There can be no
development without peace.
Thus, in addition to financing the reconstruction
of countries emerging from conflict, we must together
find comprehensive responses to questions of security
in Central Africa. To that end, it is important to lay the
economic and social foundations of lasting peace in the
entire subregion: the peace dividends to which Mr. Mbi
referred earlier.
I should like to add that, in the case of a country
such as the Central African Republic, it is somewhat

18

hypocritical to demand, before concluding a
programme with that country, that it resolve its
debts — something of which it is incapable. The efforts
of the international community, and more particularly
of donors, must offer to the Central African countries
the means they need in order to eradicate poverty and
to ensure sustainable development for all. Peace is
possible in Central Africa. The political will to achieve
it exists.
Beyond the tragedy unfolding in the Central
African subregion, the signs of hope and of reassurance
are many. Our leaders and our peoples have sensed the
wind of peace blowing through Africa. They have only
one message — the peace and development of a
continent — as the launching of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development attests. Progress towards the
realization of those two objectives — peace and
development — must be propelled jointly by the States
of Central Africa and by the United Nations system.
Therefore, let us make our cooperation dynamic
by taking concrete decisions together, by joining our
efforts and, above all, by coordinating our actions for
lasting peace in Africa in general and in the Central
African region in particular. Only thus will the
international community enable Africa to rise to the
many challenges that it confronts today.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister of State and Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation and Francophonie of Gabon for the kind
words he addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is His
Excellency Mr. Léonard She Okitundu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, for having placed on the
Council’s agenda a sensitive and crucial item: peace
and security in Central Africa. Through you, I thank
the entire Council for the interest that they have always
shown in the evolution of the geopolitical and security
situation in the subregion, which has been rocked by
conflicts for decades. Moreover, one need only consult
the Council’s agenda to see that, on a regular basis,
questions concerning Central Africa and the Great
Lakes — Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to

S/PV.4630

name but a few — remain at the centre of the Council’s
ongoing concerns.
The potential for conflict in our region is
illustrated, inter alia, by the following facts. First of
all, seven of the 11 countries in the region are prey to
disastrous and ruinous conflicts. Five of the 12 United
Nations peacekeeping, peace-building or peacemaking
missions on the continent are located there. Six of the
20 Special or Personal Representatives and Envoys of
the Secretary-General in Africa are in Central Africa.
My delegation fully subscribes to the statement
made earlier by my colleague from the Republic of the
Congo, who expressed with eloquence and clarity the
major concerns of our subregion.
My statement will address problems related to
peace in Central Africa, mechanisms for cooperation
between the United Nations system and the States of
the Central African region in maintaining peace and
security, and the real scope and current prospects of the
problems.
Concerning problems related to peace in Central
Africa, I note that, for too long, the Central African
region has been shaken by violent conflicts that cause
unprecedented human suffering and that hinder the
region’s development. The international community,
through the United Nations, is doing its utmost to help
the countries of the region to relieve the suffering of
populations and to find and implement negotiated
solutions for that situation.
In a large part of Central Africa — to which some
of the States present here today belong — the United
Nations has shown its willingness to associate itself
with wide-ranging action with a view to tackling
comprehensively the root causes of problems, of
conflicts and of instability and to promoting peace and
sustainable development in the region, inter alia by
recommending the convening of an urgent international
conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region.
The conflicts in our region are largely due to the
accumulation over many years of such complex and
interrelated problems as bad governance, the lack of
democracy, individual or ethnic monopolies over
political power, entrenched political exclusion,
endemic corruption, nepotism, violations of basic
human rights and ever-increasing poverty. Such
extremely negative factors account for the recurring

cycle of political and ethnic violence and the almost
permanent state of instability in the region. They also
explain the fact that, despite its enormous mineral,
water and agricultural resources, our region has been
slow to begin its economic and social development and
economic integration. Various elements are also adding
a regional dimension to the effects of those conflicts,
both due to tension among States and to the
repercussions of that tension beyond the national
borders of the countries concerned.
The consequences of this situation are well
known and extremely serious and worrisome. They
include a serious social crisis; the devaluing of human
life as a result of decades of brutal oppression of
populations, massacres and other even more despicable
violations of human rights; deterioration and ageing of
infrastructure and production facilities; the ravaging
and criminalization of economies and the emergence of
significant shadow economies; a decline in
qualifications and the displacement of the workforce;
negative impacts on cooperation and regional
development; a long-term humanitarian crisis; and a
precarious and explosive overall atmosphere.
In order to establish mechanisms of cooperation
among the States of the region that might serve to end
this grave situation, the countries of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
decided to ask for the help of the United Nations under
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly. Their
proposal, whose primary objective is to establish peace
and progress in the region, calls for a set of activities to
promote trust, security and development in the
framework of ECCAS. The following are some of the
activities already envisaged by our States.
Our members seek to create an atmosphere of
peace and constructive cooperation among themselves
that is characterized by stable and predictable relations
based on mutual trust among the States of the region.
They also seek to promote adherence to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations by
focusing on peace, the peaceful settlement of disputes,
human progress and human rights, as well as to
establish lasting peace and solidarity among the States
and peoples of Central Africa.
Given that request and the overall responsibility
of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security, a meeting was held in
Lomé, Togo, from 15 to 17 February 1998 on the

19

S/PV.4630

subject of promoting confidence, security and
development through the CEEAC framework. The
conference identified measures to increase trust and
security and to promote development within the
Economic Community of Central African States. Those
measures included establishing a legal framework for a
system of subregional collective defence that includes
a common armed force; creating a centre for strategic
military studies; holding joint military exercises and
patrols; setting up a standing crisis committee for the
prevention of conflict and the peaceful settlement of
disputes; encouraging periodic meetings between
ministers for foreign affairs and/or defence; and
strengthening diplomatic cooperation by opening new
embassies and consulates, establishing hotlines
between the region’s heads of State and concluding
border treaties. The Lomé conference also recognized
that greater cooperation among the States of the
subregion in the areas of security and defence would
help bolster confidence and speed up the process of
socio-economic development in member countries, in
line with the constitutive treaty of the Economic
Community of Central African States.
We are grateful to the entire United Nations
system for helping us in this effort, in particular by
establishing the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa in
May 2002. The purpose of that Committee is to
promote peace, security and development in Central
Africa through confidence-building measures, arms
limitations and disarmament. The Committee’s
programme of action calls for a set of measures to be
taken in the areas of preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding, peacemaking, peacekeeping, compliance and
monitoring.
Among the most important decisions taken by
States members of CEEAC under the auspices of the
Standing Advisory Committee are the non-aggression
pact adopted in Libreville, Gabon, in September 1993
and signed in Yaoundé, Cameroon, on 8 July 1996; the
establishment of the Central African Early Warning
System; the establishment of the Central African
Multinational Force; the setting up of the Central
African Defence and Security Commission; the
establishment, on 25 February 1999, at Yaoundé,
Cameroon, of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa, following the signing of the relevant
protocol at Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, on 25 June
2000; the establishment of a subregional centre for

20

human rights and democracy in Central Africa; and the
establishment of a subregional parliament in Central
Africa.
My delegation would also like to express its full
satisfaction with the tremendous amount of work done
by the secretariat of the Advisory Committee, which
has been responsible for the holding of 18 ministerial
meetings and numerous conferences and workshops.
Every one of those meetings, seminars and conferences
adopted very diversified recommendations and
measures in the priority areas identified by the member
States of CEEAC under the auspices of the Committee.
Those measures and recommendations pertain to, inter
alia, the promotion and respect for human rights,
including minority rights; the establishment of viable
socio-economic conditions; promoting transparency in
democratic governance; strengthening economic
integration; increasing cross-border cooperation,
including in the area of transportation; bolstering
military and security cooperation, including by
organizing joint patrols and joint training exercises to
promote participatory democracy; and the peaceful
resolution of disputes. The entire set of measures and
recommendations would take too long to recite here.
With regard to the scope of these efforts, as the
Council might be aware, although in recent years
cooperation between the United Nations and CEEAC
through the Advisory Committee has resulted in the
adoption of numerous relevant and practical decisions
aimed at promoting and strengthening peace in the
region, only some of those recommendations and
decisions have been implemented, while the majority
have yet to be put into effect. Moreover, most, if not
all, of the bodies established in this cooperative
framework have not yet begun to function.
Moreover, while some States enjoy a security
situation that could be called stable, most of them
continue to face serious social and economic problems,
as well as domestic and/or international conflicts.
Those countries are either in an open state of war, still
in the process of negotiating and making peace, or have
just completed electoral processes after years of
troubles whose consequences they still feel. A number
of persistent problems continue to beset the entire
region, including those associated with common
monitoring of borders where there are cross-border
conflicts; disarming armed groups; trafficking in small
arms and light weapons; large-scale transnational
banditry; implementing lasting solutions to the problem

S/PV.4630

of refugees in accordance with the relevant
international conventions; and, finally and obviously,
serious problems pertaining to economic and social
development, poverty and the promotion and
enjoyment of human rights.
The least we can say is that existing mechanisms
for cooperation have generally not made it possible to
achieve real physical, economic and political
integration. That has been due mostly to the persistence
of conflict, insufficient human and institutional
capacity — especially with regard to integration — and
the very slow pace of implementing the political
commitments made at the highest levels in this regard.
With regard to prospects and based on what I have
said, it would appear that the challenges are still there.
The strategies to be adopted must be multifaceted and
take into account all dimensions, internal and external,
if we want them to be lasting solutions that would
restore peace, security and development to us.
Yet, for the first time in a long while, prospects
for a return to peace are emerging in most of the States
concerned. The Security Council is being asked
particularly to take all necessary measures to
encourage, accompany, speed up and consolidate
positive developments and make the incipient peace
process irreversible.
Along these lines, the agreements and peace
protocols signed by different warring groups in the
region should be seen as provisional arrangements
which, in order to be lasting, must necessarily be
supported by various confidence-building measures,
either between States or within States. At the regional
level, the United Nations system should help all of the
Central African States in promoting and implementing
goals deriving from the Charters of the United Nations
and the African Union, in particular by taking measures
which will help strengthen harmony, peace, security,
democracy and respect for human rights and economic
development,
supported
by
transparency
in
administration, governance, combating corruption and
regional cooperation.
The United Nations system can also help the
States of the region to implement the decisions and
recommendations
adopted
by
the
Economic
Community of Central African States, in the
framework of regional cooperation, as well as those on
the
settlement
of
conflicts,
peace-building,
humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced

persons, and all other relevant measures adopted in the
framework of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa.
We believe that priority should be given to the
following: establishing an effective response system
for the conflicts that are tearing Central Africa apart,
namely establishing an early-warning mechanism for
Central Africa (MARAC) and a Central African
multinational
peacekeeping
force
(FORMAC);
partnership with the United Nations system in training
for peacekeeping operations and the formation of
military units trained for the job; partnership with the
women’s organizations for peace and security in
Central Africa, given the recognized role of women in
the processes aimed at restoring a lasting peace;
humanitarian assistance for refugees and displaced
persons, especially as regards their integration and
reintegration, and the rehabilitation of their homes;
material and financial support to implement the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Rehabilitation and
Reintegration (DDRR) programmes.
My delegation would like, in that connection, to
welcome and thank the World Bank for its positive
initiative in proposing a programme of demobilization
and reintegration that operates in several African
countries, including some that are not part of Central
Africa. Here, I would like to join my colleagues in
welcoming the presence of Mr. Mbi of the World Bank.
Generally, increased involvement of the United
Nations is required and must be encouraged in all its
human, institutional and financial dimensions. This is
why my delegation appreciates and supports the
initiatives aimed at holding an international conference
on peace, security and development in the Great Lakes,
which will help to find a solution to end the cycle of
violence and enable the development of the region.
At the national level, after five years of foreign
occupation that were preceded by several years of
chaotic administration, and bearing in mind current
developments, including the signing of peace
agreements between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, new prospects of peace
with Burundi, and the preparations for an inclusive
national dialogue, my delegation, on behalf of
President Kabila, calls the attention of the Security
Council to the need for critical support on the part of
the United Nations so that my country can consolidate
the peace process by recovering its territorial integrity,

21

S/PV.4630

strengthening national reconciliation and putting into
place new democratic institutions.
My delegation also calls the Council’s attention
to the urgent need for post-conflict assistance so that
we can restore the country’s economy, infrastructure
and ecosystem and strengthen its institutional and
human capacities. In the short term, it is urgent and
crucial to strengthen the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) after the aggressor forces start withdrawing
and support efforts to hold a successful and inclusive
dialogue culminating in national reconciliation through
free and transparent elections.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
for his kind words addressed to me and other members
of the Council.
The next speaker on my list is Mr. Santiago
Nsobeya Efuman, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
International Cooperation and Francophonie of
Equatorial Guinea. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Nsobeya Efuman (Equatorial Guinea)
(spoke in Spanish): May I first of all congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your presiding over this meeting of
the Security Council, and for being a worthy son and
representative of the Republic of Cameroon, a
neighbouring country with which Equatorial Guinea
has a fine relationship of good neighbourliness and
friendship. Your presence on the Security Council does
honour to Equatorial Guinea and, of course, to the
entire Central African subregion.
In addition, I associate myself with the statement
made by Minister Rodolphe Adada, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of the Congo, in his
capacity as the current president of the Economic
Community of Central African States. This being said,
I want to associate Equatorial Guinea with the words of
appreciation
and
well-deserved
congratulations
addressed to you on your presiding over the work of
the Security Council during this month. We also extend
our appreciation to each of the members of the Security
Council.
Our gratitude goes in particular to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
through him to each and every one of the bodies of the

22

United Nations system, that directly or indirectly make
an invaluable contribution to the attainment of the
objective of this meeting of the Security Council.
Together with the preceding speakers, Equatorial
Guinea highly values this fine and unprecedented
initiative of devoting a meeting of the Security Council
to a thorough consideration of the study of the difficult
issue related to the increasingly urgent need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
the subregion of Central Africa in the maintenance of
peace and security.
Consequently, I would stress that, for the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, whose Government is
making every effort for the maintenance of peace and
stability in our country, this meeting reaffirms and
clearly attests to the great responsibility and primary
role that the United Nations Charter assigns to the
Security Council as the body in charge of ensuring and
preserving international peace and security wherever
they may be threatened. This meeting is focused on and
recalls that task and concerns over the alarming
situation in the Central African subregion, which is
suffering from the proliferation and persistence of
crisis and conflict situations and hotbeds of tension
that, declared and not, undoubtedly represent a genuine
collective threat to peace and a serious obstacle to the
enormous and tireless efforts of the States of the
subregion to confront the challenges facing our
countries in the achievement of political, economic and
social development for our respective peoples.
More significant yet is the fact that this meeting
of the Security Council is taking place at a particularly
complex time in the international situation,
characterized by the threats to the peace and hotbeds of
tension in the Central African subregion to which I
have just referred and which are known to all. I will not
name all the fraternal Central African countries that are
stricken with crises, because there is no pleasure in
constantly seeing these names on a list of crisis
victims. We hope that the names of those Central
African countries in crisis and conflict will soon be
moved to the list of those enjoying peace, stability and
progress for their peoples after so many years of
suffering.
Central Africa, endowed with immense and
significant natural resources and a population of over
100 million inhabitants, cannot remain indefinitely
immersed in instability. That is why Equatorial Guinea,

S/PV.4630

without dwelling on each and every one of the
elements of the untenable situation prevailing in
Central Africa — whose political, economic and social
implications have already been described to the
Council — wishes to express its appreciation for the
important work done over the past 10 years by the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.
Out of its sense of responsibility and conviction,
Equatorial Guinea has been fully involved in this
dynamic in order to make its modest contribution to the
search for and consolidation of peace and stability in
Central Africa. In this context, Equatorial Guinea
welcomed the convening in the city of Bata, from 18 to
21 May 1998, of the Subregional Conference on
Democratic Institutions and Peace in Central Africa,
where the subregional parliament of Central Africa was
created at the initiative of President Obiang Nguema
Mbasago. That institution is responsible for involving
peoples in addressing questions of interest with a view
to strengthening mutual confidence and to promoting
peace and harmony among the States of subregion. It
was also established as a primary mechanism for
cooperation and dialogue in the promotion of
democratic values in the Central African subregion.
Among the activities of the Standing Advisory
Committee, Equatorial Guinea also welcomed the
convening of several important ministerial meetings, as
well as of a high-level seminar on the implementation
of the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, held in Yaoundé
from 19 to 21 July 1999. The seminar was devoted to
the promotion of participatory democracy, the peaceful
settlement of disputes, good-neighbourliness, the
struggle against the illicit trafficking and proliferation
of small arms and light weapons, cooperation in the
field of defence and security, the promotion of
international humanitarian law, the establishment of a
mechanism for the maintenance and restoration of
peace, the promotion of good governance, sustainable
development and the strengthening of subregional
cooperation. Equatorial Guinea also welcomed the
convening of the Subregional Conference on the
Proliferation and Illicit Circulation of Small Arms in
Central Africa, held in N’Djamena from 25 to 27
October 1999.

Fully aware of the challenges confronting Central
Africa, and ever since the summit of the heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), held in Libreville,
Gabonese Republic, my country, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, has spared no effort over the past
three years in making its modest contribution to the
process of relaunching ECCAS in order to create
mechanisms within the Community in the framework
of the collective effort of all members countries in the
maintenance of peace and security.
Those efforts include the signing of a nonaggression pact among the States of ECCAS and the
establishment of the Council for Peace and Security in
Central Africa; the Multinational Force for Central
Africa; the early-warning mechanism for Central
Africa; and a subregional centre for human rights and
democracy in Central Africa.
To make these mechanisms operational, ECCAS
has turned to the United Nations to establish the
foundations of cooperation that is more consistent with
current and future challenges. ECCAS obtained
observer status in the United Nations two years ago and
has established an important framework of cooperation
that gives new impetus to improved cooperation at the
subregional level and with the United Nations system.
At the same time, ECCAS has been building bridges of
cooperation with the European Union and the entire
international community.
In this regard, Equatorial Guinea reiterates its
desire to see such cooperation flourish, especially since
we see encouraging prospects on the horizon for the
peaceful settlement of the conflicts and hotbeds of
tension now being experienced by a number of States
of Central Africa.
Certain that democracy is not an event, but rather
a process, Equatorial Guinea is fully convinced that
peace, security and stability are prerequisites to the
restoration and consolidation of democracies, to a
strengthened culture and promotion of respect for
human dignity, and to the achievement of the progress
and prosperity to which the peoples of our respective
countries are entitled.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea is also
fully convinced that peace, dialogue and tolerance are
essential elements in promoting coexistence and
harmony among peoples and nations. That is the basis
of Equatorial Guinea’s unflagging resolve to make the

23

S/PV.4630

Central African subregion a zone of peace, stability
and cooperation. With that in mind, we insist, as we
always have and always will, on recourse to dialogue
and peaceful negotiation.
In conclusion, I solemnly reaffirm before this
important meeting of the Security Council the
determination of the Government of Equatorial Guinea
to make further progress in consolidating the rule of
law, democracy and the promotion and protection of
human rights. I wish to inform the Council that, on 12
October, on the occasion of the thirty-fourth
anniversary of our national independence, President
Obiang Nguema Mbasago of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea offered a presidential pardon and
reprieve to the majority of those who had been found
guilty and deprived of their freedom by our country’s
justice system for various crimes and offences. This act
of magnanimity attests to his policy in favour of the
social reintegration of all the children of Equatorial
Guinea, based on the conviction of the President of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea that such measures
contribute concretely to the maintenance of peace and
stability in our country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, International Cooperation
and Francophonie of Equatorial Guinea for his kind
words addressed to me.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Denmark. I invite her to take a seat at the Council
table and to make her statement.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia — and the Associated Countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves with this
statement.
Allow me to congratulate the presidency of the
Council on convening this open session in the Security
Council on the strengthening of cooperation between
the United Nations system and Central Africa in the
maintenance of peace and security. I would also like to
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity
to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union supports the view that there
is a need for a closer look at the opportunities for

24

strengthening regional integration and cooperation in
the Central African region. Regional integration and
cooperation would contribute to the integration of the
Central African countries into the world economy and
play a decisive role in consolidating peace and
preventing conflict. This would enable the countries
involved to face cross-border challenges, in particular
in the field of the environment and the use and
management of natural resources.
The subregional organizations in the Central
African region could be important building blocks for
regional political and economic integration, and they
could contribute in securing peace and prosperity. But
an important prerequisite for consolidating regional
peace, democracy and economic stability is the
existence of a genuine political will among the Central
African States to cooperate. In this regard the EU is
happy to note that there is evidence of an increasing
feeling of collective responsibility for securing peace
and stability in the Central African region.
At the regional level the recent establishment of
the African Union and the adoption of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development are positive steps
towards building Africa’s capacity to prevent and
manage all aspects of conflicts through the
strengthening of existing regional and subregional
initiatives. If this growing sense of regional
responsibility and ownership continues to grow and is
expressed in a genuine political will for cooperation,
then other countries and the United Nations should
help to enhance the institutional capacities of the
region and cooperate closely with them. The European
Union is fully committed to working closely and at all
levels with the United Nations and the region.
In the Cotonou Agreement, the European Union
has established long-term contractual partnerships with
the countries in the Central African region. One of the
priority areas of the Agreement is that of supporting
regional integration and cooperation. Among other
things, we have entered into negotiations for regional
economic partnership agreements. These will
strengthen the relations between the European Union
and the Central African States in full conformity with
World Trade Organization rules and will foster regional
integration.
Apart from the Cotonou Agreement, it should
also be noted that the European Union has launched or
contributed to a number of other initiatives in the area

S/PV.4630

of conflict prevention and management in Africa.
Furthermore, the EU member countries have
contributed to peacekeeping in Africa both financially
and through participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Let me just add that the European Union follows
the developments in the Great Lakes region closely and
is studying the possibility of organizing an
international conference on peace, security, democracy
and development in the region.
Allow me to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of the European Union to help strengthen
the regional capacities in Central Africa in order to
secure peace, democracy and economic stability. The
EU is ready to cooperate fully in this endeavour with
the United Nations system and Central Africa.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Egypt. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to extend to the Council
President our sincere thanks for organizing and
presiding over this important meeting. We also wish to
express our appreciation for the high-level participation
that characterizes this debate, which reflects the
enormity of the challenges we are facing as an
international community in the Central African region.
It also shows our common aspiration to assist this
critical region and enhance cooperation between it and
the United Nations system.
We cannot discuss means of enhancing
cooperation between the international community and
the Central African region, with all that it embodies in
terms of potential, capabilities and resources, without
pausing at the major hot points of conflict afflicting it
and agreeing on means to resolve them. From this
standpoint, the Egyptian delegation would like to
mention a number of specific points that we feel must
be emphasized when addressing the ongoing armed
conflicts in the region.
First of all, the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is the primary one, for its
shadows loom over any attempts to establish peace in
the Great Lakes region in particular and the Central
African region in general. Thus, we feel that the efforts
being made by the international community, and

specifically the efforts of the United Nations system,
should be focused on finding a comprehensive and
lasting solution to that conflict in a manner that will
pave the way for addressing all the other problems
facing the region in terms of security, economic,
humanitarian and developmental dimensions.
Secondly, and accordingly, we invite the Security
Council to quickly expand the military component of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC) to 8,700
personnel, as recommended in the latest report of the
Secretary-General. We hope that the United Nations, in
close cooperation with the troop-contributing countries,
will be able to deploy the additional units in the eastern
parts of that country as soon as possible, in order to
create an environment conducive for launching the
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
programme for the elements of the armed groups that
are not parties to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement.
Thirdly, we invite the international community to
throw its political weight behind the recent agreements
signed between the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, and between that
same Government and Uganda, in Pretoria and Luanda
respectively, in a manner that will guarantee full and
coordinated implementation of their provisions. We
hope that the current negotiations between the
Congolese Government and other parties will lead to an
imminent breakthrough that establishes the broad
foundations under which the brotherly Congolese
people can enjoy the security, peace and prosperity
towards which they aspire.
Fourthly, we must at the same time address the
other hot points of conflict which continue to the north
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo into the
Central African Republic and to the east into Burundi.
We thus invite the United Nations to continue its
support for the region and efforts aimed at concluding a
ceasefire agreement between the Government of
Burundi and the rebel Front for the Defence of
Democracy (FDD) and National Liberation Forces
(FNL) groups that remain outside the Arusha peace
process.
We hope that the international community will
consider supporting the decisions of the regional
initiative, should the rebel groups continue their
intransigence and their refusal to work with the

25

S/PV.4630

Transitional Government that came into power in
November of last year.
On the other hand, we invite the United Nations
to continue its support for the peace-building efforts in
the Central African Republic through the United
Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA) in Bangui. We hope that
the Security Council will be forthcoming in supporting
the initiatives of the Economic and Monetary
Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) and the
Community of Sahelo-Saharan States (CEN-SAD) in
that regard.
If the international community is indeed serious
in its efforts to support the peace frameworks in the
three countries to which I have referred, to nurture
them and to achieve the desired results, then it will
have taken the first step towards establishing a strong
cooperative relationship between the international
community and the entire Central African region. The
establishment and maintenance of that partnership will
undoubtedly require each side to display the necessary
political will and to assume the accompanying
obligations, each within the limits of its capabilities
and in accordance with its responsibilities under the
Charter.
In that context, the following points should be
taken into consideration. First, there are many existing
regional frameworks for cooperation in Central Africa
aimed generally at establishing the foundations of
peace, security and stability within and among its
States. We feel that the United Nations can exert more
efforts to support those frameworks and that the
Security Council should strive to establish an
institutional relationship with them. In that context, we
wish to mention particularly the Protocol establishing
the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa,
which includes a non-aggression pact and a mutual
assistance pact. That is an initiative that deserves
commendation and requires political support from the
Security Council and technical support from the
Secretariat and other United Nations specialized
agencies, in order to implement it.
Secondly, the illegal flow of small arms and light
weapons in the Central African region is a major
contributing factor to the emergence and fuelling of
armed conflicts in the region. Thus, the United Nations
is called on to pay greater attention to the scourge and
to put into effect comprehensive programmes that

26

address the problem in its regional dimension. In that
context, we welcome the mission undertaken by the
United Nations Development Programme in the Great
Lakes region last March to assess the scope, nature and
impact of the flow and the use of small arms in the
region. We also call on the international community to
contribute towards the implementation of the strategy
put forward for that purpose at the regional and
national levels in the States concerned. We also support
the proposal previously submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to give the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace and Disarmament in Africa a more prominent
role in encouraging transparency and confidencebuilding among the States of the region with regard to
military expenditures.
Thirdly, since they took the initiative to establish
the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management
and Resolution in Africa in 1993, Africa’s leaders
previously accepted the limits to the capabilities
available to them in order to undertake peacekeeping
operations in the continent. Such limitation, of course,
also applies to the Central African region. That is why
we are calling on the Security Council to assume
responsibility when necessary and when the region
lacks the necessary military, logistical and financial
capabilities to implement them. We also call on the
Council to give its political weight to the limited
peacekeeping operations that the regional organizations
are able to undertake, such as the one undertaken by
CEN-SAD in the Central African Republic and the one
to be undertaken by CEMAC in Bangui.
We also feel that the United Nations Department
of Peacekeeping Operations can play an effective role
in collaborating with the subregional organizations and
within the context of the United Nations Standing
Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central
Africa, in order to contribute to training and readying
military units of the Central African States in the area
of peacekeeping operations and to coordinating the
assistance that donor countries may provide in
preparing and equipping such forces.
Fourthly, and lastly, we must affirm that
confronting the root causes that make the Central
African region vulnerable to armed conflict and
security upheavals will require the allocation of large
amounts of financial assistance for many years to
come. If the international community is serious about
translating the results of this meeting into tangible
reality on the ground, its assistance will lead to

S/PV.4630

consolidating the foundations of peace, stability and
development in the region. That is why we believe that
the major test of the international community’s
determination in this area will be provision of financial
and developmental incentives that will encourage
implementation of the results of the upcoming
international conference on security, peace and stability
in the Great Lakes region, in order to provide its States
with an example of success that can be applied
elsewhere in the African continent.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr.
Motomura
(Japan):
Thank
you,
Mr. President, for convening this public meeting of the
Security Council on this very important subject. The
situation in Central Africa, where many States are
suffering the consequences of long years of conflict, is
an issue that continues to demand the Council’s urgent
attention.
In addressing the root causes of conflict, my
Government has consistently advocated the importance
of Africa’s own initiatives and self-help efforts or
ownership, as well as the partnership between Africa
and the international community that supports such
African efforts. But because those efforts cannot bear
fruit unless there is peace and stability, it is imperative
that all parties concerned turn away from conflict and
devote their energies to nation-building and
development. Towards that end, initiatives at the
subregional level are indispensable.
From this point of view, we attach great
importance to subregional organizations such as the
Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa
(COPAX), which, in close cooperation with the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union, may play
an essential role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts. One very positive example of such efforts at
the subregional level is the communiqué recently
adopted at the CEMAC Summit regarding the border
issue between the Central African Republic and Chad.

It is incumbent upon the international community,
including the entire United Nations system, to support
the
initiatives
of
those
organizations.
The
recommendation on strengthening the relationship
between the Council and African regional and
subregional organizations, put forward by the Ad Hoc
Working Group of the Security Council on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, chaired by
Ambassador Koonjul, should be the starting point.
At the same time, the Japanese Government
would like to encourage all countries in Central Africa
to continue to fully cooperate with the United Nations
offices and organs located in the subregion, such as the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the
United Nations Mission in Angola (UNMA), the
United Nations Office in Burundi (UNOB) and the
United Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the
Central African Republic (BONUCA), as well as the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region. Their cooperation
is essential in consolidating the recent, still fragile,
progress that has been made in the peace process in
such countries as Angola and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
There will be no stability and prosperity in the
world in the twenty-first century unless the problems of
Africa are resolved. In the recognition that these
problems pose tremendous challenges not only to the
region itself but also to the international community as
a whole, my Government has designated the period
leading up to the Third Tokyo International Conference
on African Development (TICAD III), to be held next
October, as the “Year for Soaring Cooperation with
Africa.” It is our sincere hope that other Member States
will join in making this aspiration a reality.
The President (spoke in French): I propose that,
with the consent of Council members, the meeting be
suspended until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.05 p.m.

27
