General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Page

1902 (XVIII). Report of the International Law Commission (18 November
1963) (item 69) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1903 (XVIII). Participation in general multilateral treaties concluded under the
auspices of the League of Nations (18 November 1963) (item 70)........
1966 (XVIII). Consideratio!1 of principles of i~ternational law ~oncernin~ friendly
relations and co-operatton among States m accordance with the Cnarter of
the United Nations (16 December 1963) (item 71)....................
1967 (XVIII). Question of methods of fact-finding ( 16 December 1963) (item 71)
1968 (XVIII). Technical assistance to promote the teaching, study, dissemination
and wider appreciation of international law (16 December 1963) (item 72)..

1902 (XVDI). Report of the International Law
Commission

69
69
70
71
71

( b) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the views expressed at the eighteenth
session of the General Assembly and the report of the
Sub-Committee on State Responsibility2 and giving due
consideration to the purposes and princ.;ples enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations;
( c) Continue its work on the succession of States
and Governments, taking into account the views expressed at the eighteenth session of the General Assembly, the report of the Sub-Committee on the Succession of States and Governments8 and the comments
which may be submitted by Governments, with appropriate reference to the views of States which have
achieved independence since the Second World War;
( d) Continue its work on special missions and on
relations between States and inter-governmental organizations, taking into account the views expressed at the
eighteenth session of the General Assembly;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to the
International Law Commission the records of the discussions at the eighteenth session of the General Assembly on the report of the Commission;
6. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide
the International Law Commission with the necessary
technical services referred to in ,+.apter V of its report.
1258th plenary meeting,
18 November 1963.

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International
Law Commission on the work of its fifteenth session,1
Recalling resolution 1765 (XVII) of 20 November
1962, by which the General Assembly recommen~ed
that the Commission should continue its work of codification and progressive development of the law of treaties
and its work on State responsibility and on the succession of States and Governments,
Emphasizing the need for the further codification
and progressive development of international la~ with
a view to making it a more effective means of implementing the purposes and principles set forth in Articles
1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the work of codification of the topics of
State responsibility, the succession of States and Governments, special missions and relations between States
and inter-governmental organizations is proceeding satisfactorily, as set forth in chapter IV of the report of
the Commission,
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifteenth session ;
2. Expresses appreciation to the Commission for
the work accomplished at its fifteenth session, especially
with regard to the law of treaties ;
. 3. Noles with approval the programme of work for
1964 proposed by the Commission in its report;
4. Recommends that the Commission should:
(a) Continue the work of codification and progressive
development of the law of treaties, taking into account
the views expressed at the eighteenth session of the
General Assembly and the comments which may be submitted by Governments, in order that the law of treaties
may be placed upon the widest and most secure foundations;

1903 (XVIII). Participation in general muld.
lateral treaties concluded under the auspices
of the League of Nations

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of extended participation in general multilateral treaties concluded under the
auspices of the League of Nations, and the report of
the International Law Commission thereon,•
Noting that there are twenty-one such treaties of a
technical and non-political character which by their
2 /bid., annex I.
8 /bid., annex II .
4 Jbid., chapter III.

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Eigliteenth Ses-

.rioJJ, Supplement No. 9 (A/5509).

69
