S/PV.9245

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9245th meeting

Tuesday, 17 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mrs. Hackman
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01666 (E)
*2301666*

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

old boy and his teenage sister were injured and lost both
parents. With two dozen people still missing, including
four children, the death toll is expected to rise.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ilze Brands
Kehris, Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights,
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights; and Metropolitan Anthony of
Volokolamsk, Chairman of the Department of External
Church Relations of the Patriarchate of Moscow.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Brands Kehris.
Ms. Brands Kehris: I wish to thank the members
of the Security Council for the opportunity to brief
them on the human rights dimension of the subject of
today’s open meeting. It is my pleasure to represent the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Volker Türk, who regrets that he is unable to attend due
to travel and related logistical challenges.
The armed attack by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine and the ensuing hostilities have brought the
most severe forms of human rights and international
humanitarian law violations into the everyday lives
of people in Ukraine, putting at risk countless lives
and causing massive displacement and destruction
of civilian infrastructure. To date, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) has recorded more than 7,000 civilians killed
and more than 11,000 injured since 24 February 2022.
The actual figures are considerably higher.
Last Saturday, a missile struck a residential
building in a densely populated area of Dnipro. We
have verified that the attack, one of the deadliest to
date, killed at least 45 civilians, including six children,
and injured at least 79. A 1-year-old boy was killed with
his father. A 3-year-old girl, her 13-year-old sister and
their mother were also killed. A young woman who was
injured in the attack lost both her parents, and a 9-year2/19

17/01/2023

The Russian Federation’s strikes targeting
Ukrainian critical infrastructure since 10 October 2022
have now killed at least 103 civilians and injured at least
371, as verified by our Office. The strikes have damaged
or destroyed half of the energy infrastructure system of
Ukraine, resulting in significant electricity and water
shortages across the country. By restricting civilians’
access to water, electricity, essential communications
and heating, the enjoyment of the rights to health, to
an adequate standard of living and the right to life is
severely compromised.
Civilians in parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions occupied by the Russian Federation have also
suffered from intense shelling by Ukraine in densely
populated areas in recent months. Since 24 February
2022, our Office has recorded 498 civilians killed,
including 25 children, and 1,675 injured, including 117
children. In December 2022 alone, we documented
five cases of injuries among children caused by
multiple-launch rocket systems and shelling in Donetsk.
We urge all parties to ensure full compliance with
international humanitarian law principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution, including by refraining
from using explosive weapons in populated areas. I wish
to add the principle under international humanitarian
law of special protection accorded to children, as
persons who are particularly vulnerable.
Among the array of human rights concerns and
violations that OHCHR has documented since the start
of this war, we are concerned about restrictions on the
freedom of religion and the freedom of association across
Ukraine, in both territory controlled by the Government
and territory occupied by the Russian Federation.
While tensions between Orthodox communities
in Ukraine existed for decades, they deteriorated
following the Russian Federation’s armed attack against
Ukraine, and there have been some worrisome recent
developments. In November and December, the Security
Service of Ukraine conducted searches in premises and
places of worship of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
At least three clergy are now facing criminal charges,
including for treason and denial of the armed aggression
of the Russian Federation against Ukraine. We urge the
Ukrainian authorities to ensure that any such searches
in premises and places of worship be in full compliance
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV.9245

with international law, that fair trial rights be given to
those facing criminal charges and that any criminal
sanctions be compatible with the rights of the freedom
of opinion, expression and religion.

of Ukraine in its attempts to destroy the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church. The Ukrainian Orthodox Church is
not a political but a religious organization, uniting more
than 12,000 parishes and millions of Ukrainian citizens.

We are concerned that two draft laws recently
introduced in the Parliament — draft law No. 8221 and
draft law No. 8262 — could undermine the right to the
freedom of religion or belief as enshrined in article 18
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights. We recall that, under international human
rights law, any limitations to the right to manifest one’s
religion or belief must be prescribed by law, necessary
and proportionate. We call on both parties to respect
and ensure that the rights to the freedoms of opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly, association and
religion can be exercised without discrimination by all.

On 1 December 2022, the National Security and
Defence Council of Ukraine adopted a decision,
the true purpose of which is to restrict the rights of
parishes of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. The same
State body has taken a number of measures, including
instructing the Government to draft a law banning
the activities in Ukraine of religious organizations
affiliated with centres of influence in Russia. It is
essentially a ban on the Ukrainian Orthodox Church,
although its governing centre is located in Kyiv, not
Moscow, and it is administratively independent of the
Russian Orthodox Church. The measures also called
for intensifying the counter-intelligence activities of
Ukrainian security services vis-à-vis the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church; depriving the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church of the right to use the chapels of the most
important historical monastery in Ukraine, the KyivPechersk Lavra; and introducing so-called sanctions
against the Church’s clergy.

As the one-year anniversary of this conflict
approaches, we appeal for respect for the sanctity of
life, for human dignity and for respect for the principle
of humanity. To that end, international human rights law
and international humanitarian law must be respected
at all times by parties to the conflict, and the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations must be upheld.
The President: I thank Ms. Brands Kehris for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Metropolitan Anthony
of Volokolamsk.
Metropolitan Anthony (spoke in Russian): I thank
members of the Security Council for giving me the
opportunity to speak at this important meeting.
The Russian Orthodox Church, both independently
and in cooperation with other Orthodox churches, the
Roman Catholic Church, Protestant denominations
and representatives of world traditional religions,
makes every effort to defend the rights of the faithful
throughout the world, especially those of Christians.
We are currently extremely concerned about flagrant
violations of the human and constitutional rights of
those of the Orthodox faith in Ukraine. One cannot
overstate the peacemaking potential of religion and the
Church in inter-State and internal conflicts. For many
centuries, Orthodox Christianity has constituted a
common spiritual and cultural foundation in the lives of
the people of Russia and Ukraine and could help restore
mutual understanding in the future. But the very basis
of such dialogue is being undermined in Ukraine, even
as we speak, given the initiative taken by the leadership

The decision was adopted the very same day by
President of Zelenskyy of Ukraine, and his subsequent
decrees have established the list of bishops of the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church who will be subject to
sanctions, which means, among other things, they will
be deprived, essentially, of the right to manage property
on Ukrainian territory. Furthermore, as the Ukrainian
media have reported, as a result of a subsequent decree
by President Zelenskyy, a number of senior members of
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church have been deprived of
Ukrainian citizenship, which most likely will be used
to justify their forced expulsion from the country.
However, article 25 of the Constitution of Ukraine
states that “a citizen of Ukraine shall not be deprived
of citizenship and of the right to change citizenship. A
citizen of Ukraine shall not be expelled from Ukraine
or extradited”.
Article 9 of the Convention on the Reduction of
Statelessness, which was drafted under the auspices of
the United Nations and to which Ukraine acceded in
2013, states “[a] Contracting State may not deprive any
person or group of persons of their nationality on racial,
ethnic, religious or political grounds.”
The lists of members of the Ukrainian episcopate
and clergy have been adopted by the National Security

23-016663/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

and Defence Council of Ukraine, without legal, judicial
or investigative proceedings or the possibility of
challenging the decision. The sanctions and revocation
of citizenship are being imposed on the clerics of one
confession only, while article 24 of the Constitution of
Ukraine expressly prohibits privileges or restrictions on
the rights citizens of Ukraine based on their religious
beliefs. Therefore, depriving Ukrainian religious
leaders of their citizenship is undeniably a form of mass
political repression, which contravenes the Constitution
of Ukraine and international agreements that the
country has signed. The violations of those rights and
restrictions of those freedoms, even during a state of
emergency or in the case of martial law, are expressly
prohibited by article 64 of the Constitution of Ukraine.
Since October 2022, under the pretext of so-called
counter-intelligence activities, the security service
of Ukraine has carried out large-scale searches of
the monasteries and parishes of Ukrainian Orthodox
churches throughout the country. In the course of those
operations, there has been a complete disregard for the
honour and dignity of the clergy, while the media have
spread slanderous rumours. Under far-fetched pretexts,
criminal cases are being brought against the episcopate
and clergy of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. In a
situation recalling the years of atheistic persecution in
the Soviet Union, they are being groundlessly accused
of anti-State activities. Alleged evidence of the latter
sometimes comprises of old newspapers, journals
or theological and historical books from the accused
parties’ own personal libraries.
The political repression of the bishops of the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church is the culmination of
the repressive religious policy of the Ukrainian
authorities over recent years, the ultimate goal
of which — in contravention of article 35 of the
Constitution of Ukraine on the separation between
church and State — is total control of the religious life
of society by Government agencies.
In 2018, with the active anti-constitutional
interference of the State apparatus and security
services of Ukraine and with gross violations of
Orthodox canonical law, the so-called Orthodox
Church of Ukraine was created. Further efforts by the
authorities are intended to force the parishes of the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church to join this new religious
organization, created by the Ukrainian State under its
patronage. In 2019, new religious legal norms were
adopted to facilitate the raids and seizures of churches
4/19

17/01/2023

and their property through sham referendums among
the residents of the territories concerned, which ignored
the opinions of members of the churches’ parishes
and involved the intervention of external actors, who
were sometimes armed. Further measures included
the falsification of documents, gross legal violations,
large-scale clashes and the beating of Church members
and clergy. In 2022 alone, 129 churches of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church were seized. The legal registration of
new parishes is being fully blocked.
In 2019, another law was adopted to change the
name of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, with the
obvious purpose of severing its link with its property.
As that law was not in compliance with the Constitution
of Ukraine, upon the request of a group of deputies of the
Verkhovna Rada, application of the law was suspended
pending its consideration by the Constitutional Court of
Ukraine. However, last month, the law went into effect.
Currently, in the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, seven
additional bills have been proposed to restrict the rights
of or entirely eliminate the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
Legislators are not hiding the fact that the purpose of
their bills is to infringe upon the rights of parishes and
members of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, forcibly
confiscate its property, deprive it of its historical and
legal name, forbid it from calling itself Orthodox and,
lastly, prohibit its activities and completely eliminate
its presence in Ukraine.
In violating the principle of separation of church and
State under article 35 of the Constitution of Ukraine,
the leadership of Ukraine and the local authorities are
essentially prohibiting the practice of religious rights
based on the Church’s own theological and canonical
criteria and are officially requiring parishes of the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church to join other religious
organizations. An unbridled, slanderous campaign
is being waged in the Ukrainian media against the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church, calling for a complete
ban on its activities and the use of pressure and
violence against its representatives, which bears clear
signs of hate speech. This sort of media background is
leading to an increase in violence against parishioners.
There have been many cases of arson and vandalism
of churches, beatings and even murder attempts of
members of the clergy, sometimes even in churches
during church services.
In conclusion, I would like to call upon members of
the Council to pay attention to the unlawful actions of
the Ukrainian State authorities against the largest faith
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

in the country and the many violations of the rights of
the faithful that are guaranteed by the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Declaration on the Elimination of All
Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on
Religion or Belief, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
and many other international instruments guaranteeing
the inalienable right of any person to the free exercise
of religion.
The President: I thank Metropolitan Anthony for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We listened closely to the briefing of the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, Ilze
Brands Kehris, but we would like to underscore that the
Russian Federation continues to believe that matters of
human rights protection do not fall within the purview
of the Security Council and must be discussed within
the relevant United Nations organs. On the Council’s
agenda today is not human rights as a separate subject,
but rather the latest provocative steps taken by the Kyiv
regime that make the prospect of a peaceful settlement in
the country even more remote. We thank the Chairman
of the Department of External Church Relations of the
Patriarchate of Moscow, Metropolitan Anthony, for his
detailed information about the repressive actions of
Kyiv against the Ukrainian Orthodox Church.
Many Council members are probably wondering
why we have convened today’s meeting, whose focus
is on the domestic situation in Ukraine. I would like to
underscore that we are not talking about interference
in church affairs, nor are we even talking about church
affairs per se. Rather, we are convinced that the
processes taking place in Ukraine are directly related
to international peace and security and that they are
having a direct impact on the prospects for establishing
peace in the country.
As we have already noted during our statement
on 13 January (see S/PV.9243), in Ukraine, there has
recently been a notable acceleration in the formation
of a genuine despotic authoritarian regime. The
persecution of dissent is being carried out on all fronts,
from the full prohibition of the opposition and the arrest

S/PV.9245

of public-opinion leaders to the destruction of freedom
of speech and even freedom of religion as such.
It is important to understand that this tightening
of the screws in the Ukrainian public, political and
cultural space did not start today, and neither did it start
in February last year. Since coming to power as the
result of an anti-constitutional coup d’état in 2014, the
Kyiv regime has been steadily destroying everything
that would in any way possibly link it to Russia. In a
country where the Russian language is the mother
tongue of the majority of the population and where for
many centuries the country was in cultural unity with
Russia, this policy essentially means undermining the
foundations that bind society together and imposing an
artificial paradigm of Ukraine as an anti-Russia, even
though Russians are the second largest ethnic group in
the country.
Indeed, under Article 10 of the Constitution
of Ukraine,
“the free development, use and protection of
Russian, and other languages of national minorities
of Ukraine, is guaranteed”,
and under Article 11, Ukraine
“promotes the consolidation and development of
the Ukrainian nation, its historical consciousness,
traditions and culture, and also the development of
the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity
of all indigenous peoples and national minorities
of Ukraine”.
Article 24 further provides that
“[t]here shall be no privileges or restrictions
based on race, colour of skin, political, religious
and other beliefs, sex, ethnic and social origin,
property status, place of residence, linguistic or
other characteristics.”
Article 53 provides that
“Citizens who belong to national minorities are
guaranteed the right to receive instruction in their
native language, or to study their native language in
state and communal educational establishments and
through national cultural societies in accordance
with the law.”
The Kyiv regime’s measures contradict Ukraine’s
obligations to protect the rights of all ethnic groups in
accordance with a whole host of international documents

23-016665/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

that, in particular, prohibit discrimination against
national minorities and guarantee ethnic groups’ rights
to education, to the preservation of their culture and to
study their mother tongue. These are all enshrined in
such documents as the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination of
1965, the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights of 1966, UNESCO’s Convention against
Discrimination in Education of 1960, the Convention
on the Rights of the Child of 1989 and Protocol No. 1
to the Convention on the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms, the Council of Europe’s
Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights
of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious
and Linguistic Minorities of 1992, and the Document
of the Copenhagen Meeting of the Conference on the
Human Dimension of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe of 1990.
All of the foregoing obligations incumbent on
Ukraine under its Constitution and international
documents are contradicted by at least 13 laws and
decisions adopted by the Ukrainian regime between
2016 and 2022, all of which has led to an unprecedented
uptick in Ukraine of Russophobia encouraged at
the very top. Back in September 2021, President
Zelenskyy called on those residents of Ukraine who
consider themselves Russian to leave the country, and
Secretary of the National Security and Defence Council
Danilov called Russians “rats and swine dogs”, also
calling for them to be hounded and destroyed by any
means possible.
After the start of Russia’s special military
operation in Ukraine, the formation of the “Zelenskyy
dictatorship” in Ukraine rapidly gathered pace. With
reference to the need to combat separatism and so-called
“Kremlin propaganda”, political opponents, along with
independent journalists and media companies, as well
as members of public organizations that the authorities
did not like, were persecuted. In just a few months, all
opposition parties that were in favour of developing
normal relations between Ukraine and Russia were
entirely shut down.
In the territory controlled by the Zelenskyy regime,
there have been mass political repressions and arrests
of civilian activists and human rights defenders. Any
manifestation of disagreement with the official position
is extirpated. For example, the Ukrainian human rights
defender Elena Berezhnaya, who for eight years studied
6/19

17/01/2023

and documented the process of the establishment of neoNazism in Ukraine and spoke before members of the
Security Council as early as March 2022, was arrested
by the Ukrainian security services and is still being
detained on the absurd accusation of high treason. We
have repeatedly drawn the attention of the SecretaryGeneral and members of the Security Council to this
glaring case. We call on the United Nations leadership
to actively facilitate Ms. Berezhnaya’s release.
We also know about hundreds of other examples
of people being persecuted and arrested on the basis
not only of publications and statements, but also
denunciations, or even simply because they listen to
Russian music or read Russian language media. They
are then subject to proposals that they be exchanged for
Ukrainian soldiers who have been taken prisoner, but,
given that so many Ukrainian soldiers are being taken
prisoner or surrendering, Kyiv is trying to increase the
number of people it can swap through blanket arrests
from among its own civilian population. Further, under
the pretext of this so-called “war with occupiers”,
the Ukrainian authorities have adopted a number of
very draconian laws, including the law on so-called
“collaborationism”, which allows for the prosecution of
people even for receiving humanitarian assistance from
Russian authorities or for refusing to evacuate from
their homes.
The media space in the country has been fully
purged of alternative points of view. In December 2022,
Volodymyr Zelenskyy signed the law on the media,
which essentially brought the Ukrainian media under
the control of the authorities. The National Council
of Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine is
now able, without any judicial proceedings, to prohibit
online media, cancel the registration of print media
and demand that Internet providers block access to
any publications. The authoritarian and discriminatory
nature of the law was even noted by Western media and
the International Federation of Journalists.
The latest area of Kyiv’s repressive policy is its war
against canonical orthodoxy. Ukraine has been brought
to the brink of a large-scale interreligious conflict that
is unprecedented in the history of modern-day Europe.
It should be noted that the Ukrainian authorities,
long ago, with the support of their Western backers,
decided to undermine the Canonical Orthodox Church
in Ukraine. As we heard from Metropolitan Anthony,
the people are now having the submissive, schismatic
Church of Ukraine, which was artificially created
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

in 2018, imposed upon them. That Kyiv-American
political project has nothing to do with matters of faith.
On the basis of that discriminatory legislation, the
seizure of Ukrainian Orthodox churches continues,
as does the illegal forced liquidation of their parishes
under the guise of supposedly voluntary conversions to
other denominations. Such measures are accompanied
by widespread clashes and the beating of parishioners
and clergy. Meanwhile, the clergy of the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church itself, in so-called worship services
intended to stir up political unrest, do not shy away
from schismatic and hateful rhetoric, speaking of the
liberation of holy places from Russian captivity and
their purging. We all remember the bloody and tragic
consequences of such calls for purges throughout
history. Ukraine is now literally a step away from a
fratricidal internal religious catastrophe, and the regime
in power is only adding fuel to the fire. According to the
information available to us, a number of new initiatives
are being prepared that will discriminate against the
parishes and parishioners of the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church, depriving it of its historical and legal name and
even erasing it completely.
The intensification of political and administrative
pressure on the Ukrainian Orthodox Church is
accompanied by a smear campaign in the Ukrainian
media that involves politicians and high-ranking
officials. For example, on 7 January, the head of
the State Service for Ethnic Policy and Freedom of
Conscience, Viktor Yelenskyy, called the existence of
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church an anomaly that should
not exist in Ukraine. Ruslan Stefanchuk, Speaker of the
Verkhovna Rada, said that a new draft law against the
Ukrainian Orthodox Church is being prepared in order
to decide the course of action against what he claimed
to be a religious organization that poses a threat to the
national security of Ukraine.
In such circumstances, we understand the statement
circulated by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church on social
media, clarifying that it did not ask us to convene this
meeting and did not authorize us to speak on its behalf
at the United Nations. That is indeed the case — no
one from Ukraine or the Ukrainian Orthodox Church
approached us with such a request, and we do not speak
on behalf of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. That
further confirms the fact that the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church is not subordinate to Russia, however much
the Kyiv regime might try to prove otherwise. We
understand that the Church’s statement is motivated by

S/PV.9245

a reluctance to be targeted yet again with delusional
accusations of its being a collaborator and to prevent
itself falling under the obscurantism and provocations
of the Ukrainian authorities.
I would ask Kyiv’s Western backers, who continue to
pay lip service to human rights and freedom of religion:
how long do they plan to ignore the actions of the Kyiv
regime to incite an interreligious crisis in Ukraine,
and how long, in general, do they plan to ignore the
inhumane regime that is being formed in the country?
Of course, those are rhetorical questions. They have
not merely ignored but encouraged such developments
over the past decades, in particular in recent years. But
how would they deal with such actions in their own
countries, which they claim to be democratic? They
cannot continue to turn a blind eye to everything the
Kyiv regime is doing by writing it off as self-defence
against Russia in a situation of war.
The trends I have mentioned on the rise of
authoritarianism and the formation of a dictatorship
in Ukraine began long before the special military
operation. The Kyiv regime’s actions pose a direct
threat, with consequences for peace and security. As
we have repeatedly underscored, Russia’s actions are
not and never have been aimed at destroying Ukraine
as a State. However, we cannot tolerate the fact that
a misanthropic, Russophobic and anti-Christian
dictatorship is establishing itself near our borders.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Ms. Ilze Brands Kehris, for her briefing. We
fully support the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and
look forward to working with it during our term on the
Security Council. The information made available by
the Office is essential for the work of the Council. I
have also taken note of the remarks by Metropolitan
Anthony, Chairman of the Department of External
Church Relations of the Patriarchate of Moscow.
Last week, Switzerland, along with many others
around this table, called on Russia for an immediate
cessation of hostilities (see S/PV.9243). Less than 24
hours later, a new wave of Russian attacks hit Ukraine,
in which residential areas and energy infrastructure
were affected. In Dnipro, a residential building was
largely destroyed. Our thoughts are with the families of
the victims, the injured and those who work tirelessly,
day and night, as part of the rescue efforts. We are also

23-016667/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

dismayed by the bombing of the city of Kherson, during
which a Ukrainian Red Cross building, among others,
was damaged. That was an attack not only against a
humanitarian actor but also against the right of those
affected by conflict to receive assistance and protection.
Switzerland condemns those attacks. We recall that,
under international humanitarian law, making a
distinction between military targets and civilians, as
well as between military targets and civilian objects,
is an obligation. Intentionally directing attacks against
civilians or civilian objects constitutes a war crime.
The principles of proportionality and precaution must
also be respected.
Switzerland also remains concerned about the
serious human rights violations and abuses committed in
Ukraine during the war. According to a statement made
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights on 7 December, those violations and abuses
include summary executions, arbitrary detentions and
enforced disappearances, torture and ill-treatment, as
well as conflict-related sexual violence.
With regard to the freedom of religion and belief,
Switzerland upholds the principle that freedom of
religion protects the individual, not religions or
religious communities. We remind all States parties
of their obligations under the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights. We oppose the spread
and dissemination of hate speech and all other forms
and manifestations of defamation and discrimination
based on religion. We call on religious institutions and
leaders to exercise their influence and responsibility for
de-escalation, humanity and the promotion of peace.
The Council must assume its responsibility for
international peace and security and devote its full
attention to achieving a just peace in accordance
with international law. Russia’s actions are in serious
violation of international law, including the principle
of the non-use of force, and of the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Ukraine. Such actions can never be
justified. We call on Russia once again to de-escalate the
situation and withdraw its troops without further delay.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Brands
Kehris for her briefing. We also listened carefully to
the remarks of Metropolitan of Volokolamsk Anthony.
This topic is of particular importance to the United
Arab Emirates, which recognizes interreligious dialogue
and understanding as essential to peaceful coexistence.
8/19

17/01/2023

Creating a culture of religious tolerance is also a core
element of sustainable conflict prevention, resolution
and reconstruction and is an important consideration
for the Security Council. We all have a responsibility to
ensure that respect for cultures and religions is a global
norm. The United Arab Emirates is firmly committed
to the principles of the culture of peace. We are aware
of the inherent risks of allowing religion to be misused
as a tool for those preaching violence and division.
In our own region, we have seen the consequences
of extremism or unchecked incitement to violence
masquerading as religious faith. Our belief in the moral
imperative to ensure that different faith communities
can live together peacefully is why we find the
recent events in Ukraine particularly distressing. The
politicization of religion is another sign of the damage
the conflict is inflicting on the country’s social fabric.
In times of conflict, we must all work together to
protect the sanctity of religious sites. It is imperative
that such properties be treated with respect and
maintained with care. Resolution 2347 (2017) deplores
the unlawful destruction of cultural heritage, including
religious sites, while emphasizing that such destruction
can exacerbate conflict and hamper post-conflict
reconciliation. It also stresses the role of Member States
in protecting cultural heritage and safeguarding cultural
property in the context of armed conflicts. That is of
particular importance because places of worship are a
centre of gravity for communities of faith and can serve
as important platforms for post-war national healing.
As the conflict continues, there are increasingly
fewer areas of life in Ukraine that remain unaffected.
Religious leaders and communities of faith can play an
important role in building peace and providing comfort
in times of war.
We are following the terrible news from Dnipro
with deep sorrow and concern. We mourn the 45 people
reportedly killed in the air strike on Saturday. The
horrific human cost of that single attack underscores
the scale of the tragedy unfolding in Ukraine. The
United Arab Emirates once again urges the parties
to abide by international law, including international
humanitarian law. We firmly reiterate our call for a
cessation of hostilities throughout Ukraine and our
readiness to support all efforts at de-escalation and
dialogue towards a just, lasting and peaceful resolution
of the war.
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Brands Kehris and Metropolitan of Volokolamsk
Anthony for their briefings.
Russia is once again trying to create a diversion
by today exploiting the freedom of religion or belief. It
seeks to divert the Security Council’s attention from its
responsibility for the war of aggression that it has been
waging for nearly a year and for the suffering caused to
the Ukrainian people.
France strongly condemns the latest Russian strikes
of 14 January, which particularly hit the town of Dnipro
and caused the deaths of several dozen civilian victims.
This meeting is another example of Russia’s
disinformation strategy. It called for this meeting under
the pretext of defending religious freedom, while it
left no respite for the civilian population during the
Christian and Orthodox Christian holidays. It blatantly
violated a ceasefire that it had unilaterally decided.
France of course recalls the importance of ensuring the
right to the freedom of religion or belief, in accordance
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Since the beginning of its aggression against
Ukraine, Russia has continued to commit serious
human rights violations, namely, forced displacement,
which may also involve children, sexual violence
committed by the Russian army and violations of the
right to the freedom of religion or belief of Ukrainians
and the freedom to practise their faith in peace.
Such violations were denounced last September (see
S/PV.9126), and again today, by the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights. Last Friday, the UnderSecretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, reminded the Council
of the number of civilian casualties caused by the
war — more than 7,000 people killed and more than
11,000 injured (see S/PV.9243).
France remains determined to support Ukraine in
its quest for justice and in the fight against all violations
committed against its people. France supports the
work of the Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on Ukraine of the Human Rights Council and
the investigations carried out by the Ukrainian justice
system and the International Criminal Court. We thank
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, which is doing outstanding work in
collecting evidence of those violations.

S/PV.9245

France stands alongside Ukraine. We will never
settle for a world in which force takes precedence over
the law. We will continue to provide the Ukrainian
people with all the humanitarian, economic and
military support that they need to exercise their right
to legitimate self-defence and preserve their freedom.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): Last Friday, the Security
Council once again discussed the consequences of
Russia’s aggression against Ukraine (see S/PV.9243).
We stressed the fact that the war is a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law. We
emphasize the implications of the war for the region, the
continent and the rest of the world. We spoke about the
humanitarian catastrophe that the Ukrainian people are
experiencing in the middle of a harsh winter. We spoke
about the plight of refugees, the internally displaced
women who are falling victim to sexual violence and
children, who are being deprived of their education
and childhood. Today we have been convened for
another meeting.
Against that background, we deplore the
dissemination of disinformation and misinformation by
religious leaders to justify its war against Ukraine, and
we condemn the destruction of Ukrainian historical
and spiritual heritage sites in Bucha, Irpin, Mariupol
and Kharkiv.
Just this past weekend, missile strikes on Ukraine
continued unabated, including on Dnipro and the
capital. Some of those missile strikes also targeted
residential buildings and left tens of civilians dead or
injured. Such strikes are coupled with the increasing
humanitarian needs brought about by the winter and the
attacks on critical civilian infrastructure.
We cannot stress enough that international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
must be fully respected and upheld. The testimonies
and evaluations presented by the International
Independent Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine are
also of grave concern and put the spotlight on a number
of corroborated human rights violations that are taking
place in Ukraine.
The only way to protect the rights of all individuals
is to stop the war that has been inflicted on Ukraine.
We continue to insist that all those responsible for
atrocity crimes must be held to account for their
actions, in accordance with international law. We call
upon the Russian Federation to stop the war, withdraw
its military forces from the entire territory of Ukraine

23-016669/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

17/01/2023

within its internationally recognized borders and turn
to dialogue and diplomacy as the tools that can really
bring stability to the region.

obligations and commitments. That is of great concern.
That is the real issue, and that deserves, and must have,
our attention.

Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I thank Assistant SecretaryGeneral Brands Kehris for her update. I also thank the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for its work in protecting and promoting
human rights worldwide.

Attempts to divert the attention of the Security
Council and the world community from the engineered
causes and disastrous consequences of the war in
Ukraine will therefore not fool anyone, just like the
several meetings that Russia called on the non-existent
laboratories for biological weapons could not either.
But this time it is religion. We are puzzled and find
it odd that at a discussion of developments related to
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church in Ukraine, we did not
have the chance to listen to its representatives.

For us, there is no doubt that there is a direct link
between human rights and security. As we all know,
lack of respect for human rights is very often the
primary source for tensions, violence and conflicts. I
will make two points.
First, three days ago, in yet another massive missile
strike on various parts of the country, including the
capital, a nine-floor apartment building was reduced to
rubble in Dnipro in a matter of seconds. That was again
by Russia. That brutal strike, reportedly by a modern
missile carrying a one-ton warhead, ended the life of
15-year-old Maria Lebid and some other 43 innocent
civilians, now listed among the dreadful number of
more than 7,000 civilians killed so far during the war
by Russian forces. That should have been the reason
to call a meeting of the Security Council, not a race to
ratio, and not a meeting to fill a self-imposed quota.
When it does not use the veto to block the Security
Council with regard to Ukraine, Russia proliferates
unnecessary meetings in order to burden the Council.
That is not how we see the work of the Council, and that
is not how we think its resources should be used.
Secondly, there is an important aspect that has
not often been mentioned in our discussions, namely,
the severe damage inflicted on the cultural heritage in
Ukraine by the war. Since February last year, UNESCO
has verified damage to 235 sites, including 104 religious
sites, 18 museums, 83 buildings of historical and/or
artistic interest, 19 monuments and 11 libraries. The
situation has further worsened since last July, when we
devoted an Arria Formula meeting to the issue.
We all know — but the perpetrators seem to
forget — that the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the
1954 Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property
in the Event of Armed Conflict, to which Russia is also
a party, sanction respect for, and the safeguarding of,
cultural property during conflict, including religious
sites. Through its actions, Russia is disregarding those
instruments, just as it is disregarding international law,
the Charter of the United Nations and all international
10/19

Not only as a country in which religious
communities live in harmony and demonstrate full
respect for each other, but also bearing in mind the
crucial importance of the enjoyment of human rights
by everyone, everywhere, Albania fully supports
the freedom of religion and belief anywhere. It is our
profound conviction that religious leaders should work
for peace. They should not support an aggression,
justify crimes, condone the ill-treatment of others
or support discrimination and hate speech, and they
should avoid the improper use, instrumentalization and
weaponization of religion. Such actions will not serve
the Church or society. On the contrary, the open support
for the war in Ukraine expressed by religious leaders
only exacerbates religious tensions along nationalist
lines and serves an extremely narrow domestic agenda
that has a huge need to justify an unjustifiable and illegal
war. If anything, history has taught us that mixing
religion and politics — and even more so religion and
war — has always proved wrong and dangerous, just
like everything that Russia is deliberately doing today
in Ukraine.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
listened closely to the briefings.
I wish to praise the work of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
I congratulate the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights, Ms. Ilze Marianne Brands Kehris, who
has undertaken her work for the past three years, and
through her I extend my praise to High Commissioner
Volker Türk, who today completed his first three
months in office.
I reiterate Ecuador’s commitment to continue
promoting and protecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms in all the organs of the United
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

Nations system, including the Security Council. I also
reiterate everything that was said at the briefing last
Friday, 13 January, when I urged Council members to
be the first to respect and defend the Charter of the
United Nations (see S/PV.9243).
Of course, my delegation recognizes the freedom
of thought, conscience and religion, in accordance
with article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and article 18 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. But we are concerned
about the exploitation of religion to fuel conflicts,
wherever they occur. We are also alarmed that the
military aggression against Ukraine has resulted in the
destruction of more than 270 religious sites, of which
at least 104 have been verified by UNESCO in its
preliminary assessment of damage caused to cultural
sites. In that regard, I must recall the Protocol Additional
to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
relating to the Protection of Victims of International
Armed Conflicts, whose article 53 prohibits acts of
hostility directed against places of worship, which
constitute the cultural or spiritual heritage of peoples.
I deplore the fact that, despite the announced possible
cessation of hostilities during Orthodox Christmas,
attacks continued during that period, according to the
briefing to the Council made by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
Ms. Rosemary Anne DiCarlo, just four days ago
(see S/PV.9243). I cannot fail to condemn the attacks
committed over the weekend on Dnipro, which took
the lives of dozens of civilians, including children,
increasing the toll of destruction and death that this
conflict has left in its wake. We are also alarmed by
the attack on the Red Cross facilities in Kherson. As
with any military aggression, the greatest impact is
not only on the civilian population, in particular the
most vulnerable, but also on fundamental rights and
freedoms. I therefore reiterate the call for an end to the
invasion, which has lasted for almost a year.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I listened
carefully to the briefings by Metropolitan Anthony of
Volokolamsk, Chairman of the Department of External
Church Relations of the Patriarchate of Moscow, and
Ms. Ilze Brands Kehris, Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights.
Religious issues in conflict situations are complex
and sensitive. We have seen that in some conflict
areas religious issues, if not handled properly, tend

S/PV.9245

to intensify and exacerbate conflicts and are not
conducive to resolving hatred or resolving conflicts.
China has always maintained that the freedom of
religion and belief should be fully protected and
respected, dialogue between religions and sects should
be strengthened, mutual respect fostered and a culture
of peace advocated in order to inject a positive energy
into the political settlement of potential issues.
Since the outbreak of the crisis in Ukraine, problems
have emerged on all fronts and the confrontations and
conflicts among religions, cultures and societies have
been deepening. The prolongation, expansion and
complication of the conflict are too much for either side
to bear. There is no winner in conflict and confrontation.
Dialogue and negotiation is the only realistic and
feasible way to resolve the crisis. China hopes that
all the parties concerned will exercise rationality and
restraint, engage in dialogue and commit to resolving
common security concerns by political means. The
international community should focus on promoting
peace and dialogue, encouraging Russia and Ukraine
to return to negotiations and generating the conditions
for an early ceasefire and cessation of hostilities. Any
incitement of hatred and inflammation of tensions
should be rejected.
In this process, religion should become a positive
force for advocating peace, promoting unity and
building a shield in the minds of the local people for
building and defending peace. At the first meeting of
the year on Ukraine held in the Council last week (see
S/PV.9243), many countries stressed that 2023 should
be the year of peace. That is also China’s fervent wish.
China will continue to uphold an objective and impartial
position and work with all peace-loving countries to
build synergy in the international community in order
to play a constructive role in the peaceful resolution of
the crisis in Ukraine.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Brands Kehris and
Metropolitan Anthony for their briefings today.
Let me start by being clear. The United States takes
seriously any allegations of violations of human rights,
including the freedom of religion or belief. We expect
all countries to respect human rights and fundamental
freedoms, and we call out those — friend or
foe — who fail to meet them, including ourselves when
that happens. But really, can any informed person take
seriously Russia’s purported commitment to religious

23-0166611/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

freedom in Ukraine? Let me echo the comments of
our French and Albanian counterparts. The subject of
this meeting is another cynical attempt by the Russian
Federation to invent justifications — justifications for
a senseless, unholy war.
Over the past several months, Russia has thrown
a variety of flimsy excuses at the wall in an attempt
to justify the unjustifiable. We have heard that Russia
seeks to de-nazify and demilitarize Ukraine. We have
heard that it seeks to protect Russian speakers, that it is
fighting drug traffickers and addicts, that it is fighting
Satanists. Russia has also sought to justify its war
through cynical attempts to distort the history of the
Holocaust. That disinformation detracts from serious,
critically important worldwide efforts to combat
anti-Semitism, including Holocaust distortion.
The Security Council has heard no shortage of
excuses from the Russian delegation on why its brutal
invasion is supposedly righteous, and why its attacks
that have killed and injured civilians are a necessary
price. As we meet, we are seeing the price Moscow is
inflicting on innocent civilians in Ukraine. Emergency
personnel are still digging through the debris of an
apartment building in Dnipro that Russia attacked,
killing dozens, including children.
And today we have heard another phony justification
for the war in Ukraine: Russia’s concern about religious
freedom in Ukraine. Let us consider, as others have
noted, Russia’s appalling damage to religious sites and
places of worship in Ukraine, despite its concern about
religious freedom. UNESCO has verified the damage
of 104 religious sites since Russia’s brutal invasion of
Ukraine last year. In areas of Ukraine under Russia’s
control or occupation, there is pervasive and continuous
evidence of abuses by Russia against peaceful members
of religious groups that Russia considers undesirable or
has summarily deemed extremist.
We are concerned about the safety of members of
all religious communities in Ukraine, particularly the
safety of those living in areas under Russia’s control
or occupation, including members of the independent
Orthodox Church of Ukraine, Crimean Tatar Muslims,
Jehovah’s Witnesses, evangelicals and Baptists. Last
week, Russia sentenced five Crimean Tatars to 13 years,
and one Crimean Tatar religious leader to a heartbreaking
17 years in prison for participating in a religious group
outlawed by Moscow. Since 2014, Russian authorities
have prosecuted dozens of Crimean Tatars on charges
12/19

17/01/2023

that independent observers characterize as baseless.
We urge the Kremlin to respect the human rights of
all and the safety of the civilian population of Ukraine,
including of members of all religious communities.
We must also note Russia’s flagrant violations and
abuses of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
including freedom of religion or belief, in Russia and
in Russian-controlled areas of Ukraine. There are
numerous reports — we have all seen them — of Russia’s
authorities detaining, physically abusing, torturing and
imprisoning individuals on the basis of their religious
beliefs or affiliations, and then wrongfully labelling
them as “extremist,” “terrorists,” or “undesirable”.
In conclusion, the Kremlin’s objective — the violent
conquest and subjugation of a sovereign country — has
not deviated since Putin began his war against Ukraine.
Russia now hopes to force Ukraine into a frozen
conflict, lock in its gains, rest and refit its forces and
then attack again until Putin’s revanchist goals are met.
We have all witnessed Russia’s playbook: to wreak
death and destruction in Ukraine; freeze and starve its
people; force them from their homes; drive them across
Europe and around the world; then drive up energy,
food, and other household costs; and then distract the
international community with disinformation, such as
today’s wasteful briefing.
We urge those here and those watching to reject
Russia’s attempts to create false equivalencies, and we
once again, as others have done, call on Russia to end
its brutal, unprovoked war against Ukraine and cease
its violations of international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Assistant
Secretary-General Brands Kehris for her briefing
and the work of Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).
The United Kingdom is committed to defending
freedom of religion or belief around the world, a
commitment we share with Ukraine, whose democracy
is well-known for its pluralism. We condemn the
persecution of any group based on religion or belief.
That is why we hosted a conference in London last year
to urge increased global action to prevent violations
and abuses of freedom of religion or belief. And that
is why we condemn Russia’s campaign of persecution
against communities in Ukraine and Russia based on
their religion or belief. That includes the detention and
oppression of Crimean Tatars, Jehovah’s Witnesses and
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

clergy belonging to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine,
the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, and Protestant
churches in areas of Ukraine controlled by Russia since
2014. That includes Russia’s ban against Jehovah’s
Witnesses in Russia, which the European Court of
Human Rights ruled was unlawful and in violation of
fundamental human rights. And it includes the damage
and destruction of more than 100 religious sites caused
by Russia’s war in Ukraine, as verified by UNESCO.
It is clear from Russia’s track record that they did
not request today’s meeting out of a concern for any
human right. If Russia cared about human rights,
it would not have launched its illegal invasion of
Ukraine — an invasion which Russian Orthodox leader,
Patriarch Kirill, has supported and which he recently
suggested would leave no trace of the Orthodox Church
of Ukraine. The reason Russia requested this meeting
was to once again distract from its own actions.
This is an invasion which, as the United Nations,
OHCHR and the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine have confirmed, continues
to be marked by grave violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian
law; the death, injury and displacement of thousands;
the arbitrary detention, enforced disappearance,
sexual violence, torture and summary execution of
Ukrainians by Russian forces; the mass disruption of
education and forced deportations of children; and,
of course, the attacks on civilian infrastructure and
objects, including the devastating attacks on residential
buildings in Dnipro just this weekend, which Ukrainian
officials have said killed at least 40 people. That is the
real story of human rights in Ukraine. Russia is the
aggressor State. Russia is committing heinous crimes
and pointing in the other direction to try to pull the
wool over our eyes.
Russia should stop this propaganda and instead do
what the overwhelming majority of the United Nations
membership has urged it to since last February: end its
invasion of Ukraine, withdraw its forces from Ukraine’s
internationally recognized borders and uphold its
commits under international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for
Human Rights for the information that she has brought
to our attention. We listened carefully to the briefing
delivered by Metropolitan Anthony.

S/PV.9245

For the past eleven months, the eyes of the world
have been focused on Ukraine, and every day they see
the scale of destruction and the shelling of civilian
infrastructures, along with the attendant distress it has
brought to the daily lives of men, women and children,
who must choose between dying in the rubble and ruins
or fleeing their home, city or country. What purpose
would it serve to recall the appalling humanitarian
consequences of the daily fighting that is taking place
in Ukraine? My country amply highlighted them in
its statement in the Security Council on Friday (see
S/PV.9243), as we have been doing since the beginning
of the war.
Clergy are also affected in the now-total war being
waged by the parties to the conflict, and churches must
make decisions in areas beyond those that are strictly
religious or belief-based. That is reminiscent of the
darkest episodes of history, in which religion was used
to support a political or geopolitical ideology, enabling
the warring parties to justify the unjustifiable and to
fuel the deadliest of wars. Several States in the world
owe their geography and the limits of their territories to
those episodes, drawn in the ink of the blood of many
innocent victims. History has shown us in a brutal and
cruel way to what extent hatred and rejection of the
other can lead humankind into the abyss of violence,
exacerbated by the instrumentalization of the sacred
and the religious.
I would like to stress that freedom of religion or
belief is guaranteed by the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights, as well as by the Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of
Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief. All parties
must respect the relevant provisions of international
instruments, both in times of peace and in times of war.
My country is very concerned about the lack of
prospects for negotiations to end the conflict. Neither
side seems ready to sit down around the table to
consider an end to the belligerence. On the contrary,
each side is sharpening its weapons, honing its tactics
and hardening its rhetoric.
All the military projections concerning the state of
the forces present on the battlefield, all the strategic
calculations seem to boil down to a war of attrition
and ignore the human cost of the war. How many more
deaths are needed? How many more public buildings,
bridges, hospitals, schools — how many more innocent

23-0166613/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

victims and how many more refugees will have to be
pushed into the destitution of displacement camps
and onto the icy roads of exodus? How much distress
and bloodshed will it take before the parties decide
to negotiate?
Eleven months after the outbreak of war, the Council
can neither remain silent nor indulge in the logic of war.
We must find the means to put an end to this war. As
long as it lasts, it will continue to unravel the prospects
for coexistence in the region and beyond and will make
post-conflict reconstruction even more difficult.
We urge the various actors to seriously consider
silencing the guns and giving diplomacy a chance. The
latest agreements on cereals and contacts on prisoner
exchanges are encouraging signals that should serve as
a basis for a constructive dialogue that can lead to a
cessation of hostilities.
I would like to conclude by reiterating my country’s
constant appeal for de-escalation and the lowering of
tensions in order to create favourable conditions for
negotiating an end to the war. Weapons can in no way
bring about a solution. There can be no other possible
outcome than a peace agreement allowing for peaceful
coexistence. The Council must immediately commit to
finding a solution that brings the deadly war in Ukraine
to an end.
Mrs. Hackman (Ghana): I thank the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, Ms. Brands
Kehris, for her briefing. We have also taken note of the
information shared by the Chairman of the Department
of External Church Relations of the Patriarchate
of Moscow.
As the war in Ukraine evolves, worrisome accounts
of human rights violations and breaches of international
humanitarian law continue to emerge.
We are concerned by the attack, on 14 January,
of a residential facility in Dnipro in a wave of missile
attacks on several cities of Ukraine. Reports indicate
that some 45 people, including children, have been
killed and many others have suffered life-threatening
injuries. We express our sincere condolences to the
people of Ukraine, in particular to the families of
those who died unjustly from such a heinous act. We
continue to emphasize that attacks against civilians are
unacceptable, and therefore expressly prohibited under
international law by the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
14/19

17/01/2023

of War. We urge international support to ensure
accountability for this and the many other humanitarian
and human rights violations that have occurred as a
result of the war.
The relations between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine have for a long time been marked by religious
tensions that have intensified since February of last
year, when the Russian Federation launched a fullscale attack on Ukraine. The war has deepened existing
religious schisms that have struck at the very core of
the belief systems of many Ukrainians.
We note that recent developments in connection
with the activities of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church,
which is part of the Russian Orthodox Church, have
been a concern for the Ukrainian authorities and have
necessitated regulations aimed at combating suspected
acts of subversion by some clerics and members of the
Church. We hope that those measures will be temporary,
in accordance with international law and related only to
the war efforts, in order to ensure public order. We have
also heard reports of restrictions being imposed on
some religious sects, especially in Russian-controlled
areas in eastern Ukraine.
Apart from those tensions, UNESCO has reported
that more than 100 religious sites have been damaged
or completely destroyed as a result of the war. We
remind the parties of the international obligations to
safeguard cultural heritage, including religious sites
and monuments. The freedom of religion, thought
and conscience are fundamental rights guaranteed
under international law. The exercise of such freedom,
however, may be regulated in order to protect
public safety, public order and the exercise of other
fundamental rights and freedoms.
Historically and in contemporary times, some of
the worst forms of crimes have been committed against
people on the basis of religion. That is more the case
when the lines between religion and politics appeared
to be blurred. Although religion is not of itself violent,
religious excesses, misguided interpretations of beliefs
and religious intolerance have precipitated gross
violations of human rights in many parts of the world.
We therefore urge all actors to exercise tolerance
and mutual respect of other faiths, beliefs or religious
preferences. We believe that religion must not only
bring hope in these times of suffering and disarray, but
should be an enabler of peace and peaceful coexistence.
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

All claims of human rights and religious violations
should be submitted to appropriate international
channels, such as the United Nations Human Rights
Council and the Council of the Europe, for redress.
We are of the view that the sooner the war ends,
the better the chances that religious freedoms will not
further deteriorate for all religious groups.
I end by reiterating Ghana’s call for the cessation
of hostilities and urge the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of Russian forces from the internationally
recognized borders of Ukraine.
We remain deeply concerned by the trend of the
war and the deepening mistrust that it is fuelling
between the parties and other relevant international
actors. In that regard, we urge the continuing support of
the Council and the international community to assist
the parties to resolve the conflict through dialogue
and diplomacy.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking our briefers for their participation and for
their detailed and informative interventions.
Freedom of religion is a fundamental human right
enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and in numerous multilateral instruments, such as the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
and the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of
Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion
or Belief, adopted by the General Assembly in 1981.
Religion is part of the development of the individual
and of the cultural identity of peoples.
The Brazilian Constitution guarantees respect for
the freedom of worship for nationals and foreigners
alike, regardless of their origin. We are proud of our
religious diversity and the respect and tolerance that
characterize the relationships among our communities.
Religious differences must not be exploited to fuel
intercommunal tensions. It is not clear, at this stage,
that that is the case in Ukraine. Brazil expects that
the Ukrainian State will act with moderation and
discernment, while refraining from attitudes that could
be characterized, in any way, as religious persecution.
In March 2020, leaders of the three Abrahamic faiths
gathered in Jerusalem to pray together for an end to the
coronavirus disease pandemic. In our view, that scene
illustrated the potential of religion to unite peoples,
overcome differences and promote peace. We support
the efforts of religious leaders to facilitate dialogue and

S/PV.9245

encourage the parties to heed the pleas of the majority
of the Members of the Organization in favour of a
diplomatic solution to the conflict.
At last Friday’s meeting (see S/PV. 9243), the
representative of the United Arab Emirates recalled that,
since February 2022, the Council has met more than 40
times to discuss the conflict in Ukraine. Nevertheless,
as Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo noted
in her briefing at that meeting, there does not appear
to be willingness on either side for a ceasefire in the
near future. That regrettable conclusion should in itself
encourage reflection on our collective response to
the crisis. On many occasions, the General Assembly
has expressed its firm condemnation of the violation
of Ukraine’s territorial integrity. It is necessary to go
further. The Council must live up to the responsibilities
assigned to it by Article 33 of the Charter of the United
Nations and explore, with both parties, ways to end the
conflict without delay.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): Mozambique wishes
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Brands Kehris
and Metropolitan of Volokolamsk Anthony for their
valuable insights.
As the conflict drags on, we know that we are faced
with the rapid deterioration of, and disregard for, hardwon human rights and fundamental freedoms, thereby
compounding an already fraught situation. That is
taking place at a time when faithful and God-fearing
peoples should devote themselves to reflection, healing
and reconciliation. Indeed, the first and most visible
casualties of war anywhere in the world are human
decency and respect for the sense of our common
humanity. As one twentieth century philosopher
famously put it, we are confronted with the banality of
evil. The instrumentalization of religion and the lack
of respect for other people’s beliefs and their places of
worship can only further entrench hatred.
Let us be reminded that the freedom of religion
or belief is guaranteed by article 18 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. It is also an important
value of present-day civilization. Attacks on that tenet
of the Universal Declaration undermine the peaceful
coexistence among peoples and nations, which is
anchored in respect for differences and pluralism.
We urge political leaders and citizens to exercise the
utmost restraint and to abstain from weaponizing this
highly sensitive issue, which can only undermine the
possibility of any future reconciliation.

23-0166615/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

We remain deeply concerned about the retreat
from any possibility of a negotiated settlement to the
conflict. We are also concerned about the radicalization
of supporters on both sides of the dispute — the parties
to the conflict. In that context, we wish to reiterate
the call we made a few days ago in the Chamber (see
S/PV.9243) for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and a return to direct negotiations between the parties.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank the briefers for their views and thoughts.
Russia must immediately stop its war of aggression,
withdraw all its troops and military equipment
from Ukraine and respect Ukraine’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity within its
internationally recognized borders. No argument can
justify the flagrant violation of international law and
the hideous acts we are currently witnessing, including
the recent missile strike on a residential building in
Dnipro. Japan once again urges Russia, a permanent
member of the Security Council, the organ with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, to stop the war of aggression immediately.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I shall refrain from commenting on the usual
mantra of some members that everything that we bring
to the Security Council on the subject of Ukraine
is disinformation.
Many representatives in the Chamber today
mentioned the tragedy in Dnipropetrovsk, where a
missile destroyed the entrance to a residential building.
Western colleagues even attempted to use that incident
to cancel the topic we had proposed for today’s meeting,
saying that it was false and did not merit discussion.
And yet no member has mentioned the real context of
what happened — a concern that was voiced even by
Ukrainian officials.
A Russian missile that was launched at an
infrastructure facility in the city was shot down by
Ukrainian air defence systems. Since those systems
were located in a residential district — in violation of
the norms of international law, which Council members
16/19

17/01/2023

so strongly advocate — the remnants of the missile
landed on a residential building. The Council knows
what occurred thereafter. Had the Ukrainian authorities
followed the rules of international humanitarian law,
that tragedy would not have occurred.
Equally, it would not have been necessary for us
to conduct strikes on an infrastructure facility where
Ukrainian forces were stationed, had the Ukrainian
leadership demonstrated a willingness to negotiate
realistically, which would have allowed us to address
the causes that led to the beginning of the special
military operation. We also deplore the fact that no
members found anything to say in condemnation of
the almost daily uninterrupted strikes launched by
Ukrainian armed forces on Donetsk, where civilians
are also dying. The Kyiv regime intentionally targets
residential districts in which there are no military
targets. The residents of Donetsk will tell us what is
happening. We will hear more about that at the Arria
Formula meeting to be held on Friday.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): There is a place called
Church House in Westminster that today is the
headquarters of the Church of England. The building’s
assembly hall was directly hit during the Blitz and
yet suffered little damage. Let me recall that the
Blitz was a German bombing campaign against the
United Kingdom in 1940 and 1941. Casualties and
losses included more than 40,000 civilians killed and
thousands upon thousands injured. Two million houses
were damaged or destroyed. It sounds almost like what
Russia is doing today in Ukraine. Members might ask
why I mention Church House. It is not because we are
talking about religion today, but because the very first
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.1) took place
in Church House, Westminster, London. Were Russia
to be a peaceful nation and not one bombing Ukraine
today, as Nazi Germany bombed the United Kingdom
then, it would be precisely today when they would be
celebrating the seventy-seventh anniversary of the
Security Council, which took place on 17 January
1946. Unfortunately, we are not here to celebrate this
important anniversary. Unfortunately, we are here
because of the nonsense that the Russian Federation
made us listen to. But as we use taxpayers’ money, it is
our duty to make sense of that nonsense — or rather, to
make use of that nonsense.
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

The freedom of religion is a human right, as set
out in article 18 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and other important documents. No matter the
nonsense the Russian Federation says today in the
Chamber, this discussion is about human rights. Let
me therefore recall what I said in this very Chamber
on 18 April 2017, when the members of the Security
Council — including Japan, by the way, as it was
a member of the Council at the time — assembled
to discuss the role and place of human rights on the
Council’s agenda:
“In the 1970s, human rights issues were
removed from the agenda of New York and
transferred to nice, cosy, sleepy Geneva. It was not
only a physical move but, it appears, an ideological
divorce of United Nations Headquarters from
something that was then perceived as irreconcilably
different from the security agenda of New York. It
is time to reconcile these differences and to restore
the integrity of the entire United Nations system as
designed by its founders.
“The Council has no right to repeat its failures
in Rwanda, to continue to fail in Syria, or to remain
paralysed by the Russian position in the case of
Crimea and Donbas.” (S/PV.7926, p. 7)
I concluded by stressing how we sincerely believed
that the Secretary-General could skilfully manage all
of the tools given to him by the Charter of the United
Nations and that he would not hesitate to use them
whenever necessary to achieve the implementation of
the Charter’s goals and objectives.
Let me also recall what the Secretary-General said
on that day in the Chamber:
“Systematic monitoring and reporting of human
rights violations has given a voice to victims and
advanced the fight against impunity. Moreover,
these efforts offer important warning signals
to societies that also highlight the Council’s
determination to prevent further abuses. To advance
this work, I encourage close cooperation with my
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.”
(ibid., p. 3)
The Russian statement at the Security Council’s
meeting on that April day in 2017 was pretty clear
and straightforward:
“ ... the Security Council is not intended to fulfil
the tasks of ensuring the observance of human

S/PV.9245

rights and is not adapted to a substantive analysis
of the situation in this sphere”;
“We do not share the approach of considering
human rights violations as the main precondition
for armed conflict or human rights protection
as a key instrument for preventing them or as a
panacea. Practice demonstrates otherwise. The
goal of conflict prevention is completely contrary
to interfering in the domestic affairs of countries
and undermining their sovereignty, often under the
pretext of protecting human rights.” (ibid., pp. 12-13)
If the Russian Federation is so interested in
discussing the issue of human rights in the Security
Council — and once again, the freedom of religion is
a human right— perhaps the time has come to return
human rights to the Council’s agenda and thoroughly
address the Secretary-General’s reports on the human
rights situation in occupied Crimea, Ukraine, and the
report of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on Ukraine, established by the Human
Rights Council.
Perhaps it would also be useful to invite the High
Commissioner for Human Rights to brief the Council
on his recent visit to Ukraine, as well as the Head of the
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, which
has been operating in my country at the invitation of
the Government of Ukraine for almost nine years. In
particular, the Council could receive an update on
Russian war crimes based on the recent thematic report
by the Office of United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights entitled “Killings of civilians: summary
executions and attacks on individual civilians in Kyiv,
Chernihiv, and Sumy regions in the context of the
Russian Federation’s armed attack against Ukraine”.
The delegation of Ukraine would strongly support
such a development. In fact, we propose organizing a
special meeting of the Security Council to address the
implications of the Russian war of aggression on the
human rights situation in Ukraine.
It is a matter of regret that the representative of
Putin’s regime is still capable of misusing the permanent
seat of a defunct country and making the Council listen
to its disinformation narratives. Russia still attempts to
divert the attention of this organ from the real security
threats flowing from its aggression and to create a
smokescreen to hide its crimes behind tons of fakes.
We have already heard the insane statements about
“combat mosquitos”, Ukrainian dirty bombs, chemical

23-0166617/19

S/PV.9245

Threats to international peace and security

weapons, secret labs et cetera. Today the Russian
representative went even further. It is a real mockery
of the Council when an accomplice to crimes against
humanity dresses up in the mantel of preacher and
explains to the Security Council which denomination in
Ukraine should be recognized as a canonical institution
and which should be labelled a heretical one.
We have just heard from the briefer invited by
the Russian delegation, who represents the Russian
Orthodox Church. Frankly speaking, it is baffling
when a foreign national and a member of a foreign
religious organization is invited to brief about the
religious situation in another country. In that regard,
let me draw members’ attention to the official comment
issued by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church yesterday
on the intention by the Russian Federation to raise at
the United nations the issue of the situation regarding
the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. The comment was
made by the very church that the person invited by the
Russian delegation just pretended to protect.
“The Ukrainian Orthodox Church has not
appealed to any State for assistance in protecting its
rights, [much less] to the State that has perpetrated
a treacherous armed attack on our country. Also,
we have not authorized anyone from the Russian
Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate to
speak on our behalf at the United Nations. We are
concerned that the issue of the Ukrainian Orthodox
Church is being raised by structures that have no
relation to us. We call on the authorities of Russia
not to speak on behalf of our Church at international
platforms and not to use the religious factor for
their own political purposes.”
Today a number of Ukraine’s religious
leaders — representing Orthodox, Greek, Roman
Catholic, Protestant and Evangelical churches, as
well as Muslim religious unions — issued an address
to the members of the Security Council, which is
publicly available, that I would also like to bring to
their attention:
“We, representatives of religious organizations
of Ukraine, appeal to you on behalf of millions of
our faithful who, under Russian missiles and shells,
pray, work and protect the most valuable gift of
God — life on our land, people’s rights and their
dignity. The war has brought enormous suffering
to these people, with the people’s freedom [and]
18/19

17/01/2023

their religious beliefs having effectively become
the initial target of the Russian occupiers.
“In 11 months, they destroyed or ransacked
more than 270 churches and sacred buildings,
killed and tortured to death dozens of clergymen.
Wherever Russia comes, religious freedom ends.
Where Russia is, they torture “wrong” Orthodox
Christians, mock Catholics, imprison Muslims
for religious beliefs for terms unthinkable
even in Soviet times, force Protestants to flee
abroad from inevitable repression and persecute
Jehovah’s Witnesses.
“That is why our faithful are fighting at the
front, among other things, to ensure that Ukraine
continues to be a country where not a single house
of worship has been closed in the entire history
of its independent existence; where everyone has
the right to believe in what he or she considers
worthy of belief; where religious minorities feel as
comfortable as the churches that unite millions of
believers; where, after all, religiously persecuted
people from many countries have always found
refuge, and Ukraine’s achievements in the field
of freedom of conscience are recognized all over
the world.
“We take this opportunity to appeal to the
international community to hear our call: the most
that peoples can do for the sake of establishing
freedom of conscience in Ukraine is to help
Ukrainians resist the Russian invasion, which brings
death, slavery, darkness and religious oppression.”
The appeal is signed by the Primate of the
Orthodox Church of Ukraine and Metropolitan of Kyiv
and All Ukraine; the Head of the Ukrainian Greek
Catholic Church, Supreme Archbishop of Kyiv-Halych;
the Head of the All-Ukrainian Union of the Churches
of Evangelical Christians-Baptists; the Mufti of the
Spiritual Administration of the Muslims of Crimea; the
Mufti of the Spiritual Administration of the Muslims
of Ukraine; the Ruling Bishop of the Diocese of KyivZhytomyr of the Roman Catholic Church in Ukraine;
and the President of the Ukrainian Union Conference of
the Seventh-Day Adventist Church in Ukraine.
The deadly nature of the Kremlin regime was again
manifested last Saturday with a new round of Russian
missiles launched to kill Ukrainians and destroy
our critical infrastructure — by the way, despite the
important Orthodox holiday that many Ukrainians
23-01666

17/01/2023

Threats to international peace and security

marked that day. The most horrendous part of that
strike — against a multi-story residential building
in Dnipro — killed at least 45 people, including six
children, and wounded 79. We applaud the courage
and commitment of the professional rescue teams and
numerous volunteers who worked onsite 24/7 to save
everyone still alive under the debris.
Members might see the heartbreaking pictures of a
young female victim, Kateryna, who was saved after 20
hours under the rubble in freezing-cold temperatures.
As recounted by her relatives, she was not even able
to cry out for help because she has been deaf since
childhood. We kept a little hope at the moment of her
rescue that her husband and 1-year-old son could also
be found alive. Unfortunately, the Russian missile left
no room for a miracle.
According to the Ukrainian Air Force, it was a Kh22 missile fired from a Tu-22M3 long-range bomber.
This type of powerful missile, with a 950-kilogramme
warhead, was designed to hit aircraft carrier groups at
sea. They are less accurate than most modern missiles,
and their use against densely populated residential areas
is a clear war crime. A missile of the same type was used
by the Russian army to strike the city of Kremenchuk
on 27 June 2022, hitting a shopping mall and killing at
least 20 people. Unfortunately, so far, Ukraine does not
have in its possession any means capable of shooting
down such types of missiles.

S/PV.9245

It speaks volumes that today, on the second day
of mourning in Dnipro, Putin has submitted a draft
to the Russian Parliament to denounce a number of
European conventions, including the Convention for
the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms as well as the European Convention on the
Suppression of Terrorism — today, on the anniversary
of the first meeting of the Security Council. Indeed,
if they have opted for being a terrorist who kills
innocent people in their homes, why should they care
about maintaining any link, even a symbolic one, with
international democratic instruments.
I would like to thank all members who expressed
their sympathy for the victims of the deadly Russian
attack in Dnipro and pointed out the need to use the
Security Council to address real threats to regional and
international peace and security — threats that take the
lives of innocent people every day and night across the
whole of Ukraine and in many other parts of the world.
Their human rights, starting the with right to life, must
be protected. In that regard, I reiterate the call to return
to the practice of discussing human rights issues in the
Security Council and to organize, in the coming months
if not weeks, a full-fledged Council meeting to address
the implications of the Russian war of aggression on
the human rights situation in Ukraine and the place and
role of human rights in the work of the Council.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

23-0166619/19
