A/77/404

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
25 October 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 51

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations
Report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)
Rapporteur: Ms. María Noel Beretta Tassano (Uruguay)

I. Introduction
1.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include in the agenda of
its seventy-seventh session the item entitled “Information from Non -Self-Governing
Territories transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations” and
to allocate it to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee).
2.
At its 1st meeting, on 29 September 2022, the Fourth Committee decided to hold
a general debate on decolonization items (agenda items 51 to 55). The general debate
on those items was held at the 2nd, 7th, 8th and 9th meetings, on 3, 11, 13 and
14 October.
3.
At its 9th meeting, on 14 October, the Committee took action on item 51.
Statements and observations made in the course of the Committee’s consideration of
the items are reflected in the relevant summary records. 1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the following
documents:
(a) Relevant chapters of the report of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples (A/77/23, chaps. V and XIII);
(b)

Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/63).

__________________
1

22-24071 (E)

A/C.4/77/SR.2, A/C.4/77/SR.7, A/C.4/77/SR.8 and A/C.4/77/SR.9.

171122

*2224071*

A/77/404

5.
At the 2nd meeting, on 3 October, the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, in his capacity as Rapporteur of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, introduced the report of the Special Committee.
At the same meeting, the representative of Cuba, in his capacity as Vice -Chair of the
Special Committee, made a statement in which he gave an account of the activities of
the Special Committee in 2022.

II. Consideration of a draft resolution contained in
chapter XIII of the report of the Special Committee
6.
At its 9th meeting, on 14 October, the Fourth Committee was informed that draft
resolution I, entitled “Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations”, contained in chapter XIII of
the report of the Special Committee (A/77/23), had no programme budget
implications.
7.
At the same meeting, the Fourth Committee adopted draft resolution I by a
recorded vote of 147 to 2, with 3 abstentions (see para. 8). The voting was as follows: 2
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central
African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte D’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Mya nmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan , Thailand,
Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
Uruguay, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Israel, United States of America.
Abstaining:
France, Niger, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ir eland.

__________________
2

2/4

The delegations of Denmark and Uzbekistan subsequently indicated that they had intended to
vote in favour.
22-24071

A/77/404

III. Recommendation of the Special Political and Decolonization
Committee (Fourth Committee)
8.
The Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the following draft resolution:

Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories transmitted
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1970 (XVIII) of 16 December 1963, in which it
requested the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
to study the information transmitted to the Secretary-General in accordance with
Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations and to take such information fully
into account in examining the situation with regard to the implementation of the
Declaration, contained in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960,
Recalling also its resolution 76/85 of 9 December 2021, in which it requested
the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions entrusted to it under
resolution 1970 (XVIII),
Stressing the importance of the timely transmission by the administering Powers
of adequate information under Article 73 e of the Charter, in particular in relation to
the preparation by the Secretariat of the working papers on the Territories concerned,
Mindful of the non-fulfilment of the obligation to transmit information on some
Non-Self-Governing Territories in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter,
Recalling its resolution 75/123 of 10 December 2020 on the Fourth International
Decade for the Eradication of Colonialism, and stressing in that regard the need to
make real progress towards its full implementation,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General, 1
1.
Reaffirms that, in the absence of a decision by the General Assembly itself
that a Non-Self-Governing Territory has attained a full measure of self-government
in terms of Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations, the administering Power
concerned should continue to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter
with respect to that Territory;
2.
Requests the administering Powers concerned to respect their obligations
under Article 73 e of the Charter with regard to each Territory on the agenda of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3.
Also requests the administering Powers concerned, in accordance with
their Charter obligations, to transmit or continue to transmit regularly to the
Secretary-General for information purposes, subject to such limitation as security and
constitutional considerations may require, statistical and other information of a
technical nature relating to the economic, social and educational conditions in the
Territories for which they are respectively responsible, as well as the fullest possible
information on political and constitutional developments in the Territories concerned,
including the constitution, legislative act or executive order providing for the
__________________
1

22-24071

A/77/63.
3/4

A/77/404

government of the Territory and the constitutional relationship of the Territory to the
administering Power, within a maximum period of six months following the
expiration of the administrative year in those Territories;
4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to ensure that adequate
information is drawn from all available published sources in connection with the
preparation of the working papers relating to the Territories concerned;
5.
Requests the Special Committee to continue to discharge the functions
entrusted to it under General Assembly resolution 1970 (XVIII), in accordance with
established procedures.

4/4

22-24071
