General Assembly-Forty-first Session

116

(e/) The term "analysed informatíon" means the information resulting from the interpretation of processed data, inputs of data and knowledge from other sourccs;

(e) The term "remole sensing activities" means the operatíon of
remote sensing space systems, primary data collection and storage stations, and activities in processing, inlerpreting and disseminating the
processed data.
Principie II

Remole sensing activities shall be carried out for the benefit and in the
interests of ali countries, irrespective of their degree of economic, social
or scientific and technological development, and taking into particular
consideration the needs of the developing countries.
Pri nciple I II

Remole sensing activities shall be conducted in accordance with international law, including the Charter ofthe United Nations, the Treaty on
Principies Governing the Activities ofStates in the Exploration and Use
of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 24 and
the relevan! instruments ofthe lnternational Telecommunication Union
Principie IV

Remole sensing aclivities shall be conducted in accordance with the
principies contained in article I of the Treaty on Principies Goveming
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, which, in particular provides that the exploration and use of outer space shall be carried out for
the benefit and in the interests of ali countries, irrespective oftheir degree
of economic or scientific development, and stipulates the principie of
freedom of exploration and use of outer space on a basis of equality.
These activities shall be conducted on the basis of respect for the principie of full and permanent sovereignty of ali States and peoples over their
own wealth and natural resources, with due regard to the rights and interests, in accordance with international law, of other States and entities
under their jurisdiction. Such activities shall not be conducted in a manner detrimental to the legitimate rights and interests of the sensed State.

to any other State, particularly any developing country that ts atfected by
the programme, at 1ts request.
Principie X

Remole sensing shall promote thc protection ofthe Earth's natural environment.
To this end, States participating in remole sensing activities that have
identified information in their possession that is capable of averting any
phenomenon harmful to the Earth's natural environment shall disclose
such information to States concerned
Pri nciple XI

Remole sensing shall promote the protection of mankind from natural
disasters.
To this end, States participating in remole sensing activities that havc
identified processed data and analysed information in their possession
that may be useful to States atfected by natural disasters, or likely to be
atfected by impending natural disasters, shall transmit such data and information to States concerned as promptly as possible.
Principie XII

As soon as the primary data and the processed data concerning the territory under its jurisdiction are produced, the sensed Sta te shall have access to them on a non-discriminatory basis and on reasonable cost terms
The sensed State shall also have access to the available analysed information concerning the territory under its jurisdiction in the possession of
any State participating in remole sensing activities on the same hasis and
terms, taking particularly into account the nccds and interests of the developing countries.
Principie XIII

To promote and intensify international co-operation, especially with
regard to the needs of developing countries, a State carrying out remole
sensing of the Earth from outer space shall, u pon request, enter into consultations with a State whose territory is sensed in order to make available opportunities for participation and enhance thc mutual benefits to he
derived therefrom.

Principie V

States carrying out remole sensing aclivities shall promote international co-operation in these activities. To this end, they shall make available to other Stales opportunities for participation therein. Such participation shall be based in each case on equitable and mutually acceptable
terms.
Principie VI

In order to maximize the availability of benefits from remote sensing
activities, States are encouraged through agreements or other arrangements to provide for the establishment and operation of data collecting
and storage stations and processing and interpretation facilities, in particular within the framework of regional agreements or arrangements
wherever feasible.
Principie Vil

States participating in remote sensing activities shall make available
technical assistance to other intercsted States 011 mutually agreed term,
Principie Vl Il

The United Nations and the relevan! agencies within the Umted Nations system shall promote international co-operation, including technical assistance and co-ordination in the area of remole sensing.
Pri nciple IX

In accordance with article IV of the Convention on RegiMration of
Objects Launched into Outer Spacc25 and article XI of the Treaty on
Principies Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use
of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, a State
carrying out a programme of remole sensing shall inform the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations. lt shall, moreover, make available any
other relevan! information to the greatest extent feasible and practicahlr

24 Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.
25 Resolution 323'i (XXIX), annex

Principie XIV

In compliance w1th article VI of the Treaty on Principies Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, States opcrating remote
sensing satellites shall bear international responsibility for their activitie,
and assure that such activities are conducted in accordance with these
principies and the norms of international law, irrespective of whether
such activities are carried out by governmental or non-governmental entities or through international organizations to which such States are
parties. This principie i, without prejudicc to the applicahility or the
norms of international law on State responsibility for remole sensing ac·
tivities.
Principie XV

Any dispute re,ultmg from the application ofthese pnnciples shall he
resolved through !he establíshed procedures for the peaceful settletnenl
of disputes.

41/66.

Question of the review of the Convention on
Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
Space

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the importance of international cooperation in thc field of the exploration and peaceful uses
of outer space, including the Moon and other celestial
bodies, and ofpromoting the law in this field ofhuman endeavour,
Taking note with appreciation ofthe work accomplished
by the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, in
particular that of its Legal Sub-Committee,
Believing that a mandatory system of registering objects
launched into outer space, in particular, assists in their
identification and con tributes to the application and devel-

IV.

opment ofinternational law governing the exploration and
use of outer space,
Recalling that the Treaty on Principies Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer
Space, including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies 24
affirms that States Parties to that Treaty shall bear international responsibility for their national activities in outer
space and refers to the State on whose registry an object
launched into outer space is carried,
Recalling further that the Convention on lnternational
Liability for Damage Caused by Space Objects 26 establishes international rules and procedures concerning the
liability of launching States for damage caused by their
space objects,
Noting that to date thirty-five States have ratified or
acceded to, and five more States have signed, the Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into Outer
Space, 25 which was opened for signature on 14 January
1975 and which entered into force on 15 September 1976,
Having considered the ítem entitled "Question of the review of the Convention on Registration of Objects
Launched into Outer Space", as called for in article X of
the Convention,
1. Recognizes that, in view of the considerable increase
of activities in outer space, effective international rules and
procedures concerning the registration of objects launched
into outer space continue to be of great importance;
2. Reaffirms, in this respect, the importance of the
Convention on Registration of Objects Launched into
Outer Space and the registration, pursuant to the Convention, of ali objects launched into outer space;
3. Urges ali States that have not yet done so, particularly those conducting space activities, to give urgent consideration to ratifying or acceding to the Convention in order to assure its broad application;
4. A/so urges international intergovernmental organizations that conduct space activities to declare, if they
have not yet done so, their acceptance ofthe rights and obligations provided for in the Convention, pursuant to article VII;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, within
existing resources, a report on the past application of the
Convention on Registration of ObJects Launched into
Outer Space and to submit it to the Legal Sub-Committee
of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at
its twenty-sixth session, for the information of the Member States.
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/67.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peace-keeping operations in ali their aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2006 (XIX) of 18 February
1965, 2053 A (XX) of 15 December 1965, 2249 (S-V) of 23
May 1967, 2308 (XXII) of 13 December 1967, 2451
(XXIII) of 19 December 1968, 2670 (XXV) of 8 December 1970, 2835 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 2965
(XXVII) of 13 December 1972, 3091 (XXVIII) of 7
December 1973, 3239 (XXIX) of 29 November 1974, 3457
(XXX) of 10 December 1975, 31/105 of 15 December
1976, 32/106 of 15 December 1977, 33/114 of 18 Decem-

26 Resolulion 2777 (XXVI). anncx

117

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

ber 1978, 34/53 of 23 November 1979, 35/121 of 11
December 1980, 36/37 of 18 November 1981, 37/93 of 10
December 1982, 38/81 of 15 December 1983, 39/97 of 14
December 1984 and 40/163 of 16 December 1985,
Noting that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations has not been able to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session,
1. Reaffirms and renews the mandate given to the Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations by the relevan! resolutions of the General Assembly;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-second session the item entitled "Comprehensive review of the whole question of peace-keeping operations in
ali their aspects".
95th plenary meeting
3 December 1986

41/68.

Questions relating to information
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on questions relating
to information,
Recalling the recommendations ofthe Committee on lnformation approved by the General Assembly in its resolution 40/164 A of 16 December 1985 and annexed
thereto, as well as the provisions of that resolution, and
taking into account the views expressed by delegations at
the fortieth session of the Assembly, on 16 December
1985, 27
Reaffirming the mandate given to the Committee on Information by the General Assembly in its resolution
34/182 of 18 December 1979,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
questions relating to information, 28
1. Takes note of the comprehensive report of the Committee on Information, 29 which served asan important basis and stimulated further deliberations, and urges the foil
implementation of the following recommendations:
( 1) Ali countries, the United Nations system as a
whole and ali others concerned should co-operate in the
establishment of a new world information and communication order, seen as an evolving and continuous
process, and based, in ter afia, on the free circulation
and wider and better balanced dissemination of information, guaranteeing diversity of sources of information and free access to information and, in particular,
the urgent need to change the dependen! status of the
developing countries in the field of information and
communication, as the principie of sovereign equality
among nations extends also to this field, and intended
also to strengthen peace and international understanding, enabling ali persons to participate effectively in
political, economic, social and cultural life and promoting human rights, understanding and friendship among
ali nations. The ongoing efforts of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
which retains the central role in this field, to eliminate
gradually the existing imbalances in the field of information and communication and to encourage a free
27 Offici11/ Rccords o( rhc Gcnaal Assembly. Fortielh Session, Plenary
Mecring.1, 1 18th meeting
28 A/41/562 and Add.1
29 Official Record, of rhe General Assemhl_v, Forty-Jirsr Session.
Supp!m1t·111 \'o. 21 1A/4I/21)
