United Nations

S/PV.6251

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6251st meeting
Monday, 21 December 2009, 11.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Artiñano
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Araud
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. DiCarlo
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Letter dated 17 November 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/599)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-66048 (E)

*0966048*

S/PV.6251

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
Letter dated 17 November 2009 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2009/599)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to His Excellency
Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission.
It is so decided.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki, Chairperson of the
African Union High-Level Panel on Darfur.
It is so decided.
The Council welcomes Mr. Jean Ping and the
members of his delegation, including Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, former President of South Africa, and
Mr. Pierre Buyoya, former President of Burundi.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to document S/2009/599, which contains a
letter dated 17 November 2009 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Jean Ping, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, and Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
Chairperson of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur.
I warmly welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and invite him to take the floor.

2

The Secretary-General: I am honoured to be
here today and to welcome this esteemed delegation.
Today’s meeting is an important symbol of
collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations. It is also another concrete
demonstration of our common commitment to work
with the Sudanese people in addressing the serious
challenges they face.
Today, the Panel will brief the Security Council
on its report (S/2009/599, annex I), which has been
adopted in its entirety by the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The Peace and Security Council also
established a High-Level Implementation Panel
comprised of former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Pierre Buyoya and retired General Abdulsalami
Abubakar. We are privileged to receive their first-hand
briefing.
The report of the High-Level Panel provides a
frank assessment and insightful analysis of the
situation in the Sudan and offers numerous proposals
for the way forward. Perhaps above all, the Panel
members have insisted on seeing the Sudan in its
totality. They have clearly articulated the links between
the crisis in Darfur and broader efforts to implement
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).
Their insights come at a critical moment. In little
more than three months, elections are scheduled to take
place. In just over a year, the two referendums that will
determine the future shape of the Sudan are scheduled
to be held. The National Congress Party (NCP) and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement (SPLM), as the
two parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
have taken steps to prepare for these major events, but
there is still much to be done. We must remember that
neither the election nor the referendums are ends in
themselves. Managing the results — whatever the
outcome — will require genuine cooperation between
the NCP and the SPLM.
In the meantime, violence, in South Sudan in
particular, is occurring at a disturbing scale and
frequency. In Darfur, the peace process has reached a
critical point. Chief Mediator Djibril Bassolé has been
working with the Government of Qatar to generate
momentum by giving civil society a strong voice at the
peace talks. Representatives of civil society and armed
movements have agreed to resume consultations in
Doha on 18 January 2010, which will be followed by

09-66048

S/PV.6251

direct talks between the Government
movements on 24 January 2010.

and

the

Efforts must continue to encourage the
Government, and more especially the rebel movements,
to make concessions and embrace the consensus that
Mr. Bassolé is building. In my view, the High-Level
Implementation Panel and the international community
at large have a critical role to play here. By giving
Mr. Bassolé our unequivocal support, we will send a
strong message to all parties that they must engage in
the negotiations that he is leading.
Beyond that, the Panel can make an invaluable
contribution to the soft landing we are all working
towards after the election and referendums by helping
the parties to the CPA to bridge their differences. That
is an outcome that is badly needed not only for the
Sudan itself, but also for the Sudan’s neighbours and,
indeed, for all of Africa.
The High-Level Panel also addressed the difficult
issues of justice and reconciliation in the Sudan. Its
efforts to develop creative and pragmatic proposals are
highly commendable. We must keep sight of the
importance of compliance with resolution 1593 (2005),
which refers the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court.
I have just concluded a very productive meeting
with the visiting delegation, in the course of which we
agreed on the importance of continuing close African
Union-United Nations cooperation on the Sudan.
Beyond our co-management of the African UnionUnited Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, we must
make every effort to ensure that the activities of the
United Nations in the Sudan and the work of the
African Union’s High-Level Implementation Panel are
mutually supportive.
It will be the Sudanese people who solve the
Sudan’s problems. But working together, the United
Nations and the African Union can provide them with
critical assistance on their difficult journey towards
lasting peace and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jean Ping,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission.
Mr. Ping (spoke in French): At the outset, please
allow me to express my sincere thanks to the President

09-66048

and members of the Security Council for having agreed
to meet to discuss the report of the African Union
High-Level Panel on Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I).
That is an eloquent manifestation of this organ’s
interest in the situation in the Sudan and the efforts
being made to help that country to address the
numerous challenges it is facing.
I am pleased to take the floor today under the
presidency of Burkina Faso — an African presidency,
both committed and proactive — and I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the representatives
of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Uganda on having
accomplished fruitful terms on the Council in the
service, among other things, of the causes of Africa. I
would also like to congratulate all the other
representatives whose terms will conclude at the end of
this month.
I would like to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his
commitment to peace, security, stability and
development in Africa, as well as the trusting and
promising cooperation that is developing between the
United Nations and the African Union (AU).
Darfur occupies a special place in the efforts of
our two organizations in favour of peace on the African
continent. More than any other, that region symbolizes
the unique nature of the links between the African
Union and the United Nations, having provided the
context and the theatre for the first hybrid operation
between our two organizations. This pioneering
experience encourages us to better coordinate our
actions and to harmonize our respective cultures and
practices to the imperatives of joint work whose
objective circumstances leave us no other alternative.
Certainly, it can sometimes seem to be frustrating, but
we have no other choice than to persevere down this
path.
In the Sudan, as in other situations of crisis and
conflict on the African continent, the future will rely
increasingly on joint action and united efforts on the
basis of the respective comparative advantages of the
United Nations, with its expertise and resources, and
regional organizations, particularly the African Union,
whose political will — reflected in the implementation
of a continent-wide architecture of peace and security —
geographic proximity and detailed knowledge of the
situations at hand, constitute an undeniable asset and
grant the required legitimacy to the actions undertaken.

3

S/PV.6251

As members of the Council know, the AU HighLevel Panel on Darfur was established upon a decision
adopted at a ministerial meeting of the AU Peace and
Security Council (PSC) on 21 July 2008 in order to
consider and to make recommendations on the ways
and means to better address issues related, on the one
hand, to peace, reconciliation and pacification and, on
the other, to justice, the fight against impunity and
accountability.
By taking that decision, at the instigation of the
African Union Commission, the PSC was convinced
that the challenges of peace, justice and reconciliation
in the Sudan were inseparable. While affirming that
there could be no impunity for the flagrant violations
of human rights committed in Darfur, the PSC also
underscored the need to seek justice in a way that
would facilitate achieving the goal of peace and
reconciliation. Moreover, that is also the spirit of
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005) on Darfur.
Clearly, those issues cannot be divided. They must be
dealt with together with the resolve to create a positive
momentum and an add-on effect covering all the areas
where there must be action.
The Panel carried out its mandate over a period of
six months. Throughout that undertaking, it strove to
interact with each of the stakeholders, whether
Sudanese or international. It is significant that, even
with regard to its recommendations, the Panel deemed
it useful to keep the Sudanese and international actors
informed so as, wherever possible, to ensure their
acceptability and viability and to build the greatest
possible consensus on the proposed way forward,
taking due account of achievements such as the Darfur
Peace Agreement, signed in Abuja in 2006, and the
lessons learned from the efforts made to date through
so much goodwill, African and non-African.
It is just as significant that, during its various
visits to the Sudan, the Panel spent over 40 days in
Darfur going not only to areas under Government
control, but also to those controlled by the armed
opposition movements. That approach, which gave the
Panel and its report unequalled authority, was all the
more necessary given the fact that, since the start of the
war in Darfur, many people have claimed to speak on
behalf of the people of Darfur. The populations of
Darfur have rarely had the opportunity to speak for
themselves.

I wanted to make these remarks to highlight two
elements that seem to me essential. On the one hand, I
am convinced that the conflict in Darfur is, first and
foremost, a Sudanese problem and that its settlement
will depend primarily on the Sudanese themselves,
with the international community playing a supportive
and supplementary role; on the other hand, the
recommendations made by the Panel arise from the
concerns of the Sudanese parties such as they have
been able to harmonize and unify themselves, as far as
possible, and not from some disengaged deconstruction
of their realities that we might have sought to impose
on them.
I would also like to add that the Panel configured
a comprehensive approach based on the conviction that
the aims of peace, justice and reconciliation in Darfur
are closely linked and equally desirable. At the same
time, the Panel highlighted the robust desire of the
peoples of Darfur for peace and security. Nothing can
express that aspiration better that the statement made
by a nomad whom the Panel met in El Fasher in June
2009:
“We want peace. If it is flying in the air, I am
prepared to fly and catch it. If it is buried
underground, I am prepared to dig to get it. If it is
available in the market, I will find the money to
buy it.”
At the same time, as the Panel has underscored,
all the Sudanese parties expressed their devotion to
justice, respect for which will facilitate the pursuit of
peace, given that justice and reconciliation are
inextricably linked and must be tackled and
implemented in a comprehensive and supportive way.
It is of the greatest importance to stress here that
the conclusion that the Panel reached regarding the
need to set any settlement of the Darfur crisis in the
more global context of settling the crisis that has
affected the Sudan ever since its independence, some
of the causes of which go back to the colonial period.
The fundamental inequality that characterizes the
relationship between the Sudanese centre and
hinterlands partly explains the various rebellions that
the Sudan has experienced and continues to experience.
That is why the Panel has rightly defined the crisis in
Darfur as a manifestation of the wider crisis in the
Sudan as both a country and a State.
Members are aware that the High-Level Panel’s
report and its recommendations were endorsed by the

4

09-66048

S/PV.6251

PSC at its meeting held at the level of head of State
and Government in Abuja on 29 October. The PSC also
asked me to set up a High-Level Implementation Panel,
comprising former Presidents Thabo Mbeki, Pierre
Buyoya and Abdulsalami Abubakar, in order to
facilitate the implementation of the recommendations
made and to help the Sudanese parties to implement
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and other related
processes as elements of the democratic transformation
of the Sudan.
We have since undertaken a number of steps to
implement the Panel’s recommendations, which
henceforth will be the platform for all the AU’s action
in the Sudan. In that context, the Implementation Panel
went to the Sudan a few days ago. It met with all the
stakeholders, who reaffirmed their support for the
recommendations and the decision of the PSC. On the
basis of that visit, the Panel drew up an action plan
recommending activities to be systematically and
diligently undertaken concerning both Darfur and the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.
We have come to the United Nations to request its
support in the belief that, with the Panel’s report, the
methodology on which it was based, the
comprehensive
character
of
its
vision
and
recommendations, and the positive reactions of the
Sudanese parties, including the Government of
National Unity, today we have a suitable instrument to
guide our efforts and to achieve our objectives.
Hence, today’s meeting and the attitude that we
expect of the Council are very important. It is also true
that the success of our joint work in the Sudan will
require this meeting to be more than a one-off event;
rather, it must mark the launching of a process in a
spirit of partnership in the service of peace, justice,
security and reconciliation in the Sudan. I am sure that
we are all aware of the fact that today is a turning point
in the efforts of the international community to date to
reach a settlement in Darfur and to support the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement so that the Sudan can experience a
significantly new era in its history.
The situation is critical. The Sudan is on the eve
of two major dates that will determine the future of the
country and whose impact on that of Africa must not be
underestimated. First are the general elections in April
2010, which ought to mark an important stage in the

09-66048

democratic transformation of the Sudan as envisaged
by the January 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
Following that, there is the self-determination
referendum of January 2011, which in accordance with
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement will enable the
people of Southern Sudan to decide either to maintain
the unity of the Sudan or to partition the country. It is
obvious that the choice made will have considerable
consequences for the Sudan and for the rest of Africa,
just as it is obvious that the conditions and
circumstances prevailing before, during and after these
votes will have the greatest impact on the course and
coherence of events.
For Africa, what is happening and what is at stake
in the Sudan is of existential importance. The Sudan is
the biggest country in Africa. It is a melting pot of the
cultural, religious and ethnic diversity that
characterizes Africa and that, far from being a
handicap, is an advantage. The Sudan shares its borders
with nine other African States, and they, more than any
others, will be the first to suffer from the continuance
of the current situation and even more from possible
negative developments in the future.
By forming the High-level Panel and by working
actively on the follow-up to its recommendations, the
African Union, despite difficulties, setbacks, suffering
and heartbreak, has affirmed its faith in the capacity of
the Sudanese to live up to their historic responsibilities
and to overcome their differences for the good of their
country and for the good of Africa. A collective step
forward is possible if inhibitions, the weight of the past
and distractions do not continue to obscure the
generous vision of the future that the African Union
would like to popularize.
The mission entrusted to the African Union Panel
is intended to promote a comprehensive approach to
solving the crisis in the Sudan as well as the peaceful,
democratic transformation of the country. This mission
works harmoniously with the mandates of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the
Joint Mediation and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan, mandates whose implementation it is meant to
facilitate, without overlapping tasks, duplicating work
or contesting competencies. This sui generis mission
responds to real needs, and it will only strengthen the
effectiveness, coherence and credibility of the
international community’s actions in the Sudan.

5

S/PV.6251

The Sudan needs to move forward, and Africa is
determined to provide all necessary assistance, on the
basis of the report of the African Union High-Level
Panel, which has become the strategy and the source of
inspiration for the activities of the African Union in the
Sudan. We ask all our partners within the international
community to lend their support to this unprecedented
effort, remembering that the solutions that will produce
the desired results are those with Sudanese ownership
and Africa’s support. The African Union trusts in the
support of the United Nations in a beneficial endeavour
whose success will honour the entire international
community and shelter from the scourge of war many
future generations in the Sudan, Africa and the world.
I thank the Council for its gracious attention, and
I ask you, Mr. President, to invite President Mbeki to
present the conclusions of the High-level Panel and the
perspectives that point to the large-scale actions that
we must undertake with the Sudanese and all the other
actors in the best interest of everyone.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ping for his briefing.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, Chairperson of the African Union High-level
Panel on Darfur.
Mr. Mbeki (African Union): First of all, we
would like to join the Chairperson of the Commission
of the African Union (AU), Mr. Jean Ping, in thanking
you, Mr. President, and the Security Council, for
giving us the opportunity to be here today to reflect on
various matters relating to Sudan, starting with the
report of the African Union High-Level Panel on
Darfur (S/2009/599, annex I). Similarly, we join the
Chairperson of the AU Commission in stressing the
significance of the partnership between the AU and the
United Nations, which was pioneered in Darfur in the
form of both the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)and the Joint Chief
Mediator.
As Mr. Ping has indicated, the essence of the
mandate of the AU High-level Panel on Darfur was to
advise the African Union on what could be done to
accelerate the advance towards peace, justice and
reconciliation in Darfur. The Security Council is of
course aware that at its meeting of 29 October, the AU
Peace and Security Council reconstituted the AU HighLevel Panel on Darfur as the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for Sudan. I mention this

6

because much of what we will say will relate to the
work of the Implementation Panel, whose mandate,
again as mentioned by the Chairperson of the AU
Commission, is
“to assist in the implementation of all aspects of
the AU Panel on Darfur recommendations, as
well as to assist the Sudanese parties in the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and other related processes, as
part of the democratic transformation of Sudan”.
We are certain that the members of the Security
Council are familiar both with the AU High-level Panel
report and its recommendations and with the decisions
of the AU Peace and Security Council in that regard.
We will therefore not discuss the report in detail, but
will rather offer what we consider to be a few salient
observations. Of course, if the Council should require
us to comment on any detail in the report, we will do
so.
Drawing on its collective experience, the AU
Panel understood that a peaceful settlement of the
conflict in Darfur could only be achieved through a
negotiated
agreement
amongst
the
Sudanese
themselves. In other words, we proceeded from the
position that it was neither possible nor desirable to
impose a Darfur solution on the Sudanese people. We
mention this important point at this stage because it
helped to inform both the modus operandi of the AU
Panel and the report it ultimately submitted to the AU
Peace and Security Council. With regard to that modus
operandi, the AU Panel decided to engage the Sudanese
stakeholders, and especially the Darfurians, in an
extensive process of consultations, essentially to
understand what they themselves thought might be
done to accelerate the process towards peace, justice
and reconciliation in Darfur. Further, to conclude this
process of consultations, we also presented our draft
recommendations to the same Darfur and Sudan
constituencies to solicit their opinions on the
recommendations.
Arising out of all this, we are happy to inform the
Security Council that, in our view, the AU Panel report
and recommendations broadly reflect the views of the
major stakeholders in Sudan and Darfur about what
needs to be done speedily to achieve the objectives that
I have stated. We believe that this is of major practical
importance, because it underlines the objective reality
that a broad consensus exists in Darfur and in Sudan as

09-66048

S/PV.6251

a whole which should facilitate the critically important
negotiations to end the conflict in Darfur.
Just over a week ago, we visited Sudan, and the
AU High-Level Implementation Panel had occasion to
meet with, among others, a broad spectrum of the
leadership of Darfur civil society. Those leaders
emphasized exactly this point: that, to use their words,
the situation in Darfur was ripe effectively to
accelerate the peace process. We must also mention the
fact that after interactions with other Sudanese
stakeholders since the report of the AU Panel was
published and endorsed by the Peace and Security
Council, we can say firmly that the major Sudanese
constituencies broadly support the report and its
recommendations.
Members of the Security Council will also be
aware that, in our report, we insisted on everything
being done to enable the people of Darfur to participate
in both the 2010 general elections and any national
dialogue that might take place around the critical issue
of the 2011 South Sudan referendum. For this reason,
we thought it was important that the Darfur
negotiations be concluded before the impending
general elections.
We attached a great deal of importance to this
because we were concerned that, should the people of
Darfur feel excluded in any way from both the
elections and the consideration of matters relating to
the referendum, this would serve to underline their
marginalization and disempowerment, which were a
central cause of the armed uprising that started in 2003.
In this context, we would like to reiterate our
view that, first, a broad consensus exists in Darfur and
Sudan on the various elements that would constitute
what we described as a global political agreement on
Darfur; secondly, the people of Darfur insist that a
negotiated peace should be concluded as quickly as
possible; and thirdly, it is both possible and necessary
that this objective be achieved without much delay.
Here, I should also confirm that, like the AU
Panel during its short lifespan, the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel is ready to assist the Joint
Chief Mediator to achieve this outcome. This means
that, among other things, the Panel will engage the
various parties in Darfur and the Sudan to encourage
them to respond positively and expeditiously to such
initiatives as would be taken by the Joint Chief
Mediator.

09-66048

Yet another matter I would like to underline is the
important reality, mentioned by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission, that the three objectives of
peace, justice and reconciliation are interconnected and
interdependent. We are thus convinced that the positive
outcome we all seek with regard to Darfur will have to
take the form of an integrated package that achieves
the necessary balance among the various objectives of
peace, justice and reconciliation.
We are convinced that any attempt to emphasize
the importance of any of these three objectives at the
expense of the others would not bring about the just
and stable peace we all desire for the people of Darfur
and which the Darfurians themselves seek. This is one
of the considerations that informed the manner in
which we composed our recommendations, and we
believe that these will help the Sudanese negotiators to
arrive at the necessarily integrated package to which
we have referred.
In this context, we must mention the fact that
Sudan is not the first African country to be faced with
the challenge of finding the necessary balance in
addressing the interrelated issues of peace, justice and
reconciliation. Therefore, if necessary, beyond
considering the decisions taken by the AU Peace and
Security Council in this regard, the negotiators of the
Darfur agreement could draw on this wider African
experience. Indeed, I must say, the Darfurians kept
referring to that.
Members of the Security Council will also have
taken note of the fact that the AU Panel underlined that
the conflict in Darfur, as was the case with the conflicts
in South and Eastern Sudan, is a manifestation of a
general Sudan crisis. We explained that this Sudan
crisis was of long standing, encompassing both the
colonial and post-colonial periods. It arose, again as
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission has
said, essentially from the concentration of power and
wealth in an elite centred in Khartoum, resulting in the
marginalization, impoverishment and underdevelopment of
the so-called periphery, including Darfur.
Furthermore, this unequal distribution of power
and wealth made it imperative that the centre should, to
the extent possible, deny the rest of the country the
democratic right to elect a Government of their choice,
among other rights. The Darfurians themselves insisted
that this historical legacy was the root cause of the
violent conflict in Darfur. From this, it follows that the

7

S/PV.6251

solution of the conflict in Darfur should be located
within the context of addressing that legacy.
It is therefore self-evident that the resolution of
the conflict in Darfur, like those in South and Eastern
Sudan, cannot but necessitate the restructuring of
Sudan as a whole in order to address the historical
legacy, the consequence of which has been the various
conflicts that have afflicted Sudan for many decades.
Accordingly, the Implementation Panel will work
closely with the people of Sudan as they strive to give
effect to a stated common resolve to build what has
been described as the new Sudan. As with any process
that seeks to achieve the fundamental restructuring of
any society, the creation of that new Sudan, explained
in the Comprehensive Peace Agreement as making
unity attractive, is and has been difficult and
challenging. Because of this, the Sudanese people need
all the support they can get to help them achieve this
objective. We therefore hope that the United Nations
will also do what it can in this regard.
As the Security Council is aware, the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement gives the opportunity
for the people of South Sudan to opt for independence,
which might suggest that once the South has seceded,
if this is the outcome of the 2011 referendum, the
historical power relations in North Sudan could remain
unchanged. In our interactions with the population in
Darfur, there was no serious suggestion that this region
of Sudan sought to follow South Sudan with regard to
the issue of self-determination. We make this point to
emphasize that the implementation of a just Darfur
peace agreement necessarily implies the transformation
of Sudan in the manner we have indicated, including
the democratization of the country.
Because of the central importance of this process
of democratization to the resolution of the Sudan crisis,
as indicated in the mandate of our High-level
Implementation Panel, we will act to encourage the
Sudanese parties to create a climate conducive to free
and fair elections and to conduct the 2010 general
elections in such a manner that all the people of Sudan
can freely elect legislatures and Governments of their
choice.
It is commonly agreed that this is vitally
important in the context of both the fundamental
restructuring of Sudan, to which we have referred, and
the need to ensure that the 2011 referendum is handled
by a democratically elected Government. Again, it is a

8

matter of common agreement that the will of the
people of South Sudan should be respected, whatever
the outcome of the referendum. In this context, the
Sudanese parties have recognized the fact that they
must engage one another on the vital matter of the
consequences of the referendum, regardless of its
outcome.
Accordingly, and, again, as the Security Council
knows, the South Sudan referendum law requires that
the parties engage in discussions to consider all the
relevant post-referendum issues. Once again, our
Implementation Panel will work with these parties to
contribute what it can to the consideration of these
post-referendum issues, in part to help ensure that
Sudan sustains the peace that was brought about by the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement — once more,
regardless of the outcome of the referendum.
We share the belief that the people of Sudan, in
both the North and the South, are very keen to live in
conditions of peace, even if South Sudan elects to be
an independent State. The Implementation Panel will
therefore do everything it can to focus on the issue of
peace, among other ways by considering the situation
along the North-South border and making the
necessary and relevant recommendations to the
Sudanese parties.
We should perhaps have mentioned earlier the
continuing challenge to the implementation of all the
outstanding
agreements
contained
in
the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. By agreement with
the National Congress Party and the Sudan People’s
Liberation Movement, the Panel will interact with
these two parties to the CPA to help accelerate the
process towards the completion of the agenda detailed
in the Agreement.
As indicated in the AU Panel’s report, we
consider the normalization of relations between Sudan
and its neighbours to be of vital importance with regard
to the achievement of the goal of a peaceful and stable
Sudan. Accordingly, we have been greatly encouraged
by the steps taken by the Governments of Chad and
Sudan to reduce and end the tensions between the two
countries. The African Union Panel has engaged both
Governments on this matter, and the Implementation
Panel will follow up on this and will resume its
interaction with the other neighbouring countries.
As we carry out this work, we will be very
mindful of the critical importance of Sudan to its

09-66048

S/PV.6251

neighbours and the rest of our continent — again, as
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission has
said. It is self-evident that Sudan, which shares borders
with nine other countries in a volatile part of Africa,
should serve as a force for peace, stability and
development both in the region and in Africa as a
whole.
Earlier, we mentioned the groundbreaking
partnership between the AU and the United Nations,
which resulted in the establishment of UNAMID. As
UNAMID approaches the second anniversary of its
establishment, at the end of this month, we would like
to pay tribute to the extraordinary dedication and
courage of the men and women who are serving in
Darfur under challenging conditions, as well as to
commend the Mission. It is obvious that in addition to
the work it has done already, UNAMID will be
required to take on additional tasks once the Darfur
global political agreement is concluded. We therefore
hope that the necessary steps will be taken to ensure
that it has the necessary capacity to carry out all its
tasks.
In this context, we would like to congratulate
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari on his assumption of the high
position of Joint Special Representative in Darfur; we
look forward to working with him as closely as
possible.
The AU Panel was privileged to have regular
interactions with both UNAMID and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan, as well as with the
special envoys of countries members of the Security
Council and the European Union. The Implementation
Panel will strive to sustain this interaction, as we
believe that concerted international action is required
effectively to respond to the urgent challenges that
Sudan faces.

09-66048

The Panel is conscious of the reality of the
extensive nature of its mandate and therefore the work
it must carry out. It is similarly alert to the fact that it
has to act within a very short time frame, given the fact
of the impending general elections and the South
Sudan referendum.
However, objective reality dictates that the
matters we have mentioned — the resolution of the
conflict in Darfur, the CPA and North-South relations,
the democratization of Sudan and the normalization of
relations in the neighbourhood — should be addressed
simultaneously and as a matter of urgency. The
Implementation Panel will do its best to respond to this
challenge.
Once more, we thank the Security Council for
giving us the opportunity to make a brief presentation
on the issues we have mentioned and hope that the
Council will favour us and our continent with its
support, resulting in the further strengthening of the
partnership between the African Union and the United
Nations.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Chairperson of the African Union High-level Panel on
Darfur for his briefing.
There are no further speakers on my list. In
accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council’s prior consultations, I how invite Council
members to a private debate to continue the discussion
of the subject. I request delegations that have not
requested to participate in the private debate to be kind
enough to leave the Chamber.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

9
