UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1994/33*
13 July 1994
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3404th meeting of the Security Council, held on 13 July 1994, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Liberia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
Liberia dated 24 June 1994 (S/1994/760). On the basis of this report, as
well as the oral briefing provided by the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Liberia, the Council has carried out a review of the
situation in Liberia, including the role played by the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) as called for in resolution
911 (1994).
"In this context, the Council notes that, since the interim review in
May 1994, there has been limited progress in the peace process and that the
Liberian National Transitional Government (LNTG) has been unable to extend
its authority effectively outside the Monrovia area. The Council notes
further with concern that preparations for national elections have been
hampered by the continued fighting and the consequent virtual halt of the
disarmament process. It underscores that until the disarmament process is
substantially accomplished the holding of free and fair elections will not
be possible. It reiterates, nevertheless, the need to make urgent
preparations to enable the timely holding of free and fair elections. To
this end, a substantial acceleration of the disarmament process is
essential. It notes that continued delay may have an adverse effect on
international participation in the Liberian peace process.
"The Council, therefore, calls on the LNTG, in cooperation with the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and the Organization of
African Unity, with the support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNOMIL as necessary, to convene a meeting of the
Liberian factions concerned to address the problems affecting disarmament.
The Council considers that the objectives of such a meeting should be to
________________________
*

Reissued for technical reasons.

94-28579 (E)

140794

/...

S/PRST/1994/33
English
Page 2

agree on a realistic plan to resume disarmament and to set a target date
for its completion. The Council calls on the LNTG to convene the meeting
as soon as possible, at the latest by 31 July 1994. The Council stresses
the importance it places on the Liberian factions concerned attending such
a meeting.
"The Council further calls upon all factions in Liberia to demonstrate
the resolve and commitment necessary to achieve national reconciliation.
"The Council expresses its concern about the increase in military
activities being carried out in violation of the general cease-fire and the
consequent large-scale displacement of persons and atrocities which have
been committed throughout the country. The Council condemns all those who
initiate fighting and who violate international humanitarian law.
"The Council strongly deplores attacks on and the abduction and
harassment of United Nations and ECOWAS Cease-fire Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) personnel in Liberia, as well as looting of United Nations and
ECOMOG property. It demands that such hostile acts cease forthwith.
"The Council urges the Liberian parties to take all necessary measures
to ensure the security and safety of UNOMIL and ECOMOG personnel, as well
as of the personnel involved in relief operations, and strictly to abide by
the applicable rules of international humanitarian law. It demands that
all factions in Liberia extend full cooperation to organizations engaged in
the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
"The Council commends the positive role of ECOWAS in its continued
efforts to facilitate peace and security in Liberia, including through the
provision of ECOMOG troops. It welcomes the continued close cooperation
between ECOMOG and UNOMIL.
"The Council also commends other African States that have provided
troops to ECOMOG and those Member States that have contributed to the trust
fund established pursuant to paragraph 6 of resolution 866 (1993) or
provided other assistance in support of the troops. However, the Council
expresses its concern that sufficient financial and other support for the
ECOMOG troops has not yet been forthcoming despite the importance of their
continued presence in the Liberian peace process. The Council calls on all
Member States urgently to consider providing financial or material support
either through the United Nations trust fund or on a bilateral basis to
enable ECOMOG to fulfil its responsibilities in accordance with the Cotonou
Agreement.
"The Council commends the Secretary-General for the priority given to
reporting on violations of international humanitarian law and other
atrocities and encourages continued attention to these aspects of the
situation in Liberia.
"The Council requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all
information on cease-fire and arms embargo violations obtained by UNOMIL,

/...

S/PRST/1994/33
English
Page 3

in pursuit of its mandate, is made promptly available to the Security
Council and publicized more widely as appropriate.
"The Council expresses concern at problems encountered by the LNTG in
extending its authority outside the Monrovia area, and requests the
Secretary-General to explore, in consultation with ECOWAS, whether there
are any steps which might be taken to facilitate LNTG’s efforts in this
regard.
"The Council urges ECOWAS to continue its efforts to help the Liberian
parties make substantial progress towards a political settlement in the
country.
"The Council requests the Secretary-General to report on the situation
in Liberia by 2 September 1994 and to consider in that report whether the
meeting on disarmament has resulted in a realistic plan for disarmament and
whether implementation of such a plan has begun. The report should also
provide options for the size and mandate of UNOMIL that reflect the outcome
of the meeting and the progress in implementing the disarmament plan.
"The Council will remain actively seized of the matter."

-----
