S/2019/280

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 March 2019
Original: English

Conflict-related sexual violence
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2018, is
submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2106 (2013), in which the Council
requested me to report annually on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008),
1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010) and to recommend strategic actions.
2.
2019 marks the 10-year anniversary of the establishment of the mandate and
Office of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Over the past
decade, there has been a paradigm shift in the understanding of the scourge of
conflict-related sexual violence and its impact on international peace and security, the
response required to prevent such crimes and the multidime nsional services needed
by survivors. While the United Nations increasingly addresses the problem of sexual
violence in conflict from an operational or technical perspective through the
strengthening of security and justice institutions, it remains essenti al to recognize and
tackle gender inequality as the root cause and driver of sexual violence, including in
times of war and peace.
3.
Structural gender inequalities and discrimination are at the heart of the
differential impact conflict has on women, men, boys and girls. Preventing sexual
violence requires the advancement of substantive gender equality before, during and
after conflict, including by ensuring women’s full and effective participation in
political, economic and social life and ensuring accessible and responsive justice and
security institutions. The mandate of the Office of the Special Representative is firmly
rooted within the women and peace and security agenda, with its origin in Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is significant, therefore, that in 2018 my Special
Representative signed a framework of cooperation with the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women. The Framework affirms the ways in
which the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, the response to conflict-related sexual violence and the broader discourse on
women, peace and security and gender equality are linked.
4.
The term “conflict-related sexual violence” refers to rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced abortion, enforced sterilization, forced
marriage and any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity perpetrated
against women, men, girls or boys that is directly or indirectly linked to a conflict.
That link may be evident in the profile of the perpetrator, who is often affiliated with

19-04552 (E)

090419

*1904552*

S/2019/280

a State or non-State armed group, which includes terrorist entities; the profile of the
victim, who is frequently an actual or perceived member of a political, ethnic or
religious minority group or targeted on the basis of actual or perceived sexual
orientation or gender identity; the climate of impunity, which is generally associated
with State collapse, cross-border consequences such as displacement or trafficking,
and/or violations of a ceasefire agreement. The term also encompasses trafficking in
persons for the purpose of sexual violence or exploitation, when committed in
situations of conflict.
5.
While many countries are affected by the threat, occurrence or legacy of
conflict-related sexual violence, the present report is focused on 19 countries for
which credible and verifiable information is available. It should be read in
conjunction with my previous reports, which provide a cumulative basis for the listing
of 50 parties (see annex ). The majority of the listed parties are non -State actors, with
six of these having been designated as terrorist groups pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), the ISIL (Da’esh) and
Al-Qaida sanctions list. The national military and police forces that are listed are
required to engage with my Special Representative in order to develop specific, time bound commitments and action plans to address violations, as several have done since
2010. The cessation of violations and the effective imp lementation of commitments
are key factors in the consideration of the delisting of parties. States listed for grave
violations will be prohibited from participating in United Nations peace operations.
Non-State armed groups are also required to make specific commitments and
implement action plans in order to prevent sexual violence.
6.
The present report is based on information verified by the United Nations,
primarily through the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict related sexual violence established pursuant to Security Council resolution 1960
(2010). In that regard, the presence of women’s protection advisers, who are
responsible for convening the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence in the field, has significantly improved the
availability and quality of information. At the time of writing, 21 women ’s protection
advisers are deployed in seven United Nations peace operations. All peacekeeping
missions with mandates that include the protection of civilians have established the
monitoring arrangements for and incorporated early warning indicators of conflict related sexual violence into their broader protection structures. Two spe cial political
missions have also established such arrangements.
7.
Strengthening the capacity of national institutions is critical to ensuring
accountability for past crimes and for the prevention and deterrence of crimes in the
future. The Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, in
accordance with its mandate under Security Council resolution 1888 (2009),
continues to assist national authorities in strengthening the rul e of law with the aim
of ensuring criminal accountability for the perpetrators of conflict -related sexual
violence.
8.
The Team of Experts has conducted engagements in the Central African
Republic, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea,
Iraq, Liberia, Mali, Myanmar, Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan, in
follow-up to the high-level political engagement of the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. In 2018, the Team of Experts contributed to addressin g
impunity and supporting victims of conflict-related sexual violence, in conjunction
with or as a complement to United Nations system entities’ efforts, including through
the global focal point for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in
post-conflict and other crisis situations. For example, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the High Military Court upheld the life sentence of Frederic Batumike, a
local parliamentarian and militia leader who had been found guilty of crimes ag ainst
2/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

humanity for the rape of 39 children in Kavumu between 2013 and 2016, and the trial
against Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka for the alleged mass rape of 387 people in Walikale in
2010 has begun in Goma. In the Central African Republic, the specialized unit of
police and gendarmerie established to investigate sexual and gender-based violence
began an investigation into the case of a mass rape which occurred near Bossangoa
in February 2018. In Guinea, the Team of Experts is a member of the Steering
Committee, established by the Government, tasked with organizing trials concerning
the events of 28 September 2009, when at least 109 women and girls suffered sexual
violence, and for which 15 high-ranking individuals have been indicted. However,
despite some progress, impunity for the perpetrators of conflict-related sexual
violence continues to be the norm.
9.
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict, a network
comprising 13 United Nations system entities and chaired by my Special
Representative, aims to strengthen the prevention of and response to conflict-related
sexual violence through a coordinated and comprehensive approach. United Nations
Action currently supports 10 survivor-focused projects in Bangladesh, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
Mali, Myanmar and South Sudan. In 2018, two projects were funded through the
United Nations Action multi-partner trust fund: a project aimed at assisting survivors
in Bosnia and Herzegovina; and another which facilitated the deployment of two
experts to develop a comprehensive strategy on gender-based violence, including
conflict-related sexual violence, in Mali. The United Nations Action network also
supported two projects in Iraq, one focusing on providing legal aid to survivors and
the other on coordinating assistance for children, including those born of rape.
Furthermore, the network funded projects in Jordan and Lebanon, the main
beneficiaries of which were Syrian refugees, aimed at strengthening the p revention
of conflict-related sexual violence through improved access to justice and
engagement with community leaders. Throughout 2018, United Nations Action
continued to fund the Gender-based Violence Information Management System, an
inter-agency initiative that enables humanitarian actors to safely collect, store,
analyse and share data, which is also an important source of information for my
reports.
10. Recognizing that conflict-related sexual violence is distinct from incidents of
sexual exploitation and abuse that continue to occur in the complex environments
where the United Nations operates, I reiterate my commitment to improve the way
the Organization prevents and responds to such conduct by any United Nations
personnel. In my report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and abuse (A/73/744), I provided information on measures to strengthen the system wide response to sexual exploitation and abuse, including progress in the
implementation of the zero-tolerance policy and my “new approach” strategy.

II. Sexual violence as a tactic of war and terrorism: patterns,
trends and emerging concerns
11. It remains difficult to ascertain the exact prevalence of conflict -related sexual
violence owing to a range of challenges, including underreporting resulting from the
intimidation and stigmatization of survivors, as well as restrictions on access for
United Nations staff. The present analysis is necessarily limited to incidents verified
by the United Nations and cannot account for the vast number of unreported incidents
that happen across the world. Unfortunately, most survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence face daunting social and structural reporting barriers that prevent their c ases
from being counted, much less addressed. Despite such challenges, the issue demands
our urgent attention.
19-04552

3/35

S/2019/280

12. During the reporting period, non-State actors such as armed groups, local
militias and criminal elements were responsible for the majority o f incidents of sexual
violence, accounting for 37 of the parties listed in the annex to the present report.
State actors were also implicated in all country situations, with national armed forces,
police or other security entities being listed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic.
13. Trends analysis of incidents in 2018 confirms that sexual violence continues as
part of the broader strategy of conflict and that women and girls are s ignificantly
affected. It was used to displace communities, expel so -called “undesirable” groups
and to seize contested land and other resources. For instance, in South Sudan, allied
militias raped women and girls as part of a campaign to drive opponents o ut of
southern Unity State. Sexual violence was also used as a means of repression, terror
and control. In Tanganyika Province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
warring Twa and Luba militias violated women, girls and boys from each other ’s
ethnic communities. In the Syrian Arab Republic and Burundi, armed actors gang raped and sexually humiliated detainees perceived as political opponents. Sexual
violence was also used as a tactic of terrorism, as in Nigeria, where women and girls
were targeted for abduction and sexual abuse by extremist groups as part of their
financial calculus and self-perpetuation.
14. Incidents documented in 2018 confirm the nexus among sexual violence,
trafficking and terrorism. Radicalization and violent extremism have contribu ted to
the entrenchment of discriminatory gender norms that limit women ’s roles and their
enjoyment of basic rights, for example in north-eastern Nigeria and Mali. Sexual
violence has served strategic objectives of terrorism, including displacing
populations, gaining information through interrogations, advancing extremist
ideology and destabilizing social structures by terrorizing women and girls. Sexual
violence has also been a recurrent feature of recruitment by terrorist groups, who may
promise marriage and sexual slaves as forms of masculine domination and status to
young men. Sexual violence can play a vital role in the political economy of terrorism,
with physical and online slave markets and human trafficking enabling terrorist
groups to generate revenue from the continuous abduction of women and girls.
15. Conflict-related sexual violence, along with killing, pillaging and the illicit
exploitation of natural resources, continued to function as both a driver and a result
of forced displacement. Of the 68 million forcibly displaced people in the world at
present, a large number are found within the 19 countries examined. Many fled their
homes as a result of conflict-related atrocities, including sexual violence. Women and
girls, in particular, suffered sexual violence in the course of displacement, navigating
their way through checkpoints and across borders without documentation, money or
legal status. Others are at risk once they find themselves in refugee camps or camps
for internally displaced persons. Such vulnerabilities can lead to further sexual
exploitation, trafficking, rape and forced prostitution. Refugees and internally
displaced persons have reportedly suffered sexual violence at the hands of state
authorities, armed groups, smugglers, traffickers and others who control resources
and services in humanitarian contexts. In such settings, desperate parents sometimes
forced their young daughters into early marriage so as to reduce the risk of
exploitation by strangers or in order to gain access to resources for the rest of the
family. Deeply entrenched gender-based violence, such as intimate partner violence,
persists and can increase in displacement and resettlement contexts, primarily
affecting women and girls.
16. Sexual violence remains a consistent aspect of political or election-related
violence. It has long been used to intimidate and punish political opponents, their
family members and women human rights defenders, as witnessed over the years in
the context of contested political processes in Guinea, Kenya and Côte d’Ivoire. More
4/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

recently in Burundi, there were troubling reports of the rape and gang rape of women
and girls on account of political affiliation. The use of sexual violence as a form of
political intimidation has a negative impact on civic participation, particularly among
women.
17. The victims are not a homogenous group and their experiences of conflict and
specific needs in post-conflict contexts are diverse, hence the continued requirement
for distinct and survivor-centred responses. In Somalia and the Central African
Republic, women were targeted along with other family members because of the
actual or perceived affiliations of their husbands or sons. Along with girls of
reproductive age, women were strategically targeted with a view to controlling their
childbearing capacities, as a result of the role they play in reproduction and the
survival of the community. When a community is targeted by parties to armed conflict
for humiliation or destruction, women and their childbearing capacities are to be
either eliminated or controlled, from the perspective of the perpetrators. Women heads
of households or women migrating with children are particularly vulnerable to sexual
violence by authorities, armed groups, smugglers or trafficke rs, as was observed in
Iraq, Libya, Myanmar, Nigeria, Somalia and South Sudan.
18. A disturbing trend is that of sexual violence perpetrated against very young girls
and boys, such as in Afghanistan, Burundi, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan, Sri Lanka, the
Sudan (Darfur) and Yemen. Girls and boys can be targeted in order to terrorize their
communities, because of perceived affiliations of their parents or their perceived
utility or market value. Those vulnerabilities are compounded when children are
unaccompanied during migration or displaced with their families.
19. As in previous years, reports confirm that men and boys also suffered conflict related sexual violence. Incidents included rape, gang rape, forced nudity and other
forms of inhumane and degrading treatment. Violations against men were reported in
Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka and the Syrian Arab Republic, occurring primarily in villages and
detention facilities. Men and boys also face reporting barriers owing to the stigma
relating to perceived emasculation, as well as particular physical and psychological
consequences. There are often no legal provisions regarding the rape of men. Instead,
the criminalization of adult consensual same-sex conduct may impede reporting for
fear of prosecution, despite being a victim. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex (LGBTI) individuals who are survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
are negatively affected by such laws and risk penalties when reporting their
experiences.
20. Sexual violence results in multiple consequences for survivors and their
families, including unwanted pregnancies that may result from su ch violence.
Mothers of children born of wartime rape bear the burden of being ostracized by their
own community. In addition to economic difficulties, they are often stigmatized by
members of their family and community, who view them as “affiliates of the enemy”.
Survivors and their children often face high levels of stigma, and the children can be
at risk of abuse, abandonment and marginalization. Children born of wartime rape
constitute another vulnerable group, who are often labelled by communities as t he
“bad blood” of political, ethnic or religious enemies. These children are stigmatized
at birth and may suffer a lifetime of detrimental consequences. They may lack access
to community resources, family protection and education or livelihood activities.
They are often prime targets for recruitment by armed groups and terrorist
organizations. Aside from stigmatization and social exclusion, they may also face
routine but critical administrative challenges in registering their births, their legal
names or their rights to citizenship.

19-04552

5/35

S/2019/280

21. Survivors often require immediate, life-saving health care, including
comprehensive clinical management of rape to manage injuries, administer
medication to prevent sexually transmitted infections, including HIV, and to prev ent
unwanted pregnancies. Survivors may also require life -saving psychosocial support
to recover from the psychological and social impact of the violence. However, while
limited services for post-rape medical and psychosocial care may be available in some
urban centres, such services are typically less available in rural areas, and access to
medical and psychosocial support for survivors in acute humanitarian crises is
extremely limited. In periods of armed conflict, survivors often do not seek care as a
result of threats to their lives, stigma, community pressure or the lack of availability
or awareness about services. Stigma and discrimination relating to HIV often have
profound implications for HIV prevention, care and support.
22. Despite the increased attention of the international community to ending
impunity for sexual violence crimes, accountability remains elusive. The ability of
victims to gain access to the justice system is frequently hindered by reporting barriers
at both the individual and structural levels. Across most countries, victims express
reluctance to report their experiences owing to stigma, the fear of reprisal, rejection
by their families and communities, and their lack of confidence in judicial and
non-judicial responses. In conflict and post-conflict settings, stigmatization can mean
the loss of community protection, where retaliation comes at the hands of armed
actors, or where the already weak rule of law is further compromised by general
insecurity. Limited capacities for investigating conflict-related sexual violence,
paired with frequently deep-rooted gender biases against women and girls, can also
impede the effectiveness and sensitivity of investigative and judicial authorities.
23. In 2018, mixed progress was observed in terms of the investigation and
prosecution of conflict-related sexual violence. Notably, two important convictions
were upheld on appeal during the reporting period: in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the verdict in the Kavumu child rape case was affirme d; and in Guatemala,
the groundbreaking Sepur Zarco conviction for sexual and domestic slavery of Kekchi
women during the internal armed conflict was upheld by the Appellate Court, with no
possibility of appeal. However, that progress could be undermined b y Guatemala’s
bill No. 5377 aimed at reforming the Law on National Reconciliation, which
explicitly excluded serious crimes, including sexual violence, from amnesties. If
approved, military officers who had been convicted and sentenced would be released
from custody, seriously compromising victims’ rights and Guatemala’s progress in
addressing other cases of sexual violence.
24. In Guinea, 10 years after the crimes committed at the national stadium in
Conakry in 2009, which included at least 109 cases of sexual violence, the
Government of Guinea has announced the preparation of trials of 15 senior military
officials, including former President Moussa Dadis Camara. For the past 10 years, the
United Nations has been advocating accountability for these crimes, including
through the establishment of an International Commission of Inquiry mandated to
establish the facts and circumstances of the events of 28 September 2009 in Guinea,
the signature of a Joint Communiqué between the Government of Guinea and the
United Nations on fighting impunity for conflict-related sexual violence, and
continuous technical support by the Team of Experts to Guinean authorities. However,
the fact that the trials have not yet started is a matter of serious concern.
25. Given the strategic and systematic use of sexual violence by terrorist
organizations, it is of grave concern that no individuals from any such groups have
been convicted for crimes of sexual violence. In Iraq, despite thousands of detentions
and numerous prosecutions of members of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
on terrorism charges, none of those cases have included indictments for sexual crimes.
In Nigeria, trials are also proceeding, mainly under the Terrorism (Prevention)
6/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

(Amendment) Act, 2013, however, the trials do not take into consideration sexual
violence crimes. Similarly, in Mali, the prosecution of terrorist groups has not
included charges of sexual violence. The risk is that these heinous crimes will be left
out of the historical record altogether.
26. In the Central African Republic, there have been efforts to operationalize the
Special Criminal Court. However, the justice system has key capacity challenges in
addressing conflict-related sexual violence. The efficiency of initiatives such as the
creation of a joint rapid response unit to prevent sexual violence against women and
children (l’Unité mixte d’intervention rapide et de répression des violences sexuelles
faites aux femmes et aux enfants, see also paras. 37–39), as well as other efforts by
the Government will depend on the strengthening of the entire justice chain.
27. The International Criminal Court remains a forum for accountability for crimes
of conflict-related sexual violence in States that have ratified the Rome Statute or in
situations referred by the Security Council. Ongoing trials that include charges of
sexual violence are the Ongwen and Ntaganda cases. Non-judicial accountability
mechanisms established by the Security Council, the General Assembly and the
Human Rights Council, including on Iraq, Myanmar, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab
Republic and on the Kasais, are also mandated to specifically address conflict -related
sexual violence.
28. In the quest for accountability, survivors’ needs must be a primary consideration.
That means providing victims with access to justice as well as protection and support
before, during and after trial; putting in place measures to facilitate their participation
in truth-telling efforts; and ensuring they are given access to transformative
reparations. Aside from the enactment of victim and witness protection laws in some
settings or the creation of such specific units as the Victim and Witness Protection
Unit of the Special Criminal Court in the Central African Republic, reports indicate
little systemic or sustained improvement in this regard.
29. Progress related to reparations was mixed. In Colombia, efforts to provide
reparations to survivors of conflict-related sexual violence have been undertaken with
some success. However, despite such reparations being an obligation of States under
international law, instances where victims of conflict-related sexual violence have
received reparations for victims of conflict-related sexual violence remain an
exception, rather than the rule. As developed in the guidance note of the SecretaryGeneral on reparations for conflict-related sexual violence (2014), the United Nations
system must integrate reparations into the design of transitional justice and
accountability mechanisms. In order to ensure survivor-centred justice, Member
States should also consider how they can support reparations initiatives globally and
consider innovative ways of funding such mechanisms, including in conjunction with
the private sector.
30. Some important advances have been made around Security Council sanctions.
Stand-alone designation criteria on sexual violence were included in the sanctions
regimes for the Central African Republic, Libya, Somalia and South Sudan. Notably,
three individuals listed under the Libya sanctions regime were designated for
trafficking in persons, which is directly relevant to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2331 (2016), in which the nexus of sexual violence in conflict,
trafficking and violent extremism is articulated. In the case of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan,
seven of the eight individuals on the sanctions list in 2018 were designated for sexual
violence, among other crimes. In response to the Committee ’s focus on sexual
violence, the pro-Machar Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition took further
steps to implement the unilateral communiqué issued by its leader in 2014. At the
same time, the South Sudan People’s Defence Forces finalized an action plan to
19-04552

7/35

S/2019/280

prevent sexual violence. Such measures indicate that the strategic use of sanctions
can be an important tool to enforce compliance by parties to a conflict.

III. Sexual violence in conflict-affected settings
Afghanistan
31. Chronic instability, gender inequality, displacement, inadequate services, access
constraints and discriminatory practices fuelled the underreporting of conflict -related
sexual violence across Afghanistan. In 2018, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) documented 37 cases of sexual violence against women
and girls. Five rapes and one forced marriage were verified as having been committed
by parties to the conflict, including members of the Taliban and an unidentified illegal
armed group. In five of the six cases, the accused were prosecuted and convicted, as
a result of positive steps taken by the authorities. UNAMA also verified two cases of
sexual violence against boys by members of the Afghan National Police. One case
involved bacha bazi, by which young boys are “kept” by typically older powerful
men. Though bacha bazi is criminalized, prosecutions of cases involving the practice
are rare and the practice remains common.
32. The revised Penal Code, which entered into force in February 2018, includes
forms of conflict-related sexual violence as a war crime, crime against humanity and
constitutive act of genocide. In August, UNAMA organized a dialogue with the
Government, Afghan military and police forces, international military forces and the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission to develop strategies for
combating impunity for sexual violence. Following the launch in May 2018 by
UNAMA of a report, entitled “Injustice and Impunity: Mediation of Criminal
Offences of Violence against Women”, the Ministry of Women’s Affairs established
a technical committee to review the Elimination of Violence against Women Law of
2009 (see A/73/624-S/2018/1092) and align its “rape” definition with that of the Penal
Code of 2018.
33. Unfortunately, the national police demonstrated limited capacity to address
sexual crimes in 2018, partly as a result of low numbers of female officers (at present,
1.8 per cent of the force). The delay in finalizing and operationalizing the sexual
harassment complaint mechanism for policewomen also contributes to underreporting
of sexual violence incidents. During the reporting period, UNAMA convened several
meetings with relevant Government departments to advocate the finalization of the
sexual harassment complaint mechanism.
Recommendation
34. I commend the efforts of the authorities in prosecuting cases of sexual violence
and urge that such efforts are strengthened. Further, I am encouraged by efforts to
review the Elimination of Violence against Women Law of 2009. I urge the
Government to meet its obligation to protect victims from all forms of sexual violence
and ensure that perpetrators are held accountable. I encourage the authorities to
promote women’s active and equal political, social and economic participation and to
put an end to the stigmatization of victims by promoting substantive equality and
enacting laws and policies that prohibit discrimination against women. I further call
upon the Government to ensure the full investigation and prosecution of all reported
cases of bacha bazi, including those perpetrated by the Afghan National Police and
the military.

8/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

Central African Republic
35. Armed groups have consistently, and with flagrant impunity, used sexual
violence as a tactic of war in the Central African Republic. In 2018, the south -east
region witnessed cycles of violence between anti-Balaka and Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique. Systematic attacks on civilians resulted in mass displacement. In that
region, where farming is the primary source of income, displacement from their land
meant that 75 per cent of the population lost their means of livelihood. Most of the
women and girls who were raped by elements belonging to parties to the conflict were
intercepted on their way to farms or while fleeing to safety.
36. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic (MINUSCA) documented 179 incidents of conflict-related
sexual violence, affecting 259 victims (144 women, 78 girls, 1 man, 1 boy and 35
females of unknown age). The incidents included 239 cases of rape or attempted rape,
14 forced marriages, one case of sexual slavery, and five other forms of sexual
violence. 101 cases were attributed to ex-Séléka groups, 62 to Fulanis who may have
been affiliated with the ex-Séléka, 45 to the anti-Balaka, 2 to the Lord’s Resistance
Army, 5 to Retour, réclamation et rehabilitation-Abbas Sidiki, 7 to Bangui-based
armed gangs, 2 to Révolution et justice, 27 to unidentified perpetrators and 5 to other
perpetrators. A total of 3 cases were attributed to the Armed Forces of the Central
African Republic. Almost 70 per cent of the crimes were committed by more than one
perpetrator. MINUSCA verified the use by armed groups of 10 girls, whose ages
ranged from 11 to 17 years old, as wives. The cases were attributed to anti -Balaka
(5), ex-Séléka factions (3) and Lord’s Resistance Army (2). The Panel of Experts on
the Central African Republic, in its report for 2018 (S/2018/1119), noted that conflictrelated sexual violence is largely underreported, mainly owing to victims ’ fear of
retaliation. The Panel further noted a high percentage of reported cases occurring in
rural areas, where victims are often assaulted by multiple armed aggressors.
37. In 2018, hundreds of persons reported sexual violence crimes to the joint rapid
response unit to prevent sexual violence against women and children (see also
para. 26). Among those individuals, the unit registered 33 victims of conflict -related
sexual violence, including 27 women, 4 girls and 2 men. Furthermore, in November
2018, the unit undertook its first field investigation outside of Bangui, supported by
United Nations police and the Internal Security Forces of Bossangoa, to investigate
allegations of a mass rape allegedly committed by armed Fulani groups in Nana Bakassa sub-prefecture. Despite the progress made by the unit in increasing survivors’
trust in the criminal justice system, the Government was not able to guarantee the
unit’s sustainability in its national budget. Moreover, the Panel of Experts found that
of the 320 cases of sexual violence that were submitted by the unit to the Bangui
Criminal Court, few had resulted in trials.
38. The Mission and the United Nations country team worked closely with the
special prosecutor and investigating judges of the Special Criminal Court to develo p
the investigation and prosecutorial strategy for cases of sexual violence and to
advocate their prioritization. The Victim and Witness Protection Unit of the Special
Criminal Court, which is currently being established, is essential to such cases.
MINUSCA also provided technical support for the establishment of a digital database,
which will be instrumental in following up on cases from their registration by the unit
until the end of judicial proceedings. Through United Nations support for national
partners, 83 community-based protection committees, with a total of 220 members,
and 109 protection networks were established. Several women received training on
case management concepts to ensure psychosocial care for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence and to facilitate referrals to relevant service providers. As a
result of those community-based engagements, 80 per cent of victims of sexual

19-04552

9/35

S/2019/280

violence who reported their cases to the United Nations and its partners were able to
gain access to clinical and psychosocial care.
Recommendation
39. I urge the Government to ensure the prosecution of all cases of conflict -related
sexual violence in accordance with international standards, to finalize the
appointment of staff to the joint rapid response unit to prevent sexual violence against
women and children, and to explore ways to ensure the sustainability of the unit. I
further urge the special prosecutor and investigating judges of the Special Criminal
Court to consider prioritizing crimes of sexual violence.
Colombia
40. After more than five decades of conflict, the Government of Colombia and the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia–People’s Army) (FARC–EP) signed the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace ( S/2017/272,
annex II) in 2016. As noted in my previous report (S/2018/250), the Agreement
included 100 provisions on gender equality and women’s human rights, several of
which address conflict-related sexual violence, although the implementation of those
provisions has been limited. Research indicates that only 4 per cent of those gender
provisions had been implemented by mid-2018. The implementation of the gender
provisions was limited in former conflict areas, where insecurity has increased. In my
report to the Security Council on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, in December 2018 (S/2018/1159), I expressed particular concern about the
continued attacks against Colombian social leaders and human rights defenders in
some of those areas. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights reported that amid a total of 454 cases reported, 163 killings of social leaders
and human rights defenders, many of them women, had been verified by the end of
2018. Further efforts are required to strengthen security guarantees f or women human
rights defenders and LGBTI leaders, increase gender-responsive reintegration
processes and ensure women’s participation in the comprehensive rural reform, as
well as their participation in the design of the implementation of the Agreement.
41. Despite the overall reduction in violence associated with armed conflict,
including in the number of incidents of sexual violence, the persistence of violence
in several areas is of concern. In 2018, the National Victims Unit registered 97,916
victims of the armed conflict, of whom 254 were victims of sexual violence. Among
those were 232 female victims, including 18 girls (ranging from 0 to 17 years of age),
214 women (209 women ranging from 18 to 60 years of age; and 5 women ranging
from 61 and 100 years of age); 14 men; 3 LGBTI persons; 5 unknown. Furthermore,
two cases of sexual violence against girls were documented (one against an
indigenous girl), which were reportedly perpetrated by a dissident group of FARC –
EP and a post-demobilization armed group.
42. Access to justice and health care for victims of sexual violence continued to be
a challenge, in particular for women and LGBTI persons and in rural areas, where
many indigenous communities and ethnic minorities reside. Remarkably, the Office
of the Ombudsperson assisted 176 victims of conflict-related sexual violence. With
United Nations support, the Ministry of the Interior approved a policy for LGBTI
persons, including services for victims of armed conflict and a humanitarian protocol
regarding access to health care for transgender victims.
43. An important and positive development in relation to the Agreement was the
creation of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition. The United Nations supported the gender-sensitive selection of the
10/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

members of the Comprehensive System, as well as of members of the gender specialized group of the Commission on Truth, Coexistence and Non -Repetition and
members of the Gender Commission of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. The special
body, comprising women representatives, for monitoring the gender approach in the
implementation of the Agreement continues to communicate with public institutions
and women’s networks.
Recommendation
44. I urge the Government of Colombia to expedite the full implementation of all
action plans to address violence in former conflict areas, in particular those plans
related to assisting victims of sexual violence and to ensuring their access to
reparations. I urge the Government to prioritize the investigation and prosecution of
cases of conflict-related sexual violence and to allocate adequate resources to improve
institutional capacity. I further urge the Government to implement protection
measures for victims of sexual violence.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
45. In 2018, the intensified activity by non-State armed actors, as well as the
military operations in response thereto, contributed to an increase in the number of
documented cases of conflict-related sexual violence. Non-State armed groups, using
sexual violence to enforce control over illicit economic activities, including the
exploitation of natural resources, were responsible for most cases.
46. In 2018, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) documented 1,049 cases of conflict related sexual violence against 605 women, 436 girls, 4 men and 4 boys. Most of the
cases (741) were attributed to armed groups, while 308 were attributed to the Armed
Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Congolese National Police.
In most incidents, women and girls were targeted while walking to school or
collecting firewood or water. A quarter of the cases attributed to the Congolese police
were committed while victims were detained in temporary holding cells.
47. The majority of verified incidents involving armed groups occurred in North
and South Kivu Provinces and included rape, gang rape and sexual slavery. Since
February, members of the Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki armed group have committed
mass rapes in South Kivu’s Shabunda, Walungu and Mwenga territories. In April,
during at least four attacks in mineral-rich Shabunda, Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki
members raped and gang-raped at least 66 women, 11 girls and 2 men. Those acts
included penetration and intrusive cavity searches, in an alleged search for gold. In
North Kivu, the dissident wing of Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et
souverain-Rénové, led by “General” Mapenzi Bulere Likuwe, and Nduma défence du
Congo-Rénové, led by “General” Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, committed rape as part
of systematic attacks against civilians in Masisi and Lubero. In Beni, the Allied
Democratic Forces abused civilians, including through the abduction of children and
women. In Ituri, Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri continued to perpetrate
sexual violence, despite ongoing peace negotiations.
48. The Mission supported the implementation of the Armed Forces’ action plan
against sexual violence, including through joint MONUSCO -Armed Forces-national
police provincial Comités de suivi and the training of commanders and security
officers on the prevention of sexual violence. The Mission engaged with non -State
actors on the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence. In March 2018, with
MONUSCO support, the national police developed an action plan against sexual
violence, which awaits signature by the Minister of the Interior. With United Nations
support, Ntabo Ntaberi Sheka (sanctioned by the Security Council Committee
19-04552

11/35

S/2019/280

established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in November 2011) and Serafin Lionso are being tried in military courts
for mass rapes committed in Walikale province in 2010. In addition, the verdict in the
Kavumu child rape case was upheld on appeal. However, despite his conviction in
November for acts of rape constituting crimes against humanity, Lieutenant Colonel
Mabiala Ngoma is still at large. Moreover, victims have not yet received the
reparations awarded by the military court.
Recommendation
49. I urge the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen
the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence by increasing security and State
presence in areas where communities are involved in mining activities. I call for the
armed and security forces to be adequately vetted and trained, and for a policy of zero
tolerance of conflict-related sexual violence to be upheld by bringing offenders to
justice, irrespective of rank, and ensuring that victims are protected and receive
adequate reparations.
Iraq
50. During 2018, women and girls held in sexual slavery continued to be released
from ISIL control. The Kurdistan Regional Government estimates that there are 3,083
Yazidis missing, including 1,427 women and girls. This does not include missing
women and girls from other ethnic groups targeted by ISIL, including Turkmen Shia.
In camps for internally displaced persons, women and children with perceiv ed
affiliation to ISIL or originating from areas that were previously under ISIL control
suffer sexual exploitation, restricted movement and a lack of access to services and
civil documentation. Such factors, coupled with economic hardship, compound their
risk of stigma and further sexual exploitation. Sexual violence remains underreported
owing to fear of reprisal, security concerns and mistrust of the legal system.
51. In March 2018, my Special Representative visited Iraq and, with the
Government, launched an implementation plan for the 2016 joint communiqué on
prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. The plan supports
legislative and policy reforms to: (a) strengthen protection from and response to
crimes of sexual violence; (b) facilitate documentation for and the return and
reintegration of internally displaced persons; (c) ensure accountability; (d) provide
services, livelihood support and reparations for survivors and children born of rape;
and (e) engage tribal and religious leaders in the prevention of sexual violence and in
facilitating the return and reintegration of survivors. A further goal is to ensure the
full consideration of sexual violence by the Iraqi Counter-Terrorism and National
Security Advisory Commission, including by enhancing the role of women in counterterrorism efforts. The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq assisted in drafting
the terms of reference for an interministerial technical group to oversee the
implementation of the joint communiqué.
52. Despite such progress, attention urgently needs to be focused on ensuring
criminal accountability and providing assistance to victims, as well as on the
consideration of conflict-related sexual violence and the role of women in counterterrorism efforts. In 2018, the Special Adviser of the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da ’esh/ISIL was
appointed with a mandate, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379 (2017), to
collect, preserve and store evidence of ISIL war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, which include acts of sexual violence. To date, ISIL members have only
been prosecuted on terrorism charges, but not for crimes of sexual viol ence. My
Special Representative, primarily through the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, is supporting the Government ’s efforts to prosecute
12/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

“pilot cases” of crimes of sexual violence crimes perpetrated by ISIL. In additio n, the
Iraqi Government launched a special administrative process, managed through mobile
teams, as part of a pilot project to facilitate the registration of children born of rape.
Recommendation
53. I call upon the Government of Iraq to comprehensively address the needs of
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, including by upholding the rights of
families with actual or imputed ISIL affiliations and ensuring their freedom of
movement, access to civil documentation and access to basic services. I further urge
the provision of reparations to those affected and an end to impunity through the
prosecution of ISIL perpetrators for crimes of sexual violence. I call upon the
Government to prosecute cases of sexual violence in accordance with its
commitments under the joint communiqué and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Libya
54. The climate of insecurity, political divisions, sporadic armed conflict,
challenges to the rule of law and control exercised by armed groups over large parts
of Libya restricted the monitoring of and reporting on conflict -related sexual
violence. Incidents are severely underreported as a result of fear, intimidation and
stigma related to underlying discriminatory gender norms.
55. Migrant women and girls are particularly vulnerable to rape and other forms of
conflict-related sexual violence. Many are exposed to forced prostitution and sexual
exploitation in conditions amounting to sexual slavery. Many Nigerian women and
girls are particularly vulnerable to trafficking by armed groups and/or multinational
criminal networks, reporting that they were detained in “connection houses” in Tripoli
and in Sabha and subjected to sexual abuse by uniformed armed men (see S/2018/812
and S/2018/812/Corr.1). Since Libya lacks anti-trafficking legislation or systems to
identify and protect survivors, these women and girls fear prosecution and do not
report their experiences to Libyan authorities.
56. In 2018, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya documented accounts by
migrant women and girls who were victims or witnesses of sexual abuse by
smugglers, traffickers and members of armed groups, as well as by Ministry of
Interior officials, during their journey through Libya and in migrant detention centres.
Survivors described being taken away by armed men and repeatedly raped by multiple
perpetrators. Many reported being raped in front of their children and other witnesses.
In September 2018, while in the Niger, my Special Representative met with migrant
and refugee women, men and children who had been subjected to sexual violence
while being trafficked in Libya. They had experienced sexual violence in detention,
been “sold” multiple times, and some had children as a result of rape. Many could not
return to their countries for fear of stigmatization and rejection upon return.
57. The unknown fate of 17 women and girls who suffered sexual violence at the
Surman detention centre remained a concern during the reporting period. In October
2017, the head of the Department for Combating Illegal Migration Surman detention
centre, Mamduh Miloud Daw, refused to transfer the 17 women and girls to protection
agencies. Survivors and witnesses had identified Mr. Daw and another guard at the
Surman detention centre, known as “Rasta”, as perpetrators. Mr. Daw also reportedly
allowed other staff of the Surman detention centre to sexually abuse women in his
custody.
58. On 7 June 2018, the Security Council imposed sanctions on six individuals
involved in the trafficking and smuggling of migrants, including the head of the
Shuhada al-Nasr brigade in Zawiya, Mohammed Kashlaf, who controls the Nasr
detention centre for migrants. Despite an order for its closure in April, the Nasr
19-04552

13/35

S/2019/280

detention centre remained operational throughout 2018. The Security Council adopted
resolution 2441 (2018) in November, in which it explicitly included sexual violence
as a stand-alone criterion for sanctions designations.
Recommendation
59. I call upon the Libyan authorities to ensure that all allegations of sexual violence
are investigated and prosecuted, and that survivors are provided with protection,
reparations and holistic health and psychosocial services. I encourage Libyan
authorities to facilitate the release of all those held arbitrarily and without a legal
basis, in particular survivors of trafficking, torture and rape, and to introduce
measures to protect female detainees from sexual and gender-based violence and
sexual exploitation. I urge the Government to adopt anti-trafficking legislation in
accordance with international law, and to address the nexus of conflict -related sexual
violence and trafficking in accordance with Security Council resolution 2331 (2016).
I further call upon the authorities to cooperate with the International Criminal Court
in its investigation of conflict-related sexual violence.
Mali
60. In 2018, conflict-related sexual violence remained underreported owing to high
levels of insecurity, the unwillingness or failure to investigate and prosecute cases,
and the stigmatization of survivors. The United Nations Multidimensio nal Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali verified cases committed by non -State armed groups in
Ménaka, Mopti, Kidal, Timbuktu and Gao Regions. Of 22 reported incidents (2 rapes
and 20 gang rapes), 12 occurred in Gao, 5 in Mopti, 4 in Timbuktu and 1 in Ménaka.
The survivors included 13 women and 9 girls. It was verified that 17 incidents were
perpetrated by unidentified armed men, 4 by Front de libération des régions du Nord
elements and 1 by a Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés
element. In respect of sexual violence perpetrated in the context of terrorism,
4 women were abducted from Dialoubé and raped by the Front de libération du
Macina elements; 2 women were reportedly raped by 2 unidentified armed men in
Ansongo cercle, Gao Region; 4 young women were raped on their way to the local
market by 3 unidentified armed men, and a 14-year-old girl was raped by an element
of Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés based in the locality of
Ansongo. To date, no investigation has been opened by the gendarmerie of Ansongo
regarding any of those cases.
61. A further 116 cases of conflict-related sexual violence were reported, 92 of
which were attributed to unidentified armed elements and 24 to the Malian Defence
and Security Forces. Of the 116 cases of rape, 16 resulted in pregnancy, including in
the cases of 6 victims who were under the age of 18. Despite consistent reports since
2014 of cases of conflict-related sexual violence being perpetrated by armed groups
as well as some cases attributed to the Malian Defence and Security Forces, there
have been no prosecutions.
62. The fact that the perpetrators of the crimes of sexual violence committed during
the 2012–2013 crisis have yet to be held to account remains a concern. While a
coalition of six non-governmental organizations filed two collective complaints on
behalf of 115 victims of sexual violence five years ago, those cases have been pending
ever since.
63. The Mission supported designated focal points of the Coordination de s
mouvements de l’Azawad in preparing an implementation plan on conflict-related
sexual violence with five priorities, covering prevention, protection, accountability,
capacity-building and communication. The one-stop centre in Bamako, launched in
June, provides medical, psychosocial, protection and legal services to survivors.

14/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

64. The Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) concerning Mali visited the country in March and December. The Chair
expressed concerns about grave human rights violations, including conflict -related
sexual violence, following his meetings with women’s groups and signatories to the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. In their reports, the Panel of Experts
on Mali also noted sexual violence among the violations being consistently
perpetrated by parties to the conflict.
Recommendation
65. I welcome the joint communiqué signed by the Government of Mali and the
United Nations in March 2019 to allow for a more focused response to conflict -related
sexual violence. I urge the Government to implement the national strategy adopted in
October 2018 and expedite the enactment of the draft law on preventing, repressing
and responding to gender-based violence. I further urge the Government to ensure the
timely investigation and prosecution of cases of conflict -related sexual violence, in
particular the 115 cases pending before commune III in Bamako.
Myanmar
66. Following direct engagement with survivors, witnesses, caseworkers and
service providers in April 2018, my Special Representative expressed serious concern
about a pattern of widespread atrocities, including sexual violence against Rohingya
women and girls. The forms of sexual violence consistently recounted by survivors
include rape, gang rape by multiple government soldiers, forced public nudity and
humiliation, and sexual slavery in military captivity. These acts occurred in the
context of collective persecution, the burning of villages and the torture, mutilation
and killing of civilians. There are indications that the threat and use of sexual violence
was a driver and “push factor” for forced displacement on a massive scale in and out
of the northern part of Rakhine State. These observations, together with information
that has been verified by the United Nations regarding sexual violence committed as
part of military “clearance” operations in October 2016 and August 2017, indicate a
wider pattern of ethnically and religiously motivated violence.
67. In 2018, the United Nations documented the rape of an 8 -year old girl by the
Myanmar Armed Forces (Tatmadaw Kyi) in the south-east of Myanmar. In September
2018, the independent international fact-finding mission on Myanmar, established by
the Human Rights Council through its resolution 34/22, documented mass killings,
rape and sexual violence by Tatmadaw soldiers during 2017 “clearance operations”
in Rakhine State, as well as credible accounts of sexual violence and torture in Kachin
and Shan States (see A/HRC/39/64). The Fact-finding mission also documented cases
of sexualized torture in detention which were perpetrated by the Tatmadaw Kyi.
68. In September 2018, in its resolution 39/2, the Human Rights Council established
the Independent Investigative Mechanism for Myanmar to consolidate, preserve and
analyse evidence of serious international crimes committed in Myanmar since 2011
and to prepare files for criminal proceedings. In 2018, the Government of Myanmar
also established an independent commission of inquiry. In December 2018, my
Special Representative signed a joint communiqué with the Government of Myanmar
on conflict-related sexual violence. In accordance with Security Council resolution
2106 (2013), the communiqué requires concrete actions by the Myanmar Armed
Forces such as the issuance of clear orders prohibiting sexual violence and ensuring
accountability for violations, as well as timely investigation of all alleged abuses. My
Special Representative undertook a second visit to Myanmar in February 2019 to
facilitate the preparation of an action plan to implement the commitments as
expressed in the joint communiqué.

19-04552

15/35

S/2019/280

69. In 2018, an additional 15,000 Rohingya refugees fled Myanmar ’s Rakhine State
seeking safety in Bangladesh. In the central part of Rakhine State, 78 per cent of the
128,000 displaced people are women and girls. In Kachin and Shan States, an
additional 43,000 people have been forcibly displaced since January 2018, as a result
of fighting. Access restrictions have severely hampered the delivery of legal, medical
and psychosocial services to these areas.
70. During her visit to Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh, in May 2018, my Special
Representative noted the extreme vulnerability of displaced persons from Myanmar.
The vulnerability of women and girls is compounded by their lack of livelihood
opportunities and rooted in unequal gender norms, which has expos ed them to high
risks of trafficking and sexual exploitation. Negative coping mechanisms such as
child marriage and the confinement of adolescent girls at home have also increased.
My Special Representative signed a framework of cooperation with Bangladesh in
October 2018 to support the authorities in addressing these concerns.
Recommendation
71. I welcome the signing, in December 2018, of a joint communiqué between the
Government of Myanmar and the United Nations to prevent and address conflict related sexual violence. I call for its full and swift implementation in close
coordination with my Special Representative and the United Nations country team in
Myanmar, including the commitments regarding accountability for conflict -related
sexual violence allegedly perpetrated by the Myanmar Armed Forces and border
guards. I further call on the Government to ensure that the draft law on the prevention
of violence against women fully complies with international standards and call for its
immediate adoption. I urge the Government of Myanmar to provide national and
international humanitarian agencies with access to all conflict -affected areas,
including to provide services to survivors of sexual violence.
Somalia
72. Persistent insecurity, gender inequality, the lack of protection by state
authorities and the recurring humanitarian crises in Somalia continue to expose
civilians to heightened risks of sexual violence. Women and girls are particularly
targeted, although cases against boys have also been documented. The fragile justice
system, ongoing security concerns and limited access to areas controlled by
Al-Shabaab place women and girls in a state of acute vulnerability.
73. Dominant patterns include the abduction of women and girls for forced marriage
and rape, perpetrated primarily by non-State armed groups, and incidents of rape and
gang rape committed by state agents, militias associated with clans and unidentified
armed men. Cases of abduction for the forced marriage and rape of 34 girls were
attributed to members of Al-Shabaab. Internally displaced women and girls from
marginalized groups are at particularly high risk.
74. In 2018, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) verified
cases of conflict-related sexual violence against 20 women, 250 girls and 1 boy. The
cases were attributed to unknown armed actors (83), Al-Shabaab (34) and clan militia
(33), as well as state regional forces, namely Jubaland Armed Forces (26), Galmudug
Armed Forces (9), Puntland Armed Forces (2), Southwest State Armed Forces (9) and
Liyu Police (6). The United Nations also verified cases of the rape and gang rape of
48 individuals: 3 women, 44 girls and 1 boy by members of the Somali National Army,
as well as incidents against 5 women and 12 girls by officers of the Somali Police
Force.
75. Impunity for the perpetrators of crimes of sexual violence continues to be a
concern. Mistrust of the criminal justice system, gender biases of police officers, the
16/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

lack of financial resources and the victims’ lack of knowledge of their rights impede
their access to justice. On 30 May, the Federal Council of Ministers adopted the
Sexual Offences bill. If enacted, the bill will create a robust and survivor -responsive
legal framework. Rape would no longer be classified as a “crime against morality”.
The bill addresses sexual exploitation, sexual slavery, sex trafficking, forced
marriage, sexual abduction, kidnapping for sex or sexual slavery purposes, and sexual
slavery of an adult person.
76. In an effort to address a critical gap in support for female defec tors from
Al-Shabaab under the National Programme for the Treatment and Handling of
Disengaged Combatants, and in line with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
UNSOM continues to support the Government in implementing a project aimed at
empowering women affected by violent extremism, recognizing their vital role in
preventing and countering such violence. The project will provide rehabilitation and
reintegration support to 150 women defectors and their dependents in Mogadishu,
Jubaland State and South West State.
Recommendation
77. I urge the Government to enact the Sexual Offences bill to strengthen the legal
framework, enable prosecutions and end impunity for sexual violence. I also urge t he
implementation of the National Action Plan on Ending Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the extension of activities to federal member states to support their fight against
sexual violence and the provision of all necessary legal and psychosocial support to
survivors. I further urge the Government to immediately develop transparent legal
processes and enforcement mechanisms to investigate and prosecute sexual violence
perpetrated by soldiers and their commanders.
South Sudan
78. In 2018, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) recorded an
alarming increase in the number of incidents and victims of conflict -related sexual
violence. UNMISS documented 238 incidents, involving 1,291 victims, the majority
being women and girls, with 10 male victims. Of the total number, 153 were children.
The most common violation was abduction for the purposes of sexual slavery,
followed by rape and gang rape. Other violations included attempted rape, forced
marriage and forced abortion. The incidents were attributed to the following
perpetrators: South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (84); pro-Riek Machar Sudan
People’s Liberation Army in Opposition (92); pro-Taban Deng Sudan People’s
Liberation Army in Opposition (11); South Sudan National Liberation Movement (1);
National Security Services (2); South Sudan National Police Service (2); Lou Nuer
militia (1) and unidentified gunmen (25). The Mission notes, however, that sexual
violence is likely underreported owing to the shift of the conflict to more remote and
hard-to-reach areas. Furthermore, stigma, the fear of reprisals, the lack of services
and the criminalization of same-sex conduct likely inhibited reporting. The
Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan, established by the Human Rights
Council, concludes that continuing violence and human rights violations, including
rape and sexual violence, may amount to war crimes (see A/HRC/40/69). The
Commission notes that the situation has markedly worsened since 2017, with
documented cases showing a surge in rapes between November and December 2018,
particularly in Northern Liech State.
79. The first two quarters of 2018 saw repeated violations of the ceasefire
agreement, part of the Khartoum Declaration of Agreement betwe en Parties of the
Conflict of South Sudan. Major clashes in Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Central and
Western Equatoria and Unity States featured rampant human rights violations,
including the systematic use of rape, gang rape and abductions for sexual slavery, to
19-04552

17/35

S/2019/280

terrorize, punish and displace civilians. Civilians continued to flee their villages,
fearing atrocities including sexual violence, mainly during clashes between the South
Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the pro-Riek Machar Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition in southern Unity and Western Equatoria. The allied forces of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces, pro-Taban Deng Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition and youth militias abducted and raped women and girls, forcing
many to flee their villages in southern Unity. In Western Equatoria, the pro -Riek
Machar Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition also abducted women and
girls for the purpose of rape and sexual slavery.
80. In July 2018, my Special Representative visited Juba and Malakal and met
survivors and witnesses who continue to live in situations of acute vulnerability. Their
horrific testimonies of sexual violence were consistent with the report released on
10 July 2018 by UNMISS and the Office of the High Commissioner fo r Human
Rights, describing indiscriminate attacks against civilians in southern Unity State and
finding that at least 120 women and girls as young as 4 were raped and gang -raped.
In addition, the report documented the abduction of 132 women and girls for s exual
slavery. In the interim report of the Panel of Experts of November 2018
(S/2018/1049), the Panel specifically refers to command responsibility for alleged
violations in Unity.
81. In September, a special military court, established to try cases involving the rape
of humanitarian workers at Terrain Hotel, convicted 10 rank and file soldiers of the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and sentenced them to between 10 and 14
years’ imprisonment for committing sexual crimes. Unfortunately, the verdict was
limited to low-ranking soldiers, with senior officers having largely evaded liability,
and was achieved only after intense international pressure for accountability.
82. In December, during the proceedings of mobile courts in Bentiu, three men
accused of rape identified themselves as soldiers of the South Sudan People ’s Defence
Forces. All were convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for 6 to 12 years, which
represents important progress. The Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan calls for the creation of a Hybrid Court to try serious
international crimes, including sexual violence, but there has been insufficient
progress on the creation of this court.
Recommendation
83. I urge the Government of South Sudan to rigorously and expeditiously
investigate all incidents of sexual violence and hold perpetrators accountable,
regardless of rank. I further urge the Government to establish the Hybrid Court
without delay, to provide comprehensive services to survivors, to extend services into
remote locations and to grant full access to humanitarian organizations assisting
victims and displaced civilians. Considering the scale and consequences of these
violations, I also urge the Government to ensure that conflict-related sexual violence
is addressed as a central aspect of the Revitalized Agreement of 2018 and in
accordance with the joint communiqué signed in 2014, including by ensuring that
crimes of sexual violence are not amnestied and that victims receive reparations and
livelihood support.
The Sudan (Darfur)
84. The overall security situation in Darfur continued to improve with the
Government of the Sudan taking several important measures, such as weapons
collection campaigns, the repatriation of refugees and the allocation of land for
returnees, the reintegration of internally displaced persons in host communities, the
demarcation of migratory routes and the provision of water points for grazing animals.
18/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

85. Nonetheless, conflict-related sexual violence remains a concern as a result of
some ongoing clashes among armed groups and the renewal of conflict in parts of
Jebel Marra between Government forces and the Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan
Liberation Army. The proliferation of weapons, criminality and sporadic
intercommunal clashes render civilians, particularly women and girls, vulnerable.
Sexual violence displaces civilians from their homes and prevents their return, which
implies losing access to land and is a devastating o utcome for most internally
displaced persons, who once earned an income from farming. One specific pattern of
sexual violence concerned women and girls in rural communities or in camps for
internally displaced persons, who were routinely preyed upon while travelling or
engaged in livelihood activities outside camps.
86. In 2018, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
documented 122 incidents of sexual violence involving 199 victims: 85 women,
105 girls and 9 boys in Central, South, North and West Darfur States. Rape constituted
80 per cent of reported incidents; 80 per cent of the perpetrators of sexual violence
were described as armed and 31 per cent of cases were attributed to members of the
security forces. However, cases of sexual violence are likely underreported owing to
fear of reprisal and restricted access to conflict areas, to victims and to the sites of
incidents.
87. Witnesses described the perpetrators as men in unspecified military uniforms,
armed men in civilian clothes and members of specific armed groups, including Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction in the Jebel Marra (see S/2019/34).
Government security forces, including the Sudanese Armed Forces, Rapid Support
Forces and Sudan Police, were also identified. One incident in Jebel Marra involved
37 internally displaced women, who were sexually assaulted while they were
returning from livelihood activities in Thur, Central Darfur. The alleged perpetrators
were members of the Rapid Support Forces and the Sudanese Armed Forces and other
unidentified armed elements.
88. Notably, the Armed Forces Act of 2007 criminalizes sexual violence that may
occur during military operations; the implementation thereof is critical for th e
deterrence and prevention of such crimes. The Government has also established some
specialized police structures and deployed judges, including to Darfur States, in order
to enhance the investigation and prosecution of crimes of sexual violence.
Unfortunately, there have been few prosecutions of such crimes.
89. At the invitation of the Government, my Special Representative visited the
Sudan in February 2018 to establish a dialogue with national authorities towards a
framework of cooperation to address concerns regarding conflict-related sexual
violence.
Recommendation
90. I urge the Government to adopt a framework of cooperation with the United
Nations and to work with my Special Representative and relevant United Nations
system entities to develop an implementation plan in line with Security Council
resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2429 (2018). I encourage the authorities to enhance
existing accountability mechanisms and cooperate with the United Nations so as to
facilitate access throughout Darfur for service provision, humanitarian assistance and
monitoring.
Syrian Arab Republic
91. As a result of ongoing insecurity, obtaining reliable data on conflict-related
sexual violence in the Syrian Arab Republic is challenging. Nevertheless, credible

19-04552

19/35

S/2019/280

information in 2018 confirmed that sexual violence, particularly early and/or forced
marriage, continues to affect women and girls in the Syrian Arab Republic.
92. The fear of sexual violence, particularly in the context of abduction or detention,
is a significant concern raised by women, girls, men and boys. Conditions in camps
for internally displaced persons pose a high risk, in particular for women and girls,
who also face the risk of abduction. According to the report of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, the use of sexual
violence during arrest (of women and/or girls residing in the home of the ta rgeted
male), during detention (males and females) and at checkpoints is routine. In 2018,
the Commission also received allegations of members of extremist groups imposing
“medieval forms of punishment” on men accused of homosexuality. The United
Nations received reports of sexual violence allegedly perpetrated by Government
forces and their allied militias against both women and men during arrest, detention
and at checkpoints. In several areas of the country, early and forced marriage is used
as a coping or protective mechanism. Barriers to accessing services include the fear
of stigmatization, shame, social isolation and verbal abuse, in addition to structural
challenges such as the distance to service delivery points, the lack of transportation
and family restrictions. Furthermore, formal justice systems are often non-existent
outside of Government-controlled areas.
Recommendation
93. I urge all parties to the conflict, including the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, to immediately cease the perpetration of sexual violence. I encourage all
parties to the conflict to proactively facilitate the meaningful participation of women
in all relevant peace processes and peace negotiations and any future transitional
justice mechanisms, and to comprehensively address conflict-related sexual violence
in any agreements. I also urge all security forces operating in the Syrian Arab
Republic to cooperate in order to identify missing women and girls and facilitate their
return to their families.
Yemen
94. The conflict in Yemen has exacerbated the dire humanitarian crisis. After four
years of continuous violence, more than 80 per cent of the population requires
humanitarian assistance and protection. There was increased reporting of sexual
violence in 2018, in particular during the last quarter of the year. Reports include
cases of physical or sexual assault, rape and sexual slavery. While a few cases are
directly attributable to parties to the conflict, most are the result of increased risks
that women and children face, against a backdrop of pre-existing gender inequality,
exacerbated by the chronic incapacity of Government institutions to protect civilians.
Women and children are increasingly at risk of trafficking, sexual violence and
exploitation, particularly in the context of displacement.
95. The breakdown of law and order and the limitations of the justice system have
resulted in widespread impunity. Those factors, along with the victims ’ fear of
reprisal, contribute to underreporting of crimes of sexual violence. Such reluctance is
particularly acute for refugees and asylum seekers, who generally do not pursue legal
redress. Although the practice of child marriage precedes the conflict, there has been
an increase in its occurrence, suggesting it may serve as a coping mechanism amid
ongoing conflict and displacement. Refugees and asylum seekers arriving at coastal
and urban areas are at significant risk of being arbitrarily detained, often in unofficial
centres, where murder, torture and sexual violence oc cur. A woman was arrested by
the Security Belt Forces in southern Yemen for leaking information to the Ansar Allah
and during the arrest she was allegedly raped and tortured. Other incidents of rape
and sexual assault reportedly occurred in Burayqah migrant detention centre in Aden
20/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

and in the Basatin area of the Dar Sa‘d district of Aden, both controlled by the
Security Belt Forces, as documented by the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen established by the Human Rights Council (see
A/HRC/39/43). The management of these unofficial centres is usually unclear. The
United Nations advocates with State and de facto authorities to gain access to detained
persons of concern.
96. In 2018, of the 472 reported cases of sexual violence, 341 involved sexual
violence against refugees and asylum seekers, with 70 of the incidents involving
minors. Those 70 incidents, or 131 cases, involved 131 children (80 boys and 51
girls). Those 131 cases include 122 cases (affecting 73 boys and 49 girls) perpetrated
by community members and relatives – 56 per cent of them occurring in settlements
and host communities for internally displaced persons in Hudaydah, Amanat
al-Asimah and in Hadramawt Governorates. Additional cases of sexual violence
against children were verified as having been committed by members of armed
groups: two involving boys were attributed to the Popular Resistance; and one case
was attributed to the Houthis. The areas and detention centres u nder militia control
are of grave concern; the United Nations does not have access to those areas in order
to document human rights violations. Six cases against children (four boys and two
girls) are attributed to members of the Yemeni government forces.
97. The United Nations has continued to assist survivors through comprehensive
case management, including referrals for medical, psychosocial and legal aid support,
as well as safe shelter and the direct provision of cash assistance, livelihood training
and dignity kits.
Recommendation
98. I urge all parties to the conflict to ensure protection for the most vulnerable,
including displaced civilians and detainees. I encourage enhanced monitoring and
reporting, particularly as relates to the nexus of displacement, trafficking and sexual
violence and exploitation. I further urge all parties to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance, including services for survivors of sexual violence.

IV. Addressing crimes of sexual violence in post-conflict settings
Bosnia and Herzegovina
99. More than two decades after the conflict’s end, thousands of survivors of
wartime sexual violence continue to suffer socioeconomic marginalization and
stigma. Stigmatization causes survivors’ tremendous fear of being “outed” to family
and community members, preventing many from speaking openly about sexual
violence or seeking services or reparations. Furthermore, legislation is not
harmonized across the entities, thus survivors have varied entitlements not only in the
different entities, but also in the different cantons.
100. Survivors of conflict-related sexual violence require medical and psychosocial
support to ease their reintegration and prevent the transgenerational transfer of
trauma. Accordingly, the entities’ ministries in charge of health and social protection
are building the capacities of medical and psychosocial service professionals to
provide quality, non-discriminatory and sensitive assistance to survivors across the
country. In addition, standard operating procedures for the management of conflictrelated sexual violence have been developed and adopted in 20 communities, thereby
streamlining service delivery for survivors and allowing for the uniform provision of
care. Ministries gathered and published the tools developed through the joint United
Nations programme on conflict-related sexual violence as a package of measures to

19-04552

21/35

S/2019/280

address the legacy of conflict-related sexual violence. Finally, medical and
psychosocial professionals are undergoing sensitization training regarding care for
survivors of sexual violence. The United Nations is implementing capacity -building
activities for ministries relating to quality health and psychosocial support.
101. The United Nations continues to work closely with the Government to enhance
the capacities of service providers and establish sustainable multisectoral referral for
survivors. In 2018, the Republika Srpska government adopted the Law on Victims of
Torture, aimed at creating a conducive environment for survivors t o gain access to
services, justice and reparations. After one month of implementation, 257 applications
for recognition of victim of torture status were submitted to the first instance bodies,
100 of which were filed by survivors of wartime rape. In the Fe deration of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, access to justice for survivors has been regulated by the Law on
Basic Social Protection, supporting victims of war and families with children. With
United Nations support, an interdisciplinary Commission was established in order to
grant rapid determinations of status for survivors. Since becoming operational in
2017, the Commission has received 72 applications, from 61 women and 11 men. In
2018, 33 applications were submitted, 29 of which were filed by women and 4 by
men. To date, 59 applicants have been granted status.
Recommendation
102. I urge the relevant authorities to uphold the rights of survivors of conflict -related
sexual violence to reparations, including by strengthening basic social services such
as psychosocial and health services, economic empowerment, housing, free legal aid
and education for vulnerable groups, including survivors and their children, and to
allocate a specific budget for that purpose. I emphasize the need for a holistic
approach for survivors as well as for children born of wartime rape. I further call on
the authorities to continue efforts to alleviate stigma and urge the complete
harmonization of the entities’ laws with respect to the rights of survivors.
Côte d’Ivoire
103. Local and regional elections held in October were largely peaceful, although
electoral violence in some parts of the country resulted in seven deaths and additional
injuries. Although no incidents of sexual violence were reported during the October
elections, the political climate ahead of the 2020 presidential election remains fragile.
104. Since the closure of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire in June 2017,
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2284 (2016), the monitoring of and reporting
on conflict-related sexual violence has been carried out primarily by the national
human rights commission, as well as civil society focal points established by the
national committee for the fight against conflict-related sexual violence and the
Defence and Security Forces, with United Nations support. Despite positive
developments in the prevention of and response to sexual violence by the Ivorian
Defence and Security Forces, significant challenges rema in in the area of
accountability for crimes perpetrated during the 2010–2011 post-electoral crisis,
including those of sexual violence. Indeed, no cases of sexual violence committed
during the crisis period, which are under investigation by the Cellule spé ciale
d’enquête et d’instruction, have progressed to trial. Concerns were also raised by the
publication, on 8 August 2018, of a presidential decree (ordonnance présidentielle
No. 2018-669) granting amnesty “to those individuals prosecuted or convicted for
offences related to the post-electoral crisis of 2010–2011”. While the President has
publicly stated that perpetrators of serious crimes will not benefit from the amnesty,
there is widespread concern about an amnesty for high-level military officers,
members of armed groups and political leaders. In addition, while many victims of

22/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

the post-electoral violence have received general compensation from the
Government, no reparations for crimes of sexual violence have been awarded.
105. The Criminal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure are under review, in
order to strengthen accountability for violence against women and children.
Moreover, the Ministry of Women, Child Protection and Solidarity has proposed the
adoption of a comprehensive law against gender-based violence, including sexual
violence. The proposed law aims to establish a holistic and integrated approach to
addressing the crime of sexual violence.
Recommendation
106. I encourage the Government to continue the implementation of action plans to
ensure that perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence are held accountable and
survivors receive services, justice and reparations as stipulated in the conditions for
delisting from my report, and to further ensure that amnesty provisions do not ap ply
in cases of crimes of sexual violence or any other crime against humanity. In the
context of the upcoming presidential elections, I urge adequate resources to be
dedicated for the implementation of the action plan for the national committee for the
fight against conflict-related sexual violence and the development of a national early
warning mechanism for conflict-related sexual violence.
Nepal
107. Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in November 2006,
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated during the course of the
armed conflict between the State Party and the then -Communist Party of Nepal
(Maoist) continue to face barriers in gaining access to services, justice and
reparations. The lack of a conducive environment for reporting means female
survivors of sexual violence still do not speak about the violence they endured.
Victims face legal, social, economic, health-related and psychological challenges,
living in constant fear of ostracization.
108. While the Government is considering extending the reparations scheme to
victims of conflict-related sexual violence, progress has been slow and there are
insufficient opportunities for victims to receive the full range of sexual and
reproductive health, mental health, legal aid and livelihood support. Since its
establishment in 2015, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission has received over
63,000 complaints, and the Commission of Investigation on Enforced Disappeared
Persons has received 3,197 complaints. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission
has registered 308 cases of conflict-related sexual violence perpetrated both by the
security forces and the then Maoist rebels. It is highly probable that additional cases
were reported as torture, owing to stigma associated with sexual violence.
Furthermore, the access of female victims to the complaint system has been restricted
by the lack of information and the absence of outreach programmes by the
Commissions.
109. The Government has demonstrated its commitment to gender-responsive
peacebuilding by drafting a comprehensive bill to amend the Enforced
Disappearances Enquiry, Truth and Reconciliation Act. The draft bill, made public in
June 2018, contains several progressive provisions, recognizing victims ’ rights to
reparations, eliminating the statute of limitations for sexual violence and torture cases
and unconditionally restricting the powers of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and the Commission of Investigation on Enforced Disappeared Persons
to recommend amnesties for gross violations of human rights, including torture, rape
and other acts of sexual violence.

19-04552

23/35

S/2019/280

Recommendation
110. I urge the Government to expedite the revision and adoption of the bill to amend
the Enforced Disappearances Enquiry, Truth and Reconciliation Commission Act, in
line with its obligations under international law. I also call for a guarantee of interim
relief and full reparations for victims of conflict-related sexual violence, including
health services, psychosocial counselling, livelihood support and adequate
compensation. I urge the expeditious adoption of the second national action plan for
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) on
women and peace and security, and with guarantees for its effective and well resourced implementation, along with comprehensive monitoring.
Sri Lanka
111. In its resolution 30/1 of 1 October 2015, the Human Rights Council welcomed
the commitment of the Government of Sri Lanka to a comprehensive approach to
dealing with the past, including instructions to all branches of the security forces that
rape and sexual violence are prohibited and will be punished. In its resolution 34/1
(March 2017), the Human Rights Council requested the Government to fully
implement the measures identified in its resolutio n 30/1. Despite delays, Sri Lanka
has taken important steps towards implementing the provisions of those two
resolutions, including the adoption of the Office for Reparations bill. Unfortunately,
there is a lack of progress in establishing a truth and reconciliation commission or a
judicial mechanism as envisaged in resolution 30/1, partly owing to the constitutional
crisis that began in October 2018.
112. The latest annual Grave Crimes Abstract of the Sri Lankan Police (for 2017)
recorded 1,732 complaints of rape and no convictions for rape cases. Since the
passage of the Witnesses and Victims Protection Act (2015), a police division has
been established to safeguard the rights of those reporting violent crimes. However,
improving outreach, support and protection regarding cases of sexual violence will
require more female officers and the sensitization of male officers. A national plan of
action for addressing sexual and gender-based violence exists but must be adequately
resourced and implemented.
Recommendation
113. I call on the Government to ensure that cases of conflict -related sexual violence
are systematically documented, and to ensure that transitional justice mechanisms are
mandated to provide accountability and reparations in cases of sexual violence against
women, girls, men and boys from all ethnic groups, including when committed by
State actors. I urge the Government to expeditiously implement the recommendations
of relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms relating to conflict -related
sexual and gender-based violence, to ensure that reparations are available for victims
and that the Office for Reparations is operationalized and ad equately resourced.

V. Other situations of concern
Burundi
114. The risk of sexual violence, exacerbated by the 2015 political crisis, remains a
concern. In its latest report, the International Commission of Inquiry on Burundi
refers to accounts of sexual violence, in particular rape and gang rape against women
and girls for purposes such as intimidation or punishment, associated with perceived
political affiliation. Such incidents often occur with the acquiescence of state agents.
The Commission also reported sexual violence against men, including genital torture,
24/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

as well as forced nudity and other acts of humiliation during interrogation. The
Commission attributes the increased risk of sexual violence after the 2015 crisis to
high levels of violence and impunity, as well as the persistence of poverty and
gender-based discrimination, more generally. In addition, challenges remain
regarding the provision of medical and psychosocial services for survivors. The
situation is aggravated by the Government’s suspension of international
non-governmental organizations’ activities, since 1 October 2018. The Government’s
decision, in December 2018, to close the country office of the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights will also have a negative impac t on survivors’
human rights and their access to essential services.
115. Internally displaced and returnee women and girls remain highly vulnerable, in
particular on palm oil plantations or when searching for firewood or water. Reports
indicate that 43 per cent of internally displaced persons fear reporting abuse, partly
owing to mistrust of the authorities. In addition, article 25 of Law No. 1/13 of
September 2016 is interpreted as requiring service providers to report rape incidents
to the police, even against the wishes of survivors, who fear for their safety. On
International Women’s Day in 2018, the President of Burundi announced zero
tolerance for sexual and gender-based violence, regardless of the rank or status of
perpetrators.
116. Women and girls who had fled to neighbouring countries as a result of insecurity
and conflict were also documented as having been victims of sexual violence. Some
degree of support services exists to meet their needs in refugee settlements. However,
asylum seekers and others with irregular status are often unable to gain access to
comprehensive medical and psychosocial support.
Recommendation
117. I call upon Burundi’s authorities to strengthen their response to sexual violence
by facilitating access to justice, strengthening protection systems, ensuring the
provision of medical and psychological care to survivors, including displaced persons
and returnees, and establishing a safe and ethical information system on sexual and
gender-based violence. I urge the Government to cooperate with the United Nations
system, and in particular with all relevant United Nations human rights mechanisms.
I encourage the Government to undertake a prompt and independent investigation of
the allegations of sexual violence contained in the report of the International
Commission of Inquiry on Burundi and to take appropriate action to ensure
accountability.
Nigeria
118. The ongoing conflict in north-east Nigeria is characterized by widespread
attacks against civilians, including sexual violence, the abduction of women and girls
for sexual slavery, disappearances and forced displacement, all of which are primarily
attributed to Boko Haram. The abduction of women and girls by non -State armed
groups for use as sex slaves and/or carriers of person-borne improvised explosive
devices is a disturbing feature of the ongoing conflict. Ostracization from the
community hampers the reintegration of returnees, which leads to further exclusion
from social protection and assistance. Those negative effec ts are compounded for
mothers of children born from rape.
119. In February 2018, the United Nations documented the kidnapping of 110 school
girls in a secondary school in north-east Nigeria, who were subjected by members of
Boko Haram to forced marriage, rape and physical and emotional violence. On
21 March, Boko Haram released 107 of the girls. The armed group announced that
one girl who had refused to convert to Islam would be kept as a slave. The United
19-04552

25/35

S/2019/280

Nations provided medical and psychosocial rehabilitation for the released girls, with
counselling for their family members. Another five girls were raped by military
officers. One survivor was killed upon the perpetrators learning that she had filed a
complaint. Four survivors received medical attention, b ut declined legal support.
However, service provision is generally limited by the lack of access to affected
populations. The military leadership in those locations informed service providers
that they would ensure the accountability of their officers. Women and girls account
for 99 per cent of the victims of reported incidents of sexual violence across
Adamawa, Borno and Yobe States. Approximately 38 per cent of the incidents of
sexual violence reported were perpetrated in the context of trafficking, force d
conscription, abduction, kidnapping or other forms of detention.
120. In October 2017, Nigerian authorities began trials of Boko Haram suspects, with
subsequent rounds in February and July 2018 at Wawa Cantonment, in Kainji, Niger
State. In the third round of trials, which commenced in July 2018, over
200 defendants, including three women, were tried under the Terrorism (Prevention)
(Amendment) Act, 2013. The courts convicted 113 defendants, acquitted 5, and
discharged 97 without trial. None of the accused were charged with sexual violence.
The outcome is of great concern, as sexual violence plays a dominant role in Boko
Haram operations and strategies. In 2018, the national human rights commission in
Nigeria constituted a special investigations panel on alleged human rights violations
in north-east Nigeria and invited public submissions of allegations of human rights
violations committed in north-east Nigeria, including allegations concerning sexual
violence against internally displaced persons, the lack of investigations, the sexual
exploitation of women and girls in exchange for food and security, and the
discrimination and violence against women and girls returning from Boko Haram
captivity (pejoratively called “Boko Haram wives”). It is also of great concern that
the findings of the Presidential Panel to Review Compliance of the Armed Forces
with Human Rights Obligations and Rules of Engagement, established in August
2017, are not yet public.
121. The United Nations continues to support 278,194 people, primarily women and
girls, who require medical and psychosocial services. Women and girls have also
benefited from livelihood support and dignity kits. In addition, 18 new
women-friendly safe spaces were established in areas newly liberated from Boko
Haram, enabling women to build social networks, acquire vocational skills and secure
referral to pursue care and redress. 200 girls formerly associated with non -State armed
groups and forcibly married to Boko Haram insurgents were released by the military
to the Borno State Ministry of Women Affairs and Social Development. They received
rehabilitative care and reintegration support. Finally, the United Nations is finalizing
two handbooks on counter-terrorism investigations and on gender dimensions of
criminal justice responses to terrorism, specific to Nigeria.
Recommendation
122. I urge the Nigerian authorities to ensure accountability for crimes of sexual
violence, whether perpetrated by armed groups or military officers, and to improve
service delivery and support for women and girl survivors in all settings. I further
recommend the full consideration of sexual violence when investigating, charging
and prosecuting Boko Haram elements and when developing redress programmes for
their victims and former captives.

26/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

VI. Recommendations
123. Ten years after the establishment of the mandate by the Security Council, the
following recommendations represent a platform for a comprehensive and
multisectoral response to prevent and address the scourge of conflict -related sexual
violence.
124. To strengthen prevention by reinforcing the compliance of State and
non-State parties with Security Council resolutions on conflict-related sexual
violence, I recommend that the Security Council:
(a) Calls upon all State and non-State parties to make formal and specific
commitments to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence that include,
inter alia: (i) the issuance of command orders and codes of conduct and the
establishment of related enforcement procedures; (ii) the signing of individual
undertakings by commanders and ensuring access for relevant United Nations
officials to the chain of command for this purpose and for capacity-building; (iii) the
investigation of all credible allegations, including information reported by relevant
United Nations system entities, and the prosecution of alleged perpetrators;
(iv) ensuring unimpeded access for monitoring and the provision of services and
humanitarian assistance; and (v) the designation of high-level civilian, military and
police focal points with responsibility for the implementation of commitments;
(b) Supports the efforts of my Special Representative, the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, women protection advisers and
other relevant United Nations actors to engage in dialogue with State and non -State
parties to elicit commitments and to support parties in developing and
operationalizing the related implementation plans;
(c) Addresses the existing gap in the compliance system whereby there is no
consistent means to bring to the Security Council’s attention information on
compliance by parties and recommendations for targeted measures, and in this regard,
consider establishing appropriate arrangements, including inter alia the possi bility of
a formal mechanism, through which the Security Council could consistently monitor
compliance by parties to conflict – this may include a periodic review of formal
commitments concluded with the United Nations and the related implementation
plans, and an annual review of the list of parties annexed to the reports of the
Secretary-General, as well as undertaking appropriate actions such as referrals to
relevant sanctions committees in order for due consideration to be given to the
designation of those individuals who bear responsibility related to the listed parties;
(d) Continues to include sexual violence as an explicit (stand -alone)
designation criterion for sanctions under relevant country -specific regimes, and
regularly invites my Special Representative to share relevant information with
sanctions committees;
(e) Integrates conflict-related sexual violence into the work of relevant
sanctions regimes related to counter-terrorism, including the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and ensures that those who help
finance such groups through the sale, trade or trafficking of women and children are
considered for sanctions designations;
(f) Ensures that the expert groups and monitoring teams of all relevant
sanctions committees deploy dedicated expertise on gender and sexual violence as
part of their investigative and monitoring work, and consistently include information

19-04552

27/35

S/2019/280

on incidents, patterns, trends and perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence in
their reports and recommendations to committees;
(g) Exerts pressure on individuals, entities and parties, through the adoption
of targeted measures by relevant sanctions committees specifically for acts of sexual
violence, with such actions applying to individuals who commit, command or
condone sexual violence, consistent with international criminal law, whether military
or civilians.
125. To strengthen the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual
violence as a cross-cutting priority in the work of the Security Council, I
recommend:
(a) That the prevention of conflict-related sexual violence is reflected in all
relevant country-specific resolutions and in authorizations and renewals of the
mandates of peace operations through the inclusion of operational provisions, as
articulated in Security Council resolutions on sexual violence in conflict and women
and peace and security;
(b) That the periodic field visits of the Security Council integrate a focus on
conflict-related sexual violence to the extent possible and where appropriate, and that
Council members explicitly engage with national authorities on their obligations to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence, and consult survivors,
affected communities and women’s organizations, with due consideration for the
principles of safety and confidentiality.
126. To respond to sexual violence employed as a tactic of terrorism and in the
context of trafficking in conflict as framed by Security Council resolutions 2242
(2015), 2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017), I recommend:
(a) The strategic alignment of efforts to address sexual violence with efforts
to prevent violent extremism and to counter terrorism, and ensuring that national
action plans on women and peace and security and on preventing violent extremism
are complementary and in line with Security Council resolution 2242 (2015), in
recognition of the fact that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are known to be
part of the strategic objectives and ideology of certain terrorist groups, used as a tactic
of terrorism, and an instrument to increase their power through supporting financing,
recruitment and the destruction of communities;
(b) The revision of national legal and policy frameworks to e nsure that
survivors of sexual violence committed by armed or terrorist groups are recognized
and supported as legitimate victims, in order for them to benefit from holistic support,
including reparations and redress; and ensure that survivors are not trea ted as
affiliates or intelligence assets;
(c) The investigation and prosecution of members of terrorist groups not only
for membership or affiliation in such groups, but also for all crimes of sexual
violence;
(d) Supporting relevant United Nations entities such as the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the Office on Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime to include, in country assessments, information on trafficking in
persons and sexual violence in conflict, consistent with the recognition of the links
between transnational organized crime and the financing of terrorism.
127. To ensure the availability of timely and reliable information as a basis for
preventive action and response at every level, I recommend:
(a) Strengthening the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on
conflict-related sexual violence in all relevant situations of concern, including
28/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

through the provision of adequate human resources for United Nations entities
mandated in this regard; with a view to such arrangements consistently addressing
sexual violence when used as a tactic of war, committed as possible crimes against
humanity, or war crimes, as a constitutive act with respect to genocide, and when used
as a tactic of terrorism, as well as in the context of the monitoring of elections in
certain situations where sexual violence is sometimes used as part of the repertoire of
violence targeting women and girls, human rights activists and defenders or other
individuals on the basis of perceived political affiliation or ethnicity;
(b) Ensuring that all efforts to document and investigate sexual violence are
survivor-centred, well-coordinated, adhere to the principles of safety, confidentiality
and informed consent, as well as the principles of independence and impartiality; and
that monitoring and investigation strategies are connected to referral pathways for
ensuring services for survivors.
128. To ensure more proactive and effective preventive action by United Nations
peacekeepers, I recommend continued training of all peacekeeping personnel on
issues relating to gender and conflict-related sexual violence, including in situ,
context-specific scenario-based training and early-warning preparedness provided on
a periodic basis throughout a deployment, and that this competence is integrated into
the performance and operational readiness standards against which troops are
assessed.
129. To strengthen prevention by supporting a broad range of civil society
actors, I recommend:
(a) Promoting the meaningful participation of survivors and members of civil
society, including women’s organizations and community leaders, as central in all
prevention and response efforts; and supporting the efforts of human rights defenders
and journalists who report on conflict-related sexual violence, whose efforts are
fundamental to changing norms on structural gender inequality and discrimination;
(b) The training of journalists as part of a broader strategy to ensure that the
media, both traditional and social media, are not used for incitement to violence, and
to foster safe and ethical reporting on conflict-related sexual violence; and to mobilize
communities to help shift the stigma of conflict-related sexual violence from the
victims to the perpetrators;
(c) Encouraging the engagement of religious and traditional leaders, in
particular to mitigate the stigma suffered by survivors of conflict -related sexual
violence and to facilitate their reintegration and that of their children;
(d) Supporting efforts of the United Nations to provide predictable funding,
including through the prioritization of country-based pooled funds’ allocations to
women-led organizations, and build the capacity of civil society groups to enhance
informal community-level protection mechanisms against sexual violence in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
130. To strengthen prevention by supporting efforts to ensure the criminal
accountability of perpetrators, access to justice for survivors and justice sector
reform, I recommend:
(a) Increasing support to national authorities in situations of concern in their
efforts to reform laws and enhance investigation and prosecution in compliance with
international due process and fair trial standards; the enactment of victim and witness
protection laws and provision of legal aid for survivors; and the establishment of
specialized police units and specialized training for the judiciary;
(b) Ensuring that amnesties and immunities do not apply to perpetrators of
any forms of conflict-related sexual violence;
19-04552

29/35

S/2019/280

(c) Removing procedural and evidentiary impediments to justice for victims,
such as restrictive limitation periods for filing claims; corroboration requirements that
discriminate against victims as witnesses and complainants; the exclusion or
discrediting of victims’ testimony by law enforcement officials and within judicial
and other proceedings; and the lack of facilities for closed hearings;
(d) Utilizing all other means available to influence parties to conflict to
comply with international law, including by referring relevant situations of concern
or individuals who commit, command or condone conflict -related sexual violence to
the International Criminal Court.
131. To foster a survivor-centred and holistic concept of justice and
accountability, I recommend:
(a) Supporting States in making judicial and/or administrative reparations
available to victims of conflict-related sexual violence as part of their right to obtain
prompt, adequate and effective remedies;
(b) Encouraging external actors, upon the request of Member States where
their capacity may be lacking and without prejudice to State responsibility for
providing reparations, to assist in the design of reparations programmes and to give
due consideration to the establishment of a survivors’ fund;
(c) The consideration of specific windows of funding for survivors in the
context of peacebuilding initiatives and development frameworks and that this is
taken into account in the context of the partnership of the United Nations with
international financial institutions, such as the World Bank.
132. To strengthen prevention in the context of security sector reform, I
recommend:
(a) Supporting affected countries financially and with technical expertise to
strengthen their response to conflict-related sexual violence in the context of security
sector reform initiatives, including by enhancing the capacity of military justice
institutions to address such crimes; putting in place safeguards through vetting to
prevent individuals credibly suspected of violations from being recruited, retained or
promoted within the security forces; and the exclusion of such crimes from general
amnesties and statutes of limitations;
(b) Increasing the representation of women in national police services and the
establishment of specialized units within the police, with the deployment of women
in such units, given the positive correlation between the percentage of female officers
and the reporting rates for sexual violence crimes.
133. To strengthen prevention in the context of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, I recommend the integration of gender analysis
and training into national disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes,
including resocialization and reintegration initiatives to mitigate the threat of sexual
violence, connecting survivors with response services and ensuring that psychosocial
interventions reach ex-combatants.
134. To strengthen prevention in the context of peacemaking efforts, I
recommend:
(a) That ceasefire and peace agreements contain provisions that stipulate
conflict-related sexual violence as a prohibited act, particularly in provisions relating
to disengagement, and that they detail arrangements for ceasefire monitoring
mechanisms, taking into account, inter alia: (i) verification of the cessation of
conflict-related sexual violence; (ii) monitoring of and reporting on incidents, trends
and patterns of sexual violence, including the identification of parties credibly
30/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

suspected of being responsible; and (iii) the inclusion of male and female observers,
as well as of dedicated gender experts, in the monitoring structure;
(b) The presence and meaningful participation of women in political
negotiations and encouraging mediators to include gender and conflic t-related sexual
violence expertise as part of their mediation support teams.
135. To strengthen prevention by addressing the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, I recommend specific measures by private sector actors, including
undertaking due diligence so as to ensure that proceeds from materials acquired for
their production processes do not fund armed groups that perpetuate conflict and
conflict-related sexual violence, and generally sourcing materials for their production
processes from areas not affected by conflict.
136. To strengthen services for all survivors, I recommend:
(a) Addressing funding shortfalls for programming relating to sexual and
gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health care in conflict -affected
settings, given that these are lifesaving interventions;
(b) The delivery of multisectoral assistance for all survivors of sexual
violence, including the clinical management of rape, medical, psychosocial and legal
services, including comprehensive sexual and reproductive care such as access to
emergency contraception and safe termination of pregnancy and HIV prevention,
awareness and treatment, as well as reintegration support for survivors, including
shelters, where appropriate, and economic livelihood programmes – particular
attention should be paid to the diverse range of victims: ethnic or religious minorities;
women and girls in rural or remote areas; those living with disabilities; female heads
of households; widows; male survivors; women and children associated with armed
groups; women and children released from situations of abduction, forced marriage,
sexual slavery and trafficking by armed groups; children born of wartime rape; and
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons, who may require specia lized
responses.
137. Recognizing that sexual violence is not only an acute risk faced by displaced
persons but also a tactic that has been used to induce displacement, I
recommend:
(a) Giving due consideration to conflict-related sexual violence as a genderrelated form of persecution that may serve as legitimate grounds for asylum or refugee
status, in law and in practice, and encouraging adequate screening mechanisms for
the early identification of asylum seekers who are victims of sexual violence or of
trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation;
(b) The consideration of all durable solutions, in particular, resettlement
support for survivors, as well as “special quota projects” that provide temporary
protection through the evacuation and humanitarian admission of vulnerable women
and children to third countries and the consideration by host countries of measures to
be adopted to mitigate the risk of sexual violence, make services available to
survivors and provide the option of documenting their cases for future accountability
processes.
138. Recognizing that men and boys are also targets of conflict-related sexual
violence, I recommend more consistent monitoring and analysis of and reporting on
sexual violence against men and boys, particularly in the context of formal and
informal detention settings and as relates to men and boys associated with armed
groups; as well as the review of national legislation to protect male victims; and the
strengthening of policies that offer appropriate responses to male victims and

19-04552

31/35

S/2019/280

challenge deeply entrenched cultural assumptions about male invulnerability to such
violence.
139. Recognizing that lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
individuals are sometimes specifically targeted with sexual violence in conflicts,
I recommend more consistent monitoring and analysis of and reporting on violations
against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex individuals, and the review of
national legislation to protect lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and i ntersex victims.
140. Recognizing the existence and plight of thousands of children born of
wartime rape who often face a lifetime of marginalization and vulnerability to
recruitment by armed groups, I recommend giving due consideration to the
specific protection needs of such children, including for undocumented forcibly
displaced children and the clarification of their legal status as quickly as possible;
ensuring the right of mothers to confer their nationality upon their children, in line
with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women, so as to avoid possible statelessness; and making additional resources
available for services that support the survivors of sexual violence and their children
and that support women and girls wishing to terminate an unwanted pregnancy
resulting from rape in being able to do so.
141. To foster a more concerted and coordinated global response, I recommend
strengthening the collaboration of regional and subregional organizations with the
United Nations, and their provision of support to affected Member States in order to
address conflict-related sexual violence, including through reinforcing monitoring
and documentation; providing financial and technical support to affected Member
States to enhance the rule of law and service responses; fostering experience -sharing
among affected countries; addressing cross-border dimensions, such as human
trafficking; and ensuring adequate training of regional security forces and mediation
and ceasefire verification teams.
142. To strengthen the infrastructure established by the Security Council in its
resolution 1888 (2009) to address conflict-related sexual violence and support the
response of affected countries, I recommend:
(a) That the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, composed
of specialists from the United Nations Development Programme, the Department of
Peace Operations and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and working under the strategic leadership of my Special Representative, be
adequately resourced so as to be able to implement their mandates;
(b) The continued deployment of women protection advisers to United
Nations peace operations and the offices of resident and humanitarian coordinators in
all relevant situations of concern, in order to advise United Nations senior leadership
on the implementation of Security Council resolutions on conflict-related sexual
violence, and recognizing the importance of adequately resourcing those functions;
(c) The utilization of the expertise of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, working in coordination with the global focal point
for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post -conflict and other
crisis situations, in order to support the strengthening of national legislation and the
capacity of justice systems;
(d) The continued development of innovative operational tools and guidance
by United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict and adequate
resourcing of its multi-partner trust fund to catalyse comprehensive country-level
responses and the implementation of commitments to prevent sexual violence by
parties to conflict.
32/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

Annex
List of parties credibly suspected of committing or being
responsible for patterns of rape or other forms of sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of the
Security Council
The following list does not purport to be comprehensive, but rather includes
parties for which credible information is available. It should be noted that the names
of countries appear only to indicate the locations where those parties are suspected of
committing violations.
Parties in the Central African Republic
Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Ex-Séléka factions: Union pour la paix en Centrafrique, Mouvement
patriotique pour la Centrafrique, Front populaire pour la renaissance de
la Centrafrique – Gula faction, Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique – Abdoulaye Hussein faction, Rassemblement patriotique
pour le renouveau de la Centrafrique;

(c)

Front démocratique du peuple centrafricain – Abdoulaye Miskine;

(d)

Révolution et justice;

(e)

Retour, réclamation et réhabilitation – Abbas Sidiki;

(f)

Anti-balaka associated militia.

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain-Janvier;

(b)

Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain -Rénové led by
“General” Mapenzi Bulere Likuwe;

(c)

Allied Democratic Forces;

(d)

Forces pour la défense du Congo;

(e)

Bana Mura militias;

(f)

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda;

(g)

Force de résistance patriotique de l’Ituri;

(h)

Kamuina Nsapu;

(i)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(j)

Nduma défence du Congo;

(k)

Mai-Mai Kifuafua;

(l)

All Mai-Mai Simba factions;

(m) Nyatura;
(n)

19-04552

Nduma défence du Congo-Rénové led by “General” Guidon Shimiray
Mwissa;
33/35

S/2019/280

2.

(o)

Mai-Mai Raia Mutomboki;

(p)

All Twa militia.

State actors:
(a)

Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo;*

(b)

Police nationale congolaise.*

Parties in Iraq
Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Parties in Mali
Non-State actors:
(a)

Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad, part of Coordination des
mouvements de Azawad;*

(b)

Ansar Eddine, part of Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin;

(c)

Mouvement pour l’unification et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest whose
former members joined Islamic State in the Greater Sahara;

(d)

Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, part of Jama'a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin;

(e)

Groupe d’autodéfense des Touaregs Imghad et leurs alliés, part of
Platform coalition of armed groups/Plateforme des mouvements du
14 juin 2014 d’Alger.*

Parties in Myanmar
State actors:
(a)

Myanmar Armed Forces (Tatmadaw Kyi).*

Parties in Somalia
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

2.

Al-Shabaab.

State actors:
(a)

Somali National Army;*

(b)

Somali Police Force* (and allied militia);

(c)

Puntland forces.

Parties in South Sudan
1.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Lord’s Resistance Army;

(b)

Justice and Equality Movement;

(c)

pro-Riek Machar Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition;*

* Indicates that the party has made formal commitments to adopt measures to address conflict related sexual violence.
34/35

19-04552

S/2019/280

(d)
2.

Sudan People’s Liberation Army in Opposition forces aligned with First
Vice-President Taban Deng.

State actors:
South Sudan Government Security Forces including:
(a)

South Sudan People’s Defence Forces;*

(b)

South Sudan National Police Service.*

Parties in the Sudan
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Justice and Equality Movement;

(b)

Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid faction.

State actors:
(a)

Sudanese Armed Forces;

(b)

Rapid Support Forces.

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

2.

Non-State actors:
(a)

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant;

(b)

Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham led by Nusrah Front (Levant Liberation
Organization);

(c)

Army of Islam;

(d)

Ahrar al-Sham;

(e)

Pro-Government forces, including the National Defence Forces militia.

State actors:
(a)

Syrian Arab Armed Forces;

(b)

Intelligence services.

Other parties of concern on the agenda of the Security Council
Non-State actors:
(a)

19-04552

Boko Haram.

35/35
