38

General ABsembly-Sixteenth S e s s i o n = - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

sanction, directly or indirectly, discriminatory policies
and practices based on racial considerations, the adoption of legislative measures making racial discrimination and segregation punishable by law, and the discouragement of such practices based on racial considerations by all other means possible, including administrative measures;
( b) The immediate extension to all inhabitants of
the full exercise of basic political rights, in particular
the right to vote, and the establishment of equality
among the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take measures
for the immediate and large-scale dissemination of the
present resolution in the Non-Self-Governing Territories through all the appropriate media of mass communication, in the prii;icipal local languages as well as in
the languages of the Administering Members;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare, not later than September 1962, a report on the
implementation of the present re5olution for the consideration of the General Assembly and any other body
which the Assembly may appoint to assist it in the
implementation of resolution 1514 (XV).

1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.
1699 (XVI). Non-compliance of the Government
of Portugal with Chapter XI of the Charter
of the United Nations and with General Assembly resolution 1542 (XV)

The General Assembly,
Recalling that by resolution 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960 it declared that an obligation exists on the
part of the Government of Portugal to transmit information under Chapter XI of the Charter of the
United Nations concerning Non-Self-Governing Territories under its administration, and that this obligation should be discharged without further delay,
Noting with deep regret that the Government of
Portugal has refused and still continues to refuse to
submit information on its Non-Self-Governing Territories or to participate in the work of the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories,
as called for by General Assembly resolution 1542
(XV) and Chapter XI of the Charter,
Recalling further the principles set forth in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 entitled
"Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples",
Considering that the provisions of the said Declaration and any decision of the General Assembly concerning its implementation are fully applicable to the
Territories under Portuguese administration equally
with other Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting the continuing deterioration of the situation
in the Territories under Portuguese administration,
1. Cond,emns the continuing non-compliance of the
Government of Portugal with its obligations under
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
with the terms of General Assembly resolution 1542
(XV), and its refusal to co-operate in the work of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories;

2. Considers it necessary that, pending the fulfilment of these obligations by the Government of Portugal, the General Assembly must, for its part, continue
to discharge its own obligations and responsibilities towards the inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories under Portuguese administration;
3. Decides to establish a Special Committee of
seven members to be elected by the General Assembly
to examine as a matter of urgency, within the context
of Chapter XI of the Charter and relevant resolutions
of the Assembly, such information as is available concerning Territories under Portuguese administration,
and to formulate its observations, conclusions and recommendations for the consideration of the Assembly
and any other body which the Assembly may appoint
to assist it in the implementation of its resolution
1514 (XV);
4. Requests the Secretary-General, pending the
compliance by Portugal with its obligations under
Chapter XI of the Charter to transmit information on
conditions in the Territories under its administration,
to prepare for the us~ of the Special Committee, on the
basis of available information, background papers containing information on conditions prevailing in the Territories under the administration of Portugal;
5. Authorizes the Special Committee, in order that
information available to it may be as up to date and
authentic as possible, to receive petitions and hear
petitioners concerning conditions prevailing in Portuguese Non-Self-Governing Territories;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Special Committee with such necessary secretarial and
other assistance as it may require in the performance
of its tasks;
7. Requests Member States to use their influence to
secure the compliance of Portugal with its obligations
under the Charter and the relevant resolutions of the
General As!,embly;
8. Further requests Member States to deny Portugal any support and assistance which it may use for
the suppression of the peoples of its Non-Self-Governing Territories.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

*

* *
At its 1257th meeting, on 20 December 1961, the Fourth
Committee, acting on behalf of the General Assembly, elected
the members of the Special Committee established under
paragraph 3 of the above resolution. At its 1087th plenary
meeting, on 20 December 1961, the General Assembly approved
the election.
The following Member States were elected: BULGARIA, CEYLON, COLOMBIA, CYPRUS, GUATEMALA, GUINEA and NIGERIA.

1700 (XVI). Question of the renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Having recognized the usefulness and value of the
work of the Committee on Information from Non-SelfGoverning Territories in the interests of the advancement of peoples of Nop-Self-Governing Territories and
of the attainment of the objectives set forth in Chapter
XI of the Charter of the United Nations,

39

Resolutiont1 adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

Ke,eping in mind the principles and purposes contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 entitled "Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples",
Considering that by resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27
November 1%1 the General Assembly established a
Special Committee of seventeen members on the application of the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples,
Considering further that in paragraph 8 of that resolution the General Assembly requested the Committee
on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territpries
to assist the Special Committee in its work,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories on the same
basis ~s hitherto until such time as the General Assembly has decided that the principles embodied in
Chapter XI of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Declaration on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples have been fully implemented;
2. Decides further that the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories shall examine
the political and constitutional information transmitted
by the Administering Members as well as information
relating to functional fields, and submit its reports to
the General Assembly with its observations and conclusions thereon ;
3. Instructs the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to undertake intensive
studies of political, educational, economic and social
conditions and problems of Territories located in the
same area or region, except where circumstances require individual consideration;
4. Recalls its resolution 1542 (XV) of 15 December 1960 and instructs the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories to invite the cooperation of the Special Committee of seven members
established by General Assembly resolution 1699
(XVI) of 19 December 1961;
5. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to transmit to the
Special Committee on the application of the Declaration
on the granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples the reports referred to in paragraph 2
above, and to provide it with pertinent material available. to the Committee on Information including such
studies prepared for its consideration as may be required for the discharge of the Special Committee's
functions.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

*
* *
At its 1253rd meeting, on 18 December 1961, the Fourth
Committee, acting on behalf of the General Assembly, elected
four members to the Committee o~ Information from NonSelf-Governing Ten:itories for a period of three years to fill
the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of office
of the Dominican Republic, Ghana, India and /raq. 1 • At its
1083rd plenary meeting, on 19 December 1961, the Assembly
confirmed this election.
The following States were elected:

ECUADOR,

PAKISTAN,

PHILIPPINES and UPPER VOLTA.
18
Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/5048, para. 2.

1701 (XVI). Report of the Trusteeship Council
The General Assembly,
Having received the report of the Trusteeship Council covering the period from 1 July 1960 to 19 July
1961, 17
1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authorities
take account of the recommendations and observations
contained in the report;
3. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council should
consider at its n\·c11ty-eighth session the com111,:11ts and
suggestions which'were made, d1.1ring the discussion of
the repl0 rt at the sixteenth session of the General Assembly, regarding the remaining Territories nuder
trusteeship, as well as the Council's methods of work
and procedure, in order to bring them into accordance
with the requirements of the new sitnation in the field
of the International Trusteeship System.
1083rd plenary meeting,
19 December 1961.

1702 (XVI). Question of South West Africa
The G§neral Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) _of 14 pecemlJ!!r
1960 entitled "Declaration on the grantmg of mdependence to colonial countries and peoples", and its resolution 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961 establishing
a Special Committee of seventeen members on the application of the Declaration,
Recalling its resolutions 1568 (XV) of 18 Decem1.)er
1960 and 1596 (XV) of 7 April 1961,
Noting with approval the special report of the Committee on South West Africa,18
Bearing in mind the findings, conclusions and recommendations of the special report of the Committee on
South West Africa on the measures to be taken to
ensure the institution of the rule of law and such democratic processes, reforms and programmes of assistance
as will enable the Mandated Territor,y of South West
Africa to assume the full responsibilities of sovereignty
and independence within the shortest possible time,
Noting 'Wi,th deep regret that the Government of the
Republic of South Africa has prevented the Committee
on South West Africa, with threats, from entering the
Territory,
Noting with increased disquiet the progressive deterioration of the situation in South West Africa as a
result of the ruthless intensification of the policy of
apartheid, the deep emotional resentments of all African
peoples, accompanied by the rapid expansion of South
Africa's military forces, and the fact that Europeans,
both soldiers and civilians, are being armed and militarily reinforced for tl1e purpose of oppressing the indigenous people, all of which create an increasingly
explosive situation which, if allowed to continue, will
endanger international peace and security,
Considering that the Government of South Africa
has persistently failed in its international obligations
"Ibid., Sixteenth Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/4818).
Ibid., Supplement No. 12A (A/4926).

18
