A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/214
20 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 119
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/52/734)]
52/214. Pattern of conferences
The General Assembly,
A
Having considered the report of the Committee on Conferences,1
Recalling its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 40/243 of 18 December 1985, 43/222 B of
21 December 1988, 47/202 A of 22 December 1992, 48/222 A of 23 December 1993, 49/221 A of 23
December 1994, 50/206 A of 23 December 1995 and 51/211 A of 18 December 1996,
Taking note with concern of the difficulties experienced by some Member States owing to the lack
of conference services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States,
1.

Notes with appreciation the work of the Committee on Conferences, and takes note of its report;1

2. Approves the draft biennial calendar of conferences and meetings of the United Nations for
1998-1999 as submitted by the Committee on Conferences,2 subject to the provisions of the present
resolution;

1

A/52/32 and Add.1-3. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second
Session, Supplement No. 32.
2

A/52/32, annexes I-V, and Add.2 and 3. For the final text, see Official Records of the General
Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 32.

98-76183

/...

A/RES/52/214
Page 2

3. Authorizes the Committee on Conferences to make adjustments in the calendar of conferences
and meetings for 1998 that may become necessary as a result of actions and decisions taken by the
General Assembly at its fifty-second session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all the conference services required as a result of
decisions taken by the General Assembly at its fifty-second session, taking into account, as necessary, the
procedures established in Assembly resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986 and 42/211 of 21 December
1987;
5. Decides that henceforth the two holidays of Id al-Fitr and Id al-Adha shall be observed as
official holidays of the United Nations at Headquarters, and at other duty stations where applicable, and
that United Nations buildings at those locations shall be closed to the public on those days;
6. Decides also that no United Nations meetings shall be held on Id al-Fitr and Id al-Adha, which
occur in 1998 on 29 January and 7 April, respectively, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure strict
implementation of this decision and of paragraph 5 above when preparing all future draft calendars of
conferences and meetings of the United Nations;
7. Expresses concern that 32 per cent of requests were denied for interpretation services for
meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, in view of the importance of those
meetings for the smooth functioning of sessional bodies, while recognizing that meetings of Charter and
mandated bodies must be serviced as a priority;
8. Urges intergovernmental bodies to spare no effort at the planning stage to take into account
meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States, to make provision for such meetings
in their programmes of work and to notify the conference services well in advance of any cancellations
so that unutilized conference-servicing resources may, to the extent possible, be reassigned to meetings
of regional and other major groupings of States;
9. Decides to include all necessary resources in the budget for the biennium 1998-1999 to provide
interpretation services for meetings of regional and other major groupings of Member States upon request
by those groupings, on an ad hoc basis, in accordance with established practice, and requests the
Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session, through the Committee on
Conferences, a report on the implementation of this decision;
10. Emphasizes the importance of providing adequate conference-servicing resources to all United
Nations conference centres;
11. Welcomes the improvement, relative to 1995, in the overall utilization factor for 1996, which
exceeded the benchmark of 80 per cent, in particular at Geneva and Vienna;
12. Notes with concern the underutilization of conference facilities at the United Nations Office at
Nairobi;
13. Calls for better utilization of conference facilities at the United Nations Office at Nairobi;
14. Encourages all the subsidiary bodies of the Governing Council of the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Commission on Human Settlements and other United Nations bodies to hold
their meetings at the United Nations Office at Nairobi to the extent possible;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to assist the aforementioned bodies in improving this situation
and to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-third session, through the Committee on Conferences,
on the actions taken to this end;
/...

A/RES/52/214
Page 3

16. Reiterates its request to the Committee on Conferences, in consultation with the organs
concerned, to examine the cases where the utilization factor has been lower than 80 per cent for at least
three sessions, with a view to making appropriate recommendations in order to achieve the optimum
utilization of conference-servicing resources;
17. Reaffirms its decision that the headquarters rule shall be adhered to by all bodies;
18. Decides that waivers to the headquarters rule shall be granted solely on the basis of the calendar
of conferences and meetings of the United Nations which the Committee on Conferences recommended
for adoption by the General Assembly;
19. Invites all its subsidiary bodies that are authorized to meet away from their established
headquarters to keep under review the exception to the headquarters rule in the light of the current
situation of their work and to report any changes to the General Assembly through the Committee on
Conferences;
B
Recalling its resolutions 47/202 B of 22 December 1992, 48/222 B of 23 December 1993, 49/221 B
of 23 December 1994, 50/206 B and C of 23 December 1995 and 51/211 B of 18 December 1996,
Regretting the delayed issuance of the report of the Secretary-General on the report of the Joint
Inspection Unit on United Nations publications,3
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the control and limitation of
documentation;4
2. Also takes note of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit on United Nations publications,5 the
positive opinion of the Committee on Conferences thereon and the report of the Secretary-General
thereon,3 and decides to consider both reports at its resumed fifty-second session;
3. Expresses deep concern about the decline in the quality of some reports and documents
originating in the Secretariat;
4. Notes the decision of the Secretary-General that documents originating in the Secretariat should
be no longer than sixteen pages;
5. Emphasizes that this reduction should not adversely affect either the quality of presentation or
the content of the documents;
6. Stresses once again the need for strict compliance with the existing page limit for reports of
subsidiary bodies;
7. Invites all intergovernmental bodies to consider, where appropriate, the possibility of reducing
the length of their reports from the desired limit of thirty-two pages to twenty pages over a period of time
without adversely affecting either the quality of presentation or the content of the reports;

3

A/52/685, annex.

4

A/52/291.

5

See A/51/946.
/...

A/RES/52/214
Page 4

8.

Decides to keep under review the length and quality of all documents;

9. Reiterates its request to United Nations bodies and to the Secretary-General to ensure respect
for equal treatment of the six official languages of the United Nations;
10. Expresses deep concern about difficulties experienced by some Member States owing to the
suspension of some publications in all official languages and the delay in the translation of official
documents;
11. Decides, in this regard, to request the Secretary-General to provide all necessary resources to
reverse this situation;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to improve the quality and accuracy of meeting
records in all six official languages through full reliance, in the preparation and translation of those
records, on sound recordings and written texts of statements as they were delivered in the original
languages, and to issue those records within a reasonable time-frame;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the summary records of the Fifth Committee,
given the technical complexity of their subject matter, are prepared by experienced language staff who
are thoroughly familiar with current administrative and financial developments in the Organization, and
are issued within a reasonable time-frame;
14. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to improve and accelerate the accurate
translation of documents into the official languages, giving special significance to the quality of
translation;
15. Stresses the need to strengthen the monitoring of contractual translations to ensure that they meet
the quality requirements for United Nations documents;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that summary records are translated in all six official
languages concurrently;
17. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, where appropriate, to introduce new
technologies such as machine-assisted translation and common terminology databases;
18. Expresses deep concern that the limits to self-revision have not been kept at a level that would
ensure a high quality of translation;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to reinstate the post of reviser in the six official languages;
20. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that documentation is available in
accordance with the six-week rule for the distribution of documents simultaneously in the six official
languages of the General Assembly;
21. Regrets that there continue to be delays in the submission of documents to the conference
services;
22. Reaffirms its decision that, if a report is issued late, the reasons for the delay should be indicated
when the report is introduced;
23. Requests the Committee on Conferences to review the late issuance of documents and to suggest
remedial action for consideration by the General Assembly at its fifty-third session;

/...

A/RES/52/214
Page 5

24. Requests the Secretary-General to direct all departments to include, where appropriate, the
following elements in reports originating in the Secretariat:
(a) A summary of the report;
(b) Consolidated conclusions, recommendations and other proposed actions;
(c) Relevant background information;
25. Decides that all documents submitted to legislative bodies for consideration and action should
have conclusions and recommendations in bold print;
26. Expresses deep concern about the technical and audio quality of some conference rooms, and,
in this regard, requests the Secretary-General to present proposals at the first part of the resumed fiftysecond session of the General Assembly in order to ensure all necessary resources for the upgrading of
those conference rooms, including the interpretation booths;
C
Recalling its resolutions 50/206 D of 23 December 1995, 51/211 C of 18 December 1996 and
51/211 F of 15 September 1997,
Stressing the importance of equal access to, and benefit from, the optical disk system and other new
technologies in all six official languages for all Member States and the need to overcome the difficulties
faced by some Member States, in particular developing countries, in acquiring the technology to access
the optical disk system, as well as other available technologies,
Appreciating the actions taken by the Ad Hoc Open-ended Working Group on Informatics of the
Economic and Social Council to achieve universal connectivity between the United Nations databases and
those of Member States, including through their permanent missions, and the training programmes initiated
to that end,
Also appreciating the efforts of the Secretary-General to incorporate new information technologies
in the work of the Organization,
1. Recognizes the efforts to provide wider access to the optical disk system, while continuing to
ensure the availability of hard copies of documents for Member States, in particular for developing
countries;
2. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to ensure that the texts of all new public
documents, in all six official languages, and information materials of the United Nations are made
available through the United Nations Web site daily and are accessible to Member States without delay;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to issue public information material in all official languages on
the United Nations Web site as soon as possible, and to report on the implementation of this decision to
the General Assembly at its fifty-third session through the Committee on Information;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to complete the task of uploading all important older United
Nations documents on the United Nations Web site in all six official languages on a priority basis, so that
these archives are also available to Member States through that medium;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue work on providing access to the optical disk
system in the six official languages on an equal basis;
/...

A/RES/52/214
Page 6

D
Recalling its resolutions 50/206 D of 23 December 1995 and 51/211 C of 18 December 1996,
Stressing the need to provide Member States and United Nations bodies with more comprehensive
and accurate information on the costs of meetings and documentation,
Noting the possible benefits of the cost-accounting system for the financial efficiency of the United
Nations,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, as a matter of priority, to expedite the development of the costaccounting system for conference services in 1998 and to extend it to other areas of the Secretariat,
ensuring that the system reflects the experience of other duty stations;
2. Encourages the Secretary-General, to the extent possible, to utilize in-house resources to
implement the cost-accounting system;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly by 31 July 1998, through the
Committee on Conferences and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, on
measures taken to develop further the cost-accounting system;
E
Recalling its decision 38/401 of 23 September 1983 concerning the prohibition of smoking in small
conference rooms and the discouragement of smoking in large conference rooms,
1.

Calls on representatives of Member States to abide by decision 38/401;

2. Encourages all users of United Nations conference facilities, in order to avoid involuntary
exposure to passive smoking, to refrain from smoking, in particular in conference rooms.
79th plenary meeting
22 December 1997
