S/2006/248

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 18 April 2006 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith my third semi-annual report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004), pursuant to the request
of the Council, expressed in the presidential statement of 19 October 2004
(S/PRST/2004/36), that I continue to report to it on the implementation of the
resolution every six months.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

06-31495 (E) 270406

*0631495*

S/2006/248

Third semi-annual report of the Secretary-General
to the Security Council on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is my third semi-annual report to the Security Council on
the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) of 2 September 2004, pursuant to the
Council’s request of 19 October 2004 (S/PRST/2004/36) that I continue to report to
it on the implementation of the resolution every six months.
2.
In its resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council reiterated its strong support
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon. The
Council called upon all parties concerned to cooperate fully and urgently with it for
the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) and all relevant resolutions
concerning the restoration of the territorial integrity, full sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon. It also defined a number of provisions, among them:
(a)
(b)
militias;

The withdrawal of all remaining foreign forces from Lebanon;
The disbanding and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese

(c) The extension of the control of the Government of Lebanon over all
Lebanese territory;
(d) Strict respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity, and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government
of Lebanon throughout Lebanon.
The Council also declared its support for a free and fair electoral process in
Lebanon’s then upcoming presidential election, conducted according to Lebanese
constitutional rules devised without foreign interference or influence.
3.
In my last report to the Security Council of 26 October 2006 (S/2005/673), I
stated that the parties concerned had made considerable further progress towards the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). I concluded that a number of operational
requirements derived from the resolution had been met, among them the withdrawal
of Syrian forces from Lebanon and the conduct of free and fair legislative elections.
I also stated that other requirements remained to be implemented, particularly the
disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, the extension of
government control throughout all of Lebanon and the full restoration and strict
respect for the sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity and political independence of
Lebanon, most notably through the establishment of normal diplomatic relations and
the demarcation of borders between the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon.
4.
In its presidential statement of 23 January 2006 (S/PRST/2006/3), the Security
Council welcomed my report and reaffirmed its strong support for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon. The Council noted
with regret that some of the provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) had yet to be
implemented, particularly the disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and nonLebanese militias and the extension of government control over all Lebanese
territory, and free and fair presidential elections conducted according to the
Lebanese constitutional rules, without foreign interference and influence. The

2

S/2006/248

Council commended the Lebanese Government for the dialogue it had initiated and
for the steps it had taken, and called on it to sustain its efforts to achieve progress on
all these issues in accordance with resolution 1559 (2004) and to pursue a broad
national dialogue. In addition, the Council called on all other parties concerned, in
particular the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to cooperate to this end.

II. Background
5.
In the six months since my last report of 26 October 2005 (S/2005/673), the
situation in Lebanon has remained tense.
6.
I note with relief that the number of terrorist attacks and acts of intimidation
decreased significantly compared to the previous six-month period. However, a
general atmosphere of fear and insecurity continues to prevail. On 12 December
2005, in a deeply deplorable act of terror, Lebanese member of Parliament, editor
and journalist Gebrane Tueni was killed along with three others in a car bombing in
the suburbs of Beirut. In its presidential statement of 12 December 2005
(S/PRST/2005/61), the Council condemned the attack in the strongest terms,
reiterated its deep concern about the impact of such assassinations, as well as its
warning to the sponsors of terrorist acts in Lebanon that they would ultimately be
held accountable for their crimes. In the statement, the Council also reaffirmed its
resolution 1559 (2004) and reiterated once again its call for the strict respect of the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon. I
joined in the Council’s condemnation of the bombing.
7.
In this context, I note that the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission (UNIIIC) investigating the terrorist assassination of
former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and 22 others in downtown Beirut on
14 February 2005 has continued its work in Lebanon. I also recall that in fulfilment
of resolution 1644 (2005) of 15 December 2005, the Commission has extended its
technical assistance to the Lebanese authorities with regard to their investigations
on the terrorist attacks perpetrated in Lebanon since 1 October 2004.
8.
In my last report, I observed that Lebanon was witnessing a momentous
transition. I wrote that Lebanon had entered a new phase in its history, a phase that
had the potential for the Lebanese to finally leave behind a tragic past, to unite and
to shape a new future of self-determination, independence, coexistence and peace.
Over the past six months, Lebanon has continued its transition into this new phase
of its history, but has also witnessed temporary setbacks, a stark reminder of how
fragile the new era continues to be.
9.
On 12 December 2005, members of the Amal party and Hizbollah suspended
their participation in the cabinet in protest over the request of the Government of
Lebanon to the United Nations to create an international tribunal to try suspects in
the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri. The political
process remained deadlocked until the ministers returned to the cabinet on
2 February 2006.
10. Upon the initiative of Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament, Nabih Berri, 14
leaders of the Lebanese factions and parties gathered for the first session of a
national dialogue on 2 March 2006. The agenda items of the dialogue were (a) the
investigation into the terrorist assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri;

3

S/2006/248

(b) the Palestinian issue in Lebanon; (c) Syrian Arab Republic-Lebanon relations;
(d) the status of the Shebaa farmlands; (e) the fate of the presidency; and (f) the
arms of Hizbollah. A number of agreements were reached on the first four items
before the dialogue was adjourned on 3 April.1
11. On 10 April, the Lebanese security forces announced that they had issued
warrants of arrests for 14 individuals for their apparent intent to carry out terrorist
attacks in Lebanon; nine individuals were arrested. The group was alleged to have
planned a plot to assassinate Hizbollah Secretary-General Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah.
12. Throughout the reporting period, a tense bilateral relationship has prevailed
between the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon. There have been mutual
accusations in public statements, including against political leaders.

III. Implementation of resolution 1559 (2004)
13. The Lebanese have made further significant progress towards implementing in
full all provisions of resolution 1559 (2004), in particular with the agreements
reached during the national dialogue. The implementation of the agreements reached
at the dialogue urgently necessitates and depends on the cooperation of parties other
than the Lebanese themselves for the purpose of the full implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) without delay. The national dialogue has tasked Prime
Minister Fouad Seniora to visit Damascus at the earliest opportunity to follow up on
the relevant issues that need to be addressed through bilateral dialogue.
14. To date, the provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) calling for the disbanding
and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, the extension of the
control of the Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese territory and strict respect
of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon
under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government have not yet been fully
implemented.

A.

Withdrawal of foreign forces deployed in Lebanon
15. In my last report, I stated that the requirement of the withdrawal of Syrian
troops and military assets had been met. I referred to the possible exception of the
Deir al-Ashayr area, the status of which was unclear, and where a Syrian military
presence remained. In consequence, I noted the complications that had arisen from
the lack of a clearly agreed upon and demarcated border between Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic, which highlighted the need for a formal border agreement
and demarcation of the frontier between the two countries.

B.

Sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon
16. In my last report, I outlined that the Security Council, by its resolution 1559
(2004), places central emphasis on the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and

__________________
1 A copy of the decisions reached at the national dialogue, up until the submission of the present

report, is attached, see annex I.

4

S/2006/248

political independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the
Government of Lebanon throughout the country. I have continued to assign this
matter the highest priority in my efforts to assist with the implementation of the
resolution.
17. In my last two reports (S/2005/272 of 26 April 2005 and S/2005/673 of
26 October 2005), I identified a number of elements of particular importance to the
restoration of, and strict respect for, the sovereignty, unity and political
independence of Lebanon. These were:
(a)

The conduct of free and credible parliamentary elections in Lebanon;

(b) The end of the existence and influence of the Syrian intelligence
apparatus in Lebanon;
(c) The establishment of mutual diplomatic representations between the
Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon;
(d) The conclusion of a border agreement between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic and the delineation of the border between the two countries;
(e) The cessation of Israeli overflights violating Lebanese territorial
integrity.
Free and credible parliamentary elections
18. I concluded in my last report that, despite ongoing and necessary work to
ensure the broad freeness and credibility of electoral processes in Lebanon, the
operational requirement of free and credible elections derived from resolution 1559
(2004) had been met.
Syrian intelligence apparatus and activity in Lebanon
19. In my last report I noted that the verification mission I dispatched to Lebanon
had verified the full and complete withdrawal of Syrian troops and military assets
from Lebanon, with the possible exception of the Deir al-Ashayr area. I also noted
that the mission had been unable to conclude with certainty that the Syrian
intelligence apparatus had been withdrawn entirely. The Government of Lebanon
has informed me that it is confident that, by and large, Syrian intelligence has
withdrawn, although reports and allegations that there is ongoing Syrian intelligence
activity in Lebanon have continued to surface on occasion. The Lebanese
Government has also informed me that the process of transition and reorganization
within the Lebanese security services is ongoing, and that it has not yet established
full control over all services. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has
denied all allegations that it has any intelligence presence or activity in Lebanon.
Establishment of mutual diplomatic representation
20. In my last report I referred to the continued aspiration of Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic to formalize their bilateral relations. I stated my expectation
that both Governments would take tangible measures to formalize ties between their
countries as sovereign and independent nations prior to the submission of the
present report to the Security Council.

5

S/2006/248

21. With regard to the formalization of bilateral relations between the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon, on 14 March 2006, at the Lebanese national dialogue, it was
decided to put the relationship between the two countries “on the basis of firm and
clear principles that would correct any deficiencies that have marred these
relations”. At the national dialogue it was also agreed, in particular, that each side
should exercise control over its borders and that the Government of Lebanon should
take the necessary measures towards that end. In addition, it was agreed that the
principle of non-intervention by either State in the other’s internal affairs should
guide bilateral relations and that a relationship of mutual trust and respect should be
embodied at the soonest possible date in the establishment of embassy-level
diplomatic relations between the two countries. The national dialogue further agreed
on the activation of a joint Syrian-Lebanese committee to close the file on missing
persons and detainees in the two countries as quickly as possible.
22. I note, and emphasize, that the agreements reached at the national dialogue
reflect and reiterate the relevant provisions of the 1989 Charter of National
Reconciliation, also known as the Taif Agreement, which was negotiated and
concluded by Lebanese political parties and factions under the auspices of the
League of Arab States in Taif, Saudi Arabia. The Taif Agreement, which put an end
to the prolonged hostilities and the civil war in Lebanon, was ratified by the
Lebanese Parliament and endorsed by the Security Council. With regard to
Lebanese-Syrian relations, the Taif Agreement stipulated that:
“Lebanon should not be allowed to constitute a source of threat to Syria’s
security, and Syria should not be allowed to constitute a source of threat to
Lebanon’s security under any circumstances. Consequently, Lebanon should
not allow itself to become a pathway or a base for any force, state, or
organization seeking to undermine its security or Syria’s security. Syria, which
is eager for Lebanon’s security, independence and unity and for harmony
among its citizens, should not permit any act that poses a threat to Lebanon’s
security, independence, and sovereignty.”
23. The agreements reached at the national dialogue have not yet been translated
into practice. Their implementation, by definition, necessitates and depends on the
cooperation between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic has stated that it considers that “the channels of
communication and trade are effectively developed enough to make the opening of
embassies unnecessary, although Damascus does not exclude the establishment of
diplomatic missions sometime in the future”.2
24. At the national dialogue, Prime Minister Seniora was tasked with visiting
Damascus at the earliest opportunity to follow up on the relevant issues that need to
be addressed through bilateral dialogue. However, to date, there have been no
further discussions between the Governments of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab

__________________
2 Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic, Walid Muallem, made these public

comments on 6 April 2006.

6

S/2006/248

Republic on the issue of the mutual opening of embassies in their respective
capitals. Bilateral relations have been tense over the last six months.3
Delineation of the border
25. As I stated in my last report, as part of the formalization of ties between the
two countries, and in order to guarantee the sovereignty, political independence and
territorial unity of Lebanon, there is need for a formal border agreement between the
Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon and the demarcation of that border on the
ground. This matter is particularly important given the prevailing uncertainty as to
whether the Deir al-Ashayr area, in which a Syrian battalion continues to be
stationed, falls onto the Lebanese or the Syrian side of the frontier.
26. The Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces have confirmed
to me that there have been further illegal transfers of goods, including arms, which
they state are difficult to prevent, as there are a number of villages along the
Lebanese-Syrian border that partly fall into one country and partly into the other,
and the borderline is not clearly demarcated and physically manifested on the
ground. According to the Lebanese Army Command, there are a number of locations
with unclear status, and official Lebanese and Syrian maps show discrepancies.
27. In my last report, I referred to a statement to me by Lebanese Prime Minister
Seniora that talks between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic on the delineation
of the border had recently begun, reviving a dialogue initiated in 1964 and
suspended in 1975.
28. In May 2005, a joint Syrian-Lebanese military commission formed to
determine if the Deir al-Ashayr area fell into Lebanon or the Syrian Arab Republic
found that there was a discrepancy between the two countries’ maps. The
commission suggested the reactivation of the boundary commission, which had
operated until 1975 but had not completed its work, in order to eliminate the
existing discrepancy so that the borders could “be unambiguously demarcated and
committed to”.
29. In September 2005, Lebanese Prime Minister Seniora had sent a letter to the
Secretary-General of the Higher Syrian-Lebanese Council, informing him of
disputes between Lebanese and Syrian farmers regarding ownership of land along
the frontier and suggesting that, in accordance with the joint military commission’s
recommendation, the joint boundary commission be reactivated. In November 2005,
Syrian Prime Minister Muhammad Naji al-Ottri informed his Lebanese counterpart,
via the Secretary-General of the Higher Syrian-Lebanese Council, that the Syrian
Arab Republic agreed to reactivate the joint boundary commissions, but stipulated a
number of conditions. Most significantly, the Syrian Arab Republic proposed the
conducting of the process of delineating the joint border in five stages, beginning
__________________
3 For example, on 13 March 2006, a Syrian Penal Court in the First Instance summoned Lebanese

Minister of Telecommunications Marwan Hamadeh, member of Parliament Walid Jumblatt and
journalist Fares Khashan after a complaint had been filed by the Syrian Attorneys’ Syndicate,
accusing the three Lebanese of incitement against the national unity of the Syrian Arab
Republic. On 14 April 2006, the General Prosecutor of the Syrian military court disclosed
publicly that a decision had been taken to pursue legal proceedings against Minister Marwan
Hamadeh, members of Parliament Saad Hariri and Walid Jumblatt and journalist Fares Khashan
over their statements against the Syrian Arab Republic and for “inciting foreign countries to be
hostile to the Syrian Arab Republic and its leaders”.

7

S/2006/248

with the sea boundary and land border in the north, before proceeding towards the
Deir al-Ashayr/Ersal area. In addition, with reference to the area of the Shebaa
farmlands, the Syrian agreement was contingent upon the condition that boundaries
in occupied areas would not be demarcated until after the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace agreement.
30. In a letter sent in December 2005, Lebanese Prime Minister Seniora addressed
Syrian Prime Minister al-Ottri, expressing his appreciation for the agreement of the
Syrian Arab Republic to the demarcation of the border. With reference to the
stipulation by the Syrian Arab Republic that the border not be delineated in areas
occupied by Israel, Prime Minister Seniora wrote that “it was imperative that a joint
mechanism for demarcating the boundaries be established between our brotherly
countries in cooperation with the United Nations, because it would contribute to
liberating these farmlands from the Israeli occupation”. Prime Minister Seniora
further proposed a “rapid and comprehensive demarcation that includes the Shebaa
farmlands in view of its national importance, which demands speedy joint action to
take the necessary practical steps to establish this mechanism in order to complete
this important national work at the soonest opportunity”. There has been no
response or follow-up to that letter.
31. In this context, I note that the status of the Shebaa farmlands has remained
under discussion among the Lebanese and in the region. In particular, it is important
to note that participants in the Lebanese national dialogue affirmed their support on
14 March 2006 for all contacts undertaken by the Government of Lebanon to
“establish the Lebanese identity of the Shebaa farmlands,” and to “determine the
area’s borders in accordance with procedures and principles approved and accepted
by the United Nations”.
32. As outlined in greater detail in my previous reports, the Security Council has
repeatedly reiterated its confirmation that Israel withdraw its forces from all
Lebanese territory in fulfilment of Security Council resolution 425 (1978) in 2000,
and that it consider the Shebaa farms area to be Israeli-occupied Syrian territory, on
the basis of the information regarding the international boundary available to the
United Nations in delineating the Blue Line of withdrawal.
33. The United Nations determination of the status of the Shebaa farms is, as I
wrote in my reports to the Security Council of 22 May 2000 (S/2000/460) and of
16 June 2000 (S/2000/590 and Corr.1), without prejudice to any internationally
recognized border agreement that Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic may wish
to conclude in the future. Its current status as Israeli-occupied Syrian territory does,
however, remain valid unless and until the Governments of Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic take steps under international law to alter that status.
34. Lebanon has repeatedly committed, in writing and through public statements
such as the one made by Foreign Minister Fawzi Salloukh after a meeting with my
Special Envoy for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) in
Beirut on 24 March 2006, to respect the Blue Line. In this context, I particularly
recall President Émile Lahoud’s letter to me of 12 June 2000 (A/54/914S/2000/564), in which the Lebanese authorities committed to accept and respect the

8

S/2006/248

Blue Line until a border delineation agreement is reached by Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic.4
35. On the basis of the aforementioned facts, the exchange of letters between the
Governments of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic, and the agreements reached
at the national dialogue in Lebanon, it appears that there exists a consensus on the
general need to delineate the Lebanese-Syrian border. There also appears to be
agreement among the Lebanese that the Shebaa farmlands area is to be considered
Lebanese territory.5 Representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic have repeatedly
made public statements to the effect that the Syrian Arab Republic agrees in
principle with the notion that the Shebaa farms are Lebanese territory.6
36. In consequence, the onus is therefore on the Governments of Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic to move speedily towards the conclusion of a border
agreement that reflects the consensus that appears to exist. The Lebanese have
emphasized their willingness to do so both at the recent national dialogue and
through Prime Minister Seniora’s initiative and in his repeated statements. I expect
the cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic on this matter.
37. As I have stated previously, the conclusion of a border delineation agreement
would represent a tangible and significant step towards formalizing the relations
between the two countries and towards reaffirming Lebanon’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence. While the negotiation and conclusion
of such a border agreement is the exclusive prerogative of the two countries,
discussions should focus particularly on areas the status of which is uncertain or
disputed, without prejudice to their status as areas occupied by a third party and
subject to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Israeli overflights violating Lebanese territorial integrity
38. Since my last report, Lebanese territorial integrity has continued to be
regularly violated by Israeli aircraft flying into Lebanese airspace. The Government
of Israel has continued to maintain its claim that these overflights are carried out for
__________________
4 In his letter to me dated 12 June 2000 (S/2000/564), Lebanese President Lahoud outlined

Lebanon’s position regarding the Blue Line and wrote: “In connection with the Shebaa
farmlands, it is clear from the report of the Secretary-General that a de facto line has been
adopted for the area in light of the fact that there are no old maps that can confirm the boundary
between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic. Accordingly, the de facto line is the line
separating the areas of operation of UNIFIL and UNDOF, while the United Nations notes that
this line can in no way be regarded as affecting the rights of the parties concerned with respect
to their international boundaries. Lebanon has accepted this assessment until such time as a joint
formula for the farmlands area can be agreed by Lebanon and Syria for submission to the United
Nations”.
5 See my reports to the Security Council of 22 May 2000 (S/2000/460) and 16 June 2000
(S/2000/590 and Corr.1), and the Security Council’s presidential statements of 23 May 2000
(S/PRST/2000/18) and 18 June 2000 (S/PRST/2000/21).
6 I recall Syrian Vice-President Sharaa’s statements to the press after his meeting with Egyptian
President Mubarak in Sharm el-Sheikh on 23 March 2006 and President Assad’s statement in an
interview with the French newspaper Le Figaro, published on 23 June 2001, in which President
Assad was quoted as saying: “According to international law, it is up to the bordering States
concerned to identify the status (appartenance) of a territory. Once that discussion is completed,
an accord must be registered with the international authorities. In the case of Shebaa, this is the
strict responsibility of the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon. As for third parties that take a
position on the ‘nationality’ of Shebaa, they have no such competency.”

9

S/2006/248

security reasons. Along with my representatives in the region, I have regularly
continued to reiterate our call on Israel to cease these overflights, which stand in
contradiction to Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 426 (1978) and to my
efforts to assist with the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). During one
particular period in November 2005, as I have reported elsewhere,7 overflights were
numerous and particularly intrusive and provocative, although their number
decreased thereafter.

C.

Extension of the control of the Government of Lebanon
over all Lebanese territory
39. In my previous report to the Security Council, I stated that over the preceding
six months, there had again been incidents underlining that the Government of
Lebanon does not yet fully exert control over all of its territory. This has remained
the case during the period of the past six months.
40. In this context, I note that the primary factors impeding the extension of
Lebanese Government control over all of Lebanon’s territory are the existence of
armed groups outside the control of the Lebanese Government and uncertainty over
the exact boundaries of the Lebanese territory. Timely implementation of tangible
measures towards the disarming and disbanding of Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias and towards the delineation of the border between the Syrian Arab Republic
and Lebanon will be an important step towards the extension of the Government’s
control over all its territory.
41. I also recall in this context two provisions of the 1989 Taif Agreement, which
ended the civil war after a dialogue among the Lebanese. Firstly, the Taif Agreement
stipulated that Lebanon would take “all the necessary steps to liberate all Lebanese
territories from the Israeli occupation, to spread State sovereignty over all of
Lebanon’s territory and to deploy the Lebanese army in the border area adjacent to
Israel”. Secondly, the Taif Agreement stipulated the disbanding and disarming of all
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militia as a measure related to the broader provision
that “considering that all Lebanese factions have agreed to the establishment of a
strong State founded on the basis of national accord, the national accord
Government shall draft a detailed one-year plan whose objective is to spread the
sovereignty of the State of Lebanon over all Lebanese territories gradually with the
State’s own forces”.
42. As I have described elsewhere in more detail,7 the authority and control of the
Government of Lebanon has remained limited in the south of the country in general,
and in the areas of the Blue Line in particular, over the past six months. Regrettably,
the Lebanese Army continues to operate at a distance from the Blue Line. Control of
the Blue Line and its vicinity seems to remain for the most part with Hizbollah.
Under such circumstances, Hizbollah has maintained and reinforced a visible
presence in the area, with permanent observation posts, temporary checkpoints and
patrols; some of its positions are in close proximity to United Nations positions.
This presence stands in contradiction to the provisions of the Taif Agreement as
well as to Security Council resolutions 425 (1978), 426 (1978) and 1559 (2004).

__________________
7 See S/2006/26.

10

S/2006/248

43. My discussions and those of my representatives on the extension of the
authority of the Government of Lebanon in the South have continued. To date, there
has been no further progress on this issue. The Lebanese Army Command has
informed me that it faces no operational constraints in creating a presence in the
South and along the Blue Line, but that has not received political instructions to
take such action.
44. A number of serious incidents have emphasized the necessity for the
Government of Lebanon, through its regular security and armed forces, to extend its
control over all of its territory in order to maintain quiet along the Blue Line. The
Government of Lebanon, as the sole legitimate authority vested with a monopoly on
the use of force throughout its territory, must do more to exercise its control
accordingly.
45. In its resolution 1655 (2006) of 31 January 2006, the Security Council yet
again referred to the urgent need for the Lebanese Government to fully extend its
authority and exert its control and monopoly over the use of force throughout its
territory. The Council reiterated its call upon the Government of Lebanon to fully
extend and exercise its sole and effective authority throughout the South and urged
it to do more to assert its authority in the South and to exert its control and
monopoly over the use of force and to maintain law and order on its entire territory
and to prevent attacks from Lebanon across the Blue Line, including through
deploying additional numbers of Lebanese Armed Forces and Internal Security
Forces, taking up the proposals of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) to enhance coordination between those forces and UNIFIL on the ground
and to establish a joint planning cell.
46. In my last report, I observed that the Lebanese Armed Forces now had to show
that they can maintain effective security throughout the country. I stated that I had
taken note of the recent increased presence and engagement of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in areas where there are armed Palestinian groups, and that such steps were
positive measures towards the extension of the control of the Government of
Lebanon over all of its territory and the exercise of its monopoly on the use of force
throughout its territory. I further stated that I was encouraged by the commitment
made to me by Prime Minister Seniora’s Government that it will seek to assert its
monopoly on the use of force and exert its control throughout all Lebanese territory
through a national dialogue with all relevant parties. I also referred to an increased
deployment of the Lebanese Armed Forces along the border with the Syrian Arab
Republic for the purpose of halting the illegal transfer of arms and people, and an
increased presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces around positions of armed
Palestinian groups to the south of Beirut and in the Beqaa Valley.
47. Over the past six months, there have been renewed incidents of arms transfers
across the Syrian-Lebanese border into Lebanon, which the Government of Lebanon
and the Lebanese Armed Forces have confirmed to my Special Envoy, in
contradiction to resolution 1559 (2004), which stipulates the disarming and
disbanding of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias.
48. On 14 February 2006, the Lebanese Army Command stated it was “taking
steps to close all illegal border crossings”. It further stated that the coastline was
also under surveillance in an attempt to stop smuggling and that the army had
established its control over most of the sea and land crossings into Lebanon. The
Lebanese Army Command has also stated to my Special Envoy that its control over

11

S/2006/248

the border with the Syrian Arab Republic has been strengthened, with the
deployment of additional troops and the installation of new checkpoints. It has
further stated that all unofficial roads across the border have been closed. The Army
Command has acknowledged that it cannot yet guarantee fully effective border
control, but it has affirmed that its capacity is gradually increasing and that it has
the will to establish its effective control over the borders of Lebanon. Both the
Government of Lebanon and the Army Command have confirmed to my Special
Envoy that a political decision to prevent all further arms trafficking across the
Syrian-Lebanese border has been taken and is being enforced to the best of the
ability of the Lebanese Armed Forces. They have also stated to my Special Envoy
that in order to establish tight control over the border between Lebanon and the
Syrian Arab Republic, there needs to be a sufficient degree of cooperation from the
Syrian Arab Republic. The Lebanese Army Command has further stated to my
Special Envoy that all future cases of arms transfers within the country will be
subject to the direct decision of Prime Minister Seniora. To date there have been no
additional cases of arms trafficking.

D.

Disbanding and disarmament of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias
49. As I have previously reported, Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias continue to
exist and operate within Lebanon and to challenge the Government, which by
definition is vested with a monopoly on the use of force throughout its territory. The
most significant Lebanese militia is Hizbollah. There are also Palestinian militias in
Lebanon. In addition to the direct call in Security Council resolution 1559 (2004)
for the disarming and disbanding of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias in
Lebanon, I observed in my last report that, more broadly, the existence of armed
groups defying the control of the legitimate Government is incompatible with the
restoration and full respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of the country. The existence of militias also impedes the extension of
the Government of Lebanon’s control over all of its territory.
50. I have previously recalled the 1989 Taif Agreement, or the Charter of National
Reconciliation, as it is also known. The Agreement stipulated, in full consistency
with resolution 1559 (2004), that “the disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese
militias shall be announced. The militias’ weapons shall be delivered to the
Government of Lebanon within a period of six months, beginning with the approval
of “the Charter. My representatives and I are concerned with these matters, and we
have repeatedly emphasized that the Taif Agreement, which was concluded as the
result of a consensus among all Lebanese factions and parties, should be
implemented in full, and that resolution 1559 (2004) needs to be seen as an
expression of the United Nations support for the agreement.
51. In this context, I recall that the members of the Security Council, in
presidential statements released on 7 November 1989 (S/20953), 22 November 1989
(S/20988) and 27 December 1989 (S/21056) and in reiteration of earlier statements
in support of the talks in Taif, welcomed the ratification of the Taif Agreement by
the Lebanese Parliament on 5 November 1989, and “solemnly reaffirmed their
support for the Taif Agreement”, which they viewed as “the only basis for
guaranteeing the full sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and unity of
Lebanon”.

12

S/2006/248

Palestinian militias
52. In my last report, I stated that I had taken note of the Government of
Lebanon’s assurance that there was no need for weapons outside the Palestinian
refugee camps. The recent national dialogue in Lebanon affirmed this statement,
deciding unanimously on 14 March 2006 that Palestinians outside the camps should
be disarmed within a six-month period and that the problem of arms inside the
camps should be dealt with, while stressing the responsibility and commitment of
Lebanon to protect the Palestinian camps on its territory from any aggression. The
national dialogue also decided that the Government of Lebanon should follow up on
its efforts to improve the conditions of Palestinians living both inside and outside
refugee camps in Lebanon.
53. On 24 March 2006, a ministerial delegation was dispatched on an
unprecedented visit to a number of Palestinian refugee camps in Tyre, where the
delegation met with Palestinian representatives and inspected living conditions
inside the camps. A second such visit, to the Ein al-Hilweh camp, had to be
postponed, apparently because of the internal divisions among the different
Palestinian groups. The Government of Lebanon has told me that further visits are
anticipated.
54. Prior to the agreement on the above issue at the national dialogue, the
Government of Lebanon had continued its measures to limit the existence of
Palestinian arms outside the refugee camps, intensifying its presence around
Palestinian paramilitary positions to the south of Beirut and in the Beqaa Valley,
which are predominantly manned by the groups Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC) and Fatah-Intifada, the headquarters of
which are in the Syrian Arab Republic.8 I note the assurance of the Lebanese Army
Command that it has the capacity to collect the arms of Palestinian militias if and
when a political decision to that effect is taken.9
55. In response to the agreements reached during the Lebanese national dialogue,
leaders of the PFLP-GC, who had repeatedly rejected any disarmament of the group
in the past, have recently begun voicing their readiness to put their arms under the
State’s authority and to coordinate with the Government of Lebanon to devise joint
policies. I welcome these statements and expect that they will be matched by action
to this effect. In this context, I took note of the visit of PFLP-GC leader Ahmad
Jibreel to Lebanon on 1 April, and his talks there with political leaders mandated by
the national dialogue, Prime Minister Seniora, Speaker Berri, member of Parliament
Hariri and Hizbollah Secretary-General Sheikh Nasrallah.

__________________
8 The Lebanese Army Command told my Special Envoy that over the past months, the Lebanese

Armed Forces have established a total of 17 new positions in the vicinity of Palestinian
positions outside Palestinian refugee camps, deploying a total of 400 troops.
9 In an incident that underlined the need to end the presence of arms in the hands of groups
outside the control of the Government, two Lebanese policemen were shot and wounded by
members of the PFLP-GC while on patrol outside the group’s fortified base in Naameh, south of
Beirut, on 10 January 2006. The PFLP-GC later handed over to the authorities the member of
the group who had opened fire. The Palestinian Authority, which represents Palestinians in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, condemned the incident and reiterated its belief that Palestinians in
Lebanon were subject to and had to respect Lebanese laws, also stating that it regarded such
incidents as harmful to the Palestinian cause and to Lebanese-Palestinian relations.

13

S/2006/248

56. Fatah, the largest Palestinian faction in Lebanon, announced on 19 March
2006, five days after the presentation of the agreement, at the national dialogue, on
the issues of Palestinian arms in Lebanon, that it had “decided to collect all the
weapons we possess, including individual arms, and put them in secure places
(inside the camps), in accordance with the wishes of the inter-Lebanese dialogue
conference”. I warmly welcome and commend these statements and expect timely
follow-up to turn them into reality, as a first step towards the full disarmament and
disbanding of all militias in Lebanon.
57. I have continued to maintain close contact with the leadership of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO) and the Palestinian Authority, which, through PLO
Chairman and the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, have
reiterated to me their support for the full implementation of all provisions of
resolution 1559 (2004). In this context, I note the marked difference in the stated
willingness to cooperate with the Government of Lebanon for the purpose of the full
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) between Palestinian groups under the
direct authority of PLO and those groups that are headquartered in Damascus and do
not accept PLO as the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
58. Chairman Abbas has stated to me that PLO is committed to cooperate with the
Government of Lebanon for the purpose of implementing resolution 1559 (2004),
but does not have full authority over all Palestinian groups in Lebanon. Chairman
Abbas has further informed me that PLO is seeking the re-opening of its
representative office in Beirut in order to be able to better assist and cooperate with
the Government of Lebanon.
59. In this context, I note and commend the decision of the Lebanese Council of
Ministers on 5 January 2006 to re-open the representative office of PLO in Beirut,
in reaction to the request of PLO to establish a diplomatic mission in Beirut, which I
referred to in my last report (S/2005/673). Chairman Abbas has stated to me that
PLO is in the process of designating a representative to head the office. I look
forward to the early opening of the PLO diplomatic representation in Beirut.
Hizbollah
60. As yet there has been no noticeable change in the operational status and
capabilities of Hizbollah. The issue of the arms of the organization has been
included on the agenda of the Lebanese national dialogue, which has been adjourned
until 28 April 2006. The item has not yet been discussed.
61. I recall my observation in my last report to the Security Council that a group
engaged in the democratic political process of opinion formation and decisionmaking cannot simultaneously possess an autonomous armed operational capacity
outside the authority of the State. I also recall that in implementing the 1989 Taif
Agreement, the majority of Lebanese militias merged into the Lebanese Armed
Forces during the 1990s, in accordance with the Taif Agreement’s provision that the
“disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias shall be announced,” and
that “the militias’ weapons shall be delivered to the Government of Lebanon within
a period of six months”, beginning with the ratification of the Agreement.
62. In that context, I note the statement of the Lebanese Army Command to me
that the integration of Hizbollah into the Armed Forces does not pose problems from
an operational point of view if and when such a decision is taken. In this context, I

14

S/2006/248

also recall my statement in my last report to the Council that Hizbollah’s inclusion,
for the first time, in the Government underlined the significance of its possible
transformation into solely a political party. I also reiterate my belief that the
carrying of arms outside the official armed forces is impossible to reconcile with the
participation in power and in government in a democracy.
63. In addition, I note that the leaders of most Lebanese political factions have
stated to me that they view with favour the eventual integration of Hizbollah into
the Lebanese Armed Forces. Lebanese political leaders have also frequently
reaffirmed their commitment to the full implementation of the 1989 Taif Agreement.
64. I was concerned when I was informed in February 2006 of an incident, in
which arms destined for Hizbollah had been transferred from the Syrian Arab
Republic into Lebanon. Twelve trucks carrying ammunitions and weapons of
various kinds, including Katyusha rockets, crossed the border from the Syrian Arab
Republic. Discovered a few days later at a checkpoint inside Lebanon, the trucks
were allowed to continue their journey towards their destination in south Lebanon.
A statement released by the Lebanese Armed Forces following the incident on
6 February 2006 indicated that transportation and storage of ammunition belonging
to the “resistance”, once inside Lebanon, were subject to the ministerial policy
statement of the current Lebanese Government, which considered the “resistance” to
be legitimate. As the Government of Lebanon has confirmed, the Lebanese Armed
Forces has thus not been authorized to prevent further movement of the
ammunitions, which had been a common practice for more than 15 years. Hizbollah
publicly confirmed that the arms were destined for the group. The Government of
Lebanon and the Lebanese Army Command have informed my Special Envoy that
further cases of arms transfers would be subject to the direct decision of Prime
Minister Seniora and that no further transfers of ammunitions and weapons have
occurred since this incident.
65. Hizbollah continues to justify its existence as a “resistance” movement by
Israel’s ongoing occupation of the Shebaa farms area, which the United Nations has
determined to be Israeli-occupied Syrian territory and which many Lebanese
continue to assert is Lebanese.10 I also reiterate my determination, made in my last
report to the Council, that even if the Lebanese claim to the Shebaa farms area were
legitimate, it would be the responsibility of the Government of Lebanon only to
address this claim in conformity with international law and relevant Security
Council resolutions, and not that of an armed group outside the control of the
Government.
66. It is noteworthy, however, that Hizbollah, through its participation in the
national dialogue, has agreed to support for all contacts undertaken by the
Government of Lebanon to “establish the Lebanese identity of the Shebaa
farmlands,” and “to determine the area’s borders in accordance with procedures and
principles approved and accepted by the United Nations”. Hizbollah’s agreement
implies that it recognizes that a process pursued by the Government of Lebanon to
achieve, through due process, the delineation of the border between the Syrian Arab
__________________
10

In paras. 31-37 above, I have outlined in more detail the Security Council’s repeated
determination that the Shebaa farmlands, until such time that a border delineation agreement is
concluded, through due process, between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic and is
deposited with the United Nations, cannot be considered Lebanese land, but continues to be
defined as Israeli-occupied Syrian territory.

15

S/2006/248

Republic and Lebanon is the sole and exclusive legitimate pathway to restore
Lebanese sovereignty over the Shebaa farms.
67. It is also particularly noteworthy that Hizbollah has embraced the national
dialogue and is, through its participation in the round table and its agreement to its
agenda, willing to discuss the issue of its arms. It is worth emphasizing that
Hizbollah Secretary-General Sheikh Nasrallah was one of the Lebanese leaders
promoting the idea of a national dialogue among the Lebanese, which would be
based on the Taif Agreement. I have further taken positive note of repeated
statements by Hizbollah leaders that indicate their willingness to disarm through
design of, and Hizbollah’s integration into, a broad national defence strategy
mechanism for the protection of Lebanon. These are commendable developments.
68. In this context, I note again that a dialogue with parties other than the
Lebanese authorities is indispensable in order to realize the implementation of the
mandate contained in resolution 1559 (2004) to disarm and disband all Lebanese
and non-Lebanese militias.11

E.

Presidential election process
69. In resolution 1559 (2004), the Security Council declared its support for a free
and fair electoral process in Lebanon’s then upcoming presidential election
conducted according to Lebanese constitutional rules devised without foreign
interference or influence.
70. In my report to the Security Council of 1 October 2004 (S/2004/777), I
recalled the process whereby President Lahoud’s term of office was extended by
three years on 4 September 2004. In its presidential statement of 23 January 2006
(S/PRST/2006/3), the Security Council noted with regret that provisions of
resolution 1559 (2004) had yet to be implemented, mentioning in particular free and
fair presidential elections conducted according to the Lebanese constitutional rules,
without foreign interference and influence.
71. The national dialogue in Lebanon decided on 14 March 2006 on the need for
discussion of the subject of the presidency of the Lebanese Republic in order to deal
with the crisis of the current Government. The issue was adjourned until the
dialogue reconvenes on 28 April 2006. The issue of the presidential election process

__________________
11 Hizbollah maintains close ties, with frequent contacts and regular communication, with the

Syrian Arab Republic and the Islamic Republic of Iran. In this context, in particular, I have
taken note of statements by senior officials of the Syrian Arab Republic urging a continuation of
the “resistance”, for example, by the President of the Syrian Arab Republic during his press
conference with the visiting President of Iran in Damascus on 19 January 2006, or by the
Foreign Minister of Syria in an interview with the Lebanese daily As-Safir, published on
28 March 2006.

16

S/2006/248

has figured very prominently on the agenda in Lebanon over the past six months.12
Several hundreds of thousands of Lebanese commemorated on 14 February 2006 the
first anniversary of the assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri and 22 others
in downtown Beirut. Several political leaders addressing the rally attacked President
Lahoud and called for his resignation. A number of sessions of the Council of
Ministers were cancelled or postponed, or suffered from a lack of quorum due to
controversies over the role and presence of President Lahoud.

IV. Observations
72. Since my last report to the Council of 26 October 2005 (S/2005/673), the
Lebanese have made further significant progress towards implementing in full all
provisions of resolution 1559 (2004), in particular with the agreements reached in
the national dialogue. However, the provisions of resolution 1559 (2004) calling for
the disbanding and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, the
extension of the control of the Government of Lebanon over all Lebanese territory,
and strict respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government
have not yet been fully implemented. There has not been a presidential election
process, as called for in the resolution and the Security Council presidential
statement of 23 January 2006 (S/PRST/2006/3).
__________________
12 On 20 February, 13 current members and one former member of the Lebanese Parliament

submitted a motion to Speaker Berri, asserting that they had been subjected to pressures and
threats from the Syrian and Lebanese security services to compel them to ratify the draft law
extending President Lahoud’s term in office. The members of Parliament further claimed that, as
a result of the fact that their vote had been tarnished by a basic lack of free will, they viewed the
entire voting process related to the constitutional amendment extending the President’s term as
null and void, and that, since their votes in favour of the extension had been induced under
duress and were therefore to be considered null and void, the law amending the Lebanese
constitution was invalid, not technically having received the constitutionally mandated twothirds majority vote. In conclusion, the members of Parliament requested Speaker Berri to take
the necessary constitutional measures to deal with the outcome of the process they considered
invalid. The members of Parliament submitted a copy of their motion to me (see annex II).
During a visit to Beirut, my Special Envoy for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004) met, on my behalf, with 11 out of the 14 members of Parliament who had
submitted the motion to Speaker Berri (three were out of the country and therefore unable to
attend the meeting). In the meeting, the parliamentarians recounted in detail their individual
experiences in relation to the vote extending President Lahoud’s term in office. The vast
majority of the members of Parliament asserted that they had received direct instructions from
the Syrian military intelligence in Lebanon. These instructions were allegedly conveyed by the
chief of Syrian military intelligence in Lebanon, General Rustom Ghazaleh, and/or by the chief
of Syrian intelligence’s Beirut branch, Muhammad Khallouf, either in meetings held in the
Syrian intelligence headquarters in Lebanon at Anjar, or the intelligence headquarters in Beirut,
Beau Rivage, or by telephone.
The vast majority of parliamentarians claimed that they had been told that a decision had
been taken that President Lahoud’s term was to be extended, and that they had to act in
accordance with this decision. They had also been told that failure to comply with the decision
might jeopardize Lebanon’s security and stability, and that they might put their personal security
at risk. A number of parliamentarians further recounted conversations with former Prime
Minister Hariri, who had confirmed the instructions and, when doing so, had referred to
endangerment of his own life if the extension did not pass successfully in Parliament. The
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has strongly denied all these allegations.

17

S/2006/248

73. Lebanon has continued its journey into a new era of its history. Yet the new
Lebanon is still fragile. There is urgent need to take tangible measures in order to
retain the momentum and maintain Lebanon’s progress towards full reaffirmation of
its sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence, consistent with
the 1989 Taif Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004).
74. In particular, the implementation of the agreements reached in the national
dialogue now urgently necessitates and depends on the cooperation of parties other
than the Lebanese themselves for the full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).
I emphasize that resolution 1559 (2004) explicitly calls on all parties concerned to
cooperate fully and urgently with the Security Council for the full implementation
of this and all relevant resolutions concerning the restoration of the territorial
integrity, full sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon, and that the
Security Council, in its presidential statement of 23 January 2006 (S/PRST/2006/3),
called on all other parties concerned, in particular the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic, to cooperate in the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).
75. With the agreements unanimously reached in the national dialogue and their
initiative to work proactively and constructively with the Syrian Arab Republic, a
united Lebanon has offered an outstretched hand to the Syrian Arab Republic. I call
on the Syrian Arab Republic to accept this offer and to undertake measures, in
particular, to establish embassies and delineate the border between the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon. Diplomatic representation in other States and the existence
and clear delineation of national boundaries are basic indicators and intrinsic
elements of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of any
State. Mutual diplomatic representation is also the most appropriate way to address
any bilateral tension that may exist, and steps undertaken towards this end would
further contribute in their own right to improving the bilateral relationship between
the two historically close neighbours. The establishment and use of embassies is an
essential tool to ease tensions and secure stability in the relations between States. I
therefore reiterate my urgent call on Syria to cooperate with Lebanon for the
purpose of establishing embassies, of delineating the border between the countries
and of undertaking any other measure towards the full implementation of resolution
1559 (2004).
76. I have outlined that the delineation of the border between the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon is an element of crucial importance to a number of explicit
operational requirements of resolution 1559 (2004), which places central emphasis
on the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political independence of Lebanon
under the sole and exclusive authority of the Government of Lebanon throughout
Lebanon. In particular, territorial integrity of, and sovereignty over, a particular
territory is impossible to achieve if the borders of that territory are undefined,
uncertain or disputed. In addition, the explicit mandate contained in resolution 1559
(2004) for Lebanon to extend its governmental authority over all of its territory can
be realized only if the Government of Lebanon and all other relevant parties know
what the entirety of the territory of Lebanon is, with its exact boundaries determined
and delineated. The timely implementation of tangible measures towards the
delineation of the border between the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon, as well as
towards the disarming and disbanding of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias, is an
important step towards the extension of Government control over all its territory.

18

S/2006/248

77. Noting that repeated statements by representatives of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic that the Shabaa farms area is Lebanese and not (Israelioccupied) Syrian territory, as determined by the United Nations on the basis of the
so-called Blue Line, I reiterate my previous caveat that the United Nations
determination of the status of the Shabaa farms is without prejudice to any border
delineation agreement the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon conclude. On the
contrary, given the apparent agreement between all relevant parties, I repeat my call
on the Governments of the Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon to take steps urgently
under international law to delineate their border. The conclusion of such a border
agreement would represent, as I have stated previously, a tangible and significant
step towards formalizing relations between the two countries, towards reaffirming
Lebanon’s sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence and the full
implementation of all provisions of resolution 1559 (2004). Its current status as
Israeli-occupied Syrian territory does, however, remain valid unless and until the
Governments of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic take steps under
international law to alter that status.
78. I also emphasize again that while the negotiation and conclusion of a border
delineation agreement is the exclusive prerogative of the Syrian Arab Republic and
Lebanon, discussions should focus particularly and urgently on those areas, the
status of which is uncertain or disputed, without prejudice to their status as occupied
by a third party and subject to Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).
79. I have previously observed that the existence of armed groups defying the
control of the legitimate Government, which by definition is vested with a
monopoly on the use of force throughout its territory, is incompatible with the
restoration and full respect of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of the country. I have also previously recalled that the 1989 Taif
Agreement, in full consistency with resolution 1559 (2004) on this matter, calls for
the disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias and the delivery of their
weapons to the Government of Lebanon. In putting forward an urgent call for the
full implementation of the 1989 Taif Agreement, which was endorsed by the
Security Council in a number of presidential statements issued in 1989, I call for the
urgent and full implementation of all provisions of resolution 1559 (2004).
80. I further recall the Security Council’s expression of concern over movements
of arms and people into Lebanese territory and its commendation of the Government
of Lebanon’s taking of measures against such movements in the Council presidential
statement of 23 January 2006 (S/PRST/2006/3). I also join and reiterate with
urgency the Security Council’s call in the same statement on the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic to take similar measures, and note again that timely
implementation of tangible measures to delineate in full the border between the
Syrian Arab Republic and Lebanon will be an important step towards preventing
any illegal traffic from crossing the border and towards extending the control of the
Government of Lebanon over all its territory.
81. The national dialogue in Lebanon is a truly historic and unprecedented event.
Its significance as the first-ever truly national dialogue in Lebanon, without any
third-party presence, is not to be underestimated. This is the first time that the
Lebanese have come together in this manner to talk frankly with one another about
issues that only a few months ago were considered taboo. This is remarkable, an

19

S/2006/248

outstanding achievement in its own right, and I commend Speaker Berri for his
initiation of the national dialogue. I also note, and emphasize, that the convening of
the national dialogue followed, and stands in full accordance with, my own and the
Security Council’s calls for continued national dialogue, as expressed in my last
report to the Council and in the Council presidential statement of 23 January 2006
(S/PRST/2006/3).
82. The national dialogue has already achieved important agreements, which are in
full conformity with the Taif Agreement and resolution 1559 (2004). As I have
stated above, there is an urgent need now to build on the existing momentum and
turn the agreements reached into practical reality. To that end, dialogue and
partnership are necessary between the Lebanese and the Syrian Arab Republic, and
cooperation by all sides is indispensable.
83. The agreement reached in the national dialogue on the arms of Palestinian
militias outside Palestinian refugee camps is a tremendously significant and
important step towards the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). Emphasizing
that this historical agreement is in full conformity with the Taif Agreement and
resolution 1559 (2004), I call for its implementation within the six-month period
stipulated by the national dialogue. I commend the Lebanese, and particularly Prime
Minister Seniora for his wise and farsighted initiative and approach, which seeks to
address not just the issue of the Palestinian arms, but also the living conditions and
status of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to an eventual overall
resolution of the Palestinian refugee problem. I call on all parties to support the
implementation of the agreement reached and of Lebanese efforts to address the
socio-economic conditions of Palestinians in Lebanon.
84. It is my hope that the national dialogue will address the remaining issues on its
agenda with equal farsightedness and equal determination to succeed, guided by the
Taif Agreement, in order to reach a consensus that will further the full and timely
implementation of all provisions of resolution 1559 (2004). The dialogue is
scheduled to reconvene on 28 April 2006. I wish to reiterate and underline my
strong support for the national dialogue, which has the full backing of the
international community.
85. I also recall that it is a central element of the reaffirmation of the sovereignty,
unity and political independence of any country, and an important step towards the
extension of the control of any Government over all of its territory, that armed
groups outside the authority of the Government be brought under its control. In this
context, I recall that in implementing the Taif Agreement, the majority of Lebanese
militias merged into the Lebanese Armed Forces during the 1990s.
86. Against this background, I call for similar steps to be taken with regard to the
remaining Lebanese militias, in fulfilment of both the Taif Agreement and
resolution 1559 (2004), with particular attention paid to the formulation of a
comprehensive national defence mechanism that would guarantee the adequate
protection of Lebanon, its territory and its population. I also urgently call on all
parties who have the ability to influence Hizbollah and other militias to support the
full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004).
87. I observe that the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) is part of a wider
process of historical transformation, which also encompasses the investigations into
the terrorist assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri and 22 others in

20

S/2006/248

downtown Beirut and into other acts of assassination and terror in Lebanon over the
past period, the ongoing work to reform electoral processes in Lebanon more
broadly and the ongoing preparations and subsequent implementation of economic
reforms. I call on all parties to support this wider process of transformation in
Lebanon, in the best interest of the Lebanese, the neighbouring States and the
stability of the region, and to urgently take all enabling measures to this end.
88. In conclusion, I reiterate my urgent appeal to all parties concerned to comply
with all requirements of resolution 1559 (2004) without delay and fully implement
this and all other resolutions related to the restoration of the territorial integrity, full
sovereignty and political independence of Lebanon.
89. I continue to believe that the implementation of resolution 1559 (2004) should
proceed in a way that would best ensure the stability and unity of Lebanon, the
Syrian Arab Republic, and the wider region. I also remain committed to the
implementation of all Security Council resolutions and the ultimate achievement of
a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
90. It is my strong belief that with the continued support of the Security Council,
the national dialogue, the unity of the Lebanese and the farsighted leadership of the
Government of Lebanon, as well as the necessary cooperation of all other relevant
parties, including the Syrian Arab Republic and the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
difficulties of the past can be overcome and significant headway made towards the
full implementation of resolution 1559 (2004). I remain at the disposal of the
Security Council and stand ready to continue to assist the parties in the full
implementation of the resolution.

21

S/2006/248

Annex I
Decisions of the Lebanese National Dialogue
(14 March 2006)
[Original: Arabic]
The Lebanese Republic
The Parliament
Decisions of the Lebanese Dialogue Conference
1.

The question of finding the truth and its ramifications
The conferees decided on the first agenda item at the opening of the dialogue
on 2 March 2006:
• The International Independent Investigation Commission
• The international tribunal
• Expansion of the mandate of the Investigation Commission.
The following agenda items were decided on 14 March 2006:

2.

The Palestinian issue
In keeping with the section of the Charter of National Reconciliation (the Taif
Agreement) entitled “Reinstating the sovereignty of the Lebanese State over the
entire Lebanese Land” and in compliance with the contents thereof, affirming the
need for Palestinians to respect the authority of the State and to comply with its
laws, and rejecting resettlement and supporting the right of return for Palestinians,
the conferees agreed on the following:
• To urge the Lebanese Government to follow up on its efforts to deal with
quality-of-life, social and humanitarian issues with regard to Palestinians
living both inside and outside refugee camps in Lebanon, with all the legal
facilitation and concrete follow-up on the part of the international community
that this entails, and to shoulder its responsibility to ensure a decent and
honourable life for Palestinians until such time as they return to their homes.
• Based on the decision of the Council of Ministers with respect to the issue of
Palestinian refugees in Lebanon and in compliance therewith, to disarm
Palestinians outside the camps within a six-month period and to deal with the
problem of arms inside the camps, while stressing the responsibility and
commitment of the Lebanese State to protect the Palestinian camps from any
aggression, the conferees committed to concrete action to implement the above
and supported the Government’s efforts to do so through means of dialogue.
• To regard the statement in the Preamble to the Constitution that there shall be
“no fragmentation, no partition and no resettlement” as part of the pact of
communal existence, about which paragraph (j) of the Preamble to the
Constitution states that any authority that contradicts it has no constitutional
legitimacy.

22

S/2006/248

3.

Lebanese-Syrian relations
In keeping with the statement in the Preamble to the Constitution that Lebanon
is free, sovereign, independent and Arab in its identity and affiliation and the
confirmation by the Charter of National Reconciliation (the Taif Agreement) of the
special relationship between Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Republic that derives its
strength from the roots of kinship, history and joint fraternal interests, and affirming
the need for coordination and cooperation between the two countries in various
areas to achieve the common interests of both with respect to sovereignty and
independence, the conferees agreed that the development of these bonds entailed
their establishment on the basis of firm and clear principles that would correct any
deficiencies that have marred these relations, including:
• To allow neither Lebanon nor the Syrian Arab Republic to pose a threat to the
security and safety of the other country or its citizens under any circumstances
whatsoever, to require each side to control its borders to this end, and to call
on the Lebanese Government to take the necessary measures;
• To establish the principle of non-intervention by either State in the other’s
internal affairs;
• To establish reciprocal relations between the two States on the basis of mutual
trust and respect to be embodied at the earliest possible date in the
establishment of embassy-level diplomatic relations between the Syrian Arab
Republic and Lebanon;
• To activate and support the joint committee to close the file on missing
persons and detainees in the two countries with all possible speed.

4.

The Shebaa farmlands
The interlocutors agreed on the Lebanese identity of the Shebaa farmlands, and
affirmed their support for all contacts being made by the Government to establish
the Lebanese identity of the Shabaa farmlands and the Kafr Shuba hills and to
determine their borders in accordance with procedures and principles approved and
accepted by the United Nations.

5.

The presidency of the Republic
The interlocutors agreed on the need for discussion of this subject in order to
deal with the crisis of the current Government.

6.

Arms of the resistance
The issue of arms of the resistance is also still under discussion.

23

S/2006/248

Annex II
Letter from current and former members of Parliament to
Speaker Berri
(20 February 2006)
[Original: Arabic]
Beirut, 20 February 2006
His Excellency the Speaker of the Parliament, the Honourable Mr. Nabih Berri,
Salutations,
The undersigned current and former members of Parliament have the honour to
inform you of the following:
In view of the fact that we were subjected to pressures and threats from the
Syrian and Lebanese security services to compel us to ratify the draft law extending
the term of the President of the Republic, Emil Lahoud,
And in view of the fact that our vote was thus tarnished by a basic lack of free
will that renders not only it but the entire voting process with respect to the
constitutional amendment extending the term of the President of the Republic null
and void,
We officially inform you by this letter that we were opposed to the draft law
extending the term of the President of the Republic Emil Lahoud, which was passed
by Parliament on 3 September 2004, and that we were subjected to unbearable
pressures and threats to induce us to agree to it under duress. This renders our vote
null and void, as if it had never taken place, and consequently invalidates Law
No. 585/2004 of 4 September 2004 by virtue of it not having received the
constitutionally mandated two-thirds majority vote. We request that Your
Excellency take our position into consideration and take the necessary constitutional
measures to deal with the invalid outcome resulting from it.
With respect,
(Signed)a
Mohammed Ali Al-Mayss
Walid Eido
Michel Faraon
Nicolas Fattoush
Nabil de Freige
Yeghya Gergian
Bahia Hariri
Ghenwa Jalloul
Mohammed Kabbani
Hagob Kassargian
Atef Majdalani
Farid Makari
Jean Ogassapian
Serj Tor Sarkissian
a

24

Names are copied from the unofficial English translation.

S/2006/248

Annex III
Minutes of the meeting of the joint Lebanese-Syrian
military commission
(9 May 2005)
[Original: Arabic]
Pursuant to the instructions of the military leadership of the Syrian Arab Army
and the Lebanese Army, a commission has been formed to determine if units of the
Syrian Arab Army are stationed within the political boundaries of the Lebanese
Republic in the Deir Al-Ashayr area. Following a field survey of the area by the
commission, it became clear that there was a discrepancy between the two
countries’ topographic maps. Joint Lebanese-Syrian boundary commissions had
been previously formed, including members from the foreign and justice ministries
of the two countries, along with technical experts, but had not completed their work
at the time.
The Syrian and Lebanese sides proposed that these commissions be reactivated
in order to eliminate the discrepancy between the official borders on the two
countries’ maps and that the borders then be unambiguously demarcated and
committed to.
The minutes were signed on 9 May 2005.
For the Lebanese side:
(Signed) Brigadier General Saleh Suleiman
(On the basis that political boundaries are
in themselves international boundaries)
For the Syrian side:
(Signed) General Adeeb ‘Ali Qasim

25
