UNITED NA TI‘ONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

I940 th

MEETING:

12 JULY

1976

NEW YORK

:1I,.’: ,(
d -:\
L.>
‘/.
-* .A?
P&g. .Yl
;/ 2 -,
. ‘1:.+-*
T6f;
Provisional agenda (SIAgendall940)
. . . . . . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .‘.-. FJ<,b.,! 1 i /g?..
k..-;c &fL-;?
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ‘,.tl:“j’r . ‘,..
~y-.,’
“ -.--/ *
Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius, current Chairman of the Orga_ .:
nization of African Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against the
Republic of Uganda:
(a) Letter dated-6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary of the
Organization of African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(b) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);
(cl Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/12123);
(4 Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/12124). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
/

CONTENTS

,A

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the .Security Council. The dateof the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council; The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1940th MEETING
Held in New York, on Monday,- 12 July 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Piero VINCI

(Italy).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United .Republic of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l940)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
current Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity, of the “act of aggression” by Israel against
the Republic of Uganda:
(a) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant
Executive Secretary of the Organization
of
\
African Unity to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(6) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mauritania
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12128);
k-1 Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the permanent
Representative of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/12123);
(4 Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of
Uganda to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/12124)
The meeting

of the agenda

was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by the Prime Minister of Mauritius,
current
Chairman of the Organization
of African Unity, of
the “Act of aggression”
by Israel against the Republic
of Uganda:
(a) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Assistant Executive Secretary
of the Organization
of African
Unity to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12126);
(b) Letter dated 6 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritania
to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12128);

(c) Letter dated 4 July 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General
(S/12123);
(d) Letter dated 5 July 1976 from the Charge d’affaires
a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Uganda to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12124)

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision taken by the Council at its 1939th meeting, I propose to invite the representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea, Israel, Kenya, Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Qatar, Uganda and the United Republic
of Cameroon to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Herzog
(Israel), Sir Harold Walter (Mauritius)
and Mr. AbdalEa (Uganda) took places at the Council table and
Mr. von Wechmar (Federal Republic of Germany),
Mr. DoukourP (Guinea), Mr. Waiyaki (Kenya), Mr. El
Hassen
(Mauritania),
Mr. Jamal
(Qatar)
and
Mr. Oyono (United Republic of Cameroon) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Security Council that I have received a
letter from the representative of Somalia requesting
an invitation to participate in the Council’s discussion.
In accordance with the provisions of Article 31 of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representative of Somalia to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote.
3. In view of the small number of seats available at
the Council table, I invite the representative of Somalia
to take the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding
that he will
be invited to take a place at the Council table when
in is his turn to speak.
At the invitation
Qf the President, Mr. Hussen
(Somalia) took the place reserved for him at the side
of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the following documents:
S/12135, containing
the text of
a letter from the representative of Mexico, addressed
to the President of the Council, and S/12136, con-

taming the text of a letter from the representative
of Somalia, addressed to the President of the Council.
5. I call on the representative of the Libyan Arab
Republic, who has asked to speak on a point of order.
6. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): Permit me
to take the floor now to make a statement on behalf
of my delegation on a point of order.
7. I should like to stress the fact that the item onh
our agenda which we are discussing now is simple and
clear; it deals with the criminal act of aggression
committed
by the Zionist, racist and terrorist entity
against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of
Uganda, a State Member of the United Nations. The
title of the item is, without any shade of doubt or
ambiguity and has been unanimously agreed to by the
Council. It reads as follows: “Complaint
by the Prime
Minister of Mauritius, current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, of the ‘act of aggression’
by Israel against the Republic of Uganda”. For that
reason, Mr. President, I express my earnest hope that
you will call on speakers to limit themselves to the
issue before the Council.

munity, especially through the United Nations, which
is taking care of this problem in the General Assembly
under the agenda item “Measures to prevent international terrorism which endangers or takes innocent
human lives or jeopardizes
fundamental
freedoms,
and study of the underlying causesof those forms of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery,
frustration, grievance and despair and which cause
some people to sacrifice human lives, including their
wn, in an attempt to affect radical changes”.
P
11. We understand that it is not the intention of the
Secretary-General
to invite the Council to depart from
its clear and agreed upon agenda. Moreover, also in
this respect, I refer to document S/12134 containing
the letter from the representative of the United States
addressed to you, Mr. President.
My delegation
would like to state that the contents of the abovementioned communication
are irrelevant to the item
under discussion. We express our reservations in this
regard and our hope that this move is not an attempt
to distract us from the agreed agenda with the intention of broadening the debate and giving an erroneous
interpretation
to our agenda.
12. Again, Mr. President, I hope that you will keep
the debate on the line agreed upon by the Council with
a view to reaching a happy and effective conclusion.
My delegation will oppose any attempt to hijack the
debate under the guise of debating the hijacking.

8. On this occasion I should like to express our
thanks and gratitude to the Secretary-General
for the
sincere efforts he made in helping to alleviate the.suffering of human beings during the tragedy of Entebbe,
and I join the representative of France in regretting
that the Secretary-General
was unable to intervene in
this matter as all of us had,wished him to do. We are
convinced, as the representative of France said, that
his great moral authority would have been a valuable
asset in a situation affecting States Members. The
mere fact that he has participated in the debate proves
that the matter we are discussing now is very important and merits the attention of the Council.

13. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic for raising this point of
order.
14. I call on the representative
of order.

15. Mr. HERZOG (Israel): Mr. President, as a point
of order, may I ask fqr your guidance: when is a point
of order a point of order?

9. Indeed, what could be more serious than a flagrant
act of aggression against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a Member State? The SecretaryGeneral, in his statement before this Council, undoubtedly motivated by humanitarian
considerations,
said that to uphold the principle of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of every State was not the
only element involved in considering cases of the kind
which the Council is discussing today. He continued
as follows:

16. The PRESIDENT:
The only thing I can do is to
read out rule 30 of the provisional rules of procedure
which says:
“If a representative raises a point of order, the
President shall immediately
state his ruling. If it is
challenged, the President shall submit his ruling to
the Security Council for immediate decision and it
shall stand unless overruled.”

“This is particularly
true when the world community is now required to deal with unprecedented
problems arising from acts of international
terrorism, which I have consistently condemned and
which raise many issues of a humanitarian,
moral,
legal and political character for which, at the present
time, no commonly agreed rules or solutions exist.”
[1939th meeting,

para.

of Israel on a point

17. I call on the representative-of
on a point of order.

the United

States

18. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
I wish to assure the representative of the Libyan Arab
Republic that the intention of the letter which we have
passed around is clearly to make it perfectly certain to
all what are the provisions of that particular Convention’ and that particular agreement which have great
relevance-indeed,
very great relevance-to
this

14.)

10. My delegation welcomes this sincere and noble
appeal by the Secretary-Genera+ to the world com2

particular debate, as outlined in the agenda, both with
regard to the title of the agenda item and to the letters
thereunder, which was made extremely clear in the
consultations.

26. Our delegation has received a mandate from the
Organization
of African Unity to participate in the
debate on the item on our agenda, but our delegation
will not go into the core of the subject before it has
extended its condolences to the Chinese Mission upon
the passing of President Chou-teh, whose memory is
inseparably associated with the difficult struggle of
the Chinese people.

19. I should like to make one other comment, and
that is that I hope that the Government of the Libyan
Arab Republic is as interested in creating a situation
in the world where we do not have hijacking as it is
in not having a hijacking of this agenda.

27. Mr. President, the country which you represent
with competence and efficacy has become renowned
through time and among men because of its high level
of intelligence and deep understanding of the history
of mankind. My country has’ in recent years seen
expressed in friendly terms the feelings of mutual
understanding which unite Italy and the Republic of
Guinea.

20. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): We are
not going to take up the time of the Council. We are
going to continue with our debate, but I should like
to assure the representative of the United States that
my country, Libya, like all the African and Arab
countries, has always condemned
and denounced
hijacking. It has signed two conventions concerning
hijacking. The Organization of African Unity adopted
unanimously a resolution in which hijacking was condemned by all its members. The League of Arab States
has condemned hijacking and our Palestinian brothers
have condemned hijacking.

28. My. President, I should like to quote a passage
from one of your brilliant statements made in the
Sixth Committee at the twenty-seventh session of the
General Assembly. You were then recognizing the
difficulty inherent in elaborating a general definition
of the expression “international
terrorism”,
and you
stated at that time:

21. The question here is not one of defending hijacking. It is the question of not allowing any confusing measures to cover up a wanton aggression
against an independent,
sovereign State. If someone
wishes to discuss the question of hijacking, we are
open to a discussion of it, we are ready to discuss it.
We have been discussing it since 1972 in the General
Assembly. If it can be put as a separate item on the
agenda of the Security Council, we are ready to discuss it, but not to discuss it at the same time as a
justification for aggression against an African country.

“Like all human actions, terrorism had causes
which deserved to be examined with greatest attention, even compassion. The basic position of the
Italian Government
in that regard was that some
forms of violence had their origins in causes economic, social and therefore political
in nature.
Consequently
the maintenance
of international
peace and security could not consist merely in
ending conflicts, but must also involve the search
for their causes and the elimination
of the imbalances which characterized
the international
community.2’*

22. The PRESIDENT:
In reply to this point of order,
may I say that I believe that all members of the Council are aware of the item inscribed on the agenda and
of the background of the wording of this item. I think
that Ambassador Kikhia has referred to some relevant
parts of the statement made by the Secretary-General
which also shed some illumination
on the whole item,
because there are other relevant parts of that statement.

This thought of yours, Mr. President, eloquently illustrates the enlightened way in which your Government
will aid in judging the complaint
submitted by the
Organization of African Unity with regard to the act
of aggression committed by Israel against the Republic
of Uganda.

23. Finally, I would say that it has been the practice
in the Council and it is clear to everybody that any
item has always been interpreted with some latitude,
and it is, of course, the duty of each participant to
stick to the item, but not with such a restricted interpretation. I think that this is quite clear to everybody.

29. The Organization
of African Unity cannot be
put out by this situation, because it firmly condemns
any act of terrorism.
It rises up, together with all
universal forces, to condemn this evil. But condemnation should not be restricted to certain kinds of
terrorism; it ‘should be applied to the entire matter,
from top to bottom-that
is, to the true cause and to
all its effects. The complaint stresses the act of aggression because article 1 of the Definition of Aggression
contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX) specifies clearly and precisely what
is meant by the world aggression. The desire to turn
our complaint into a discourse on the nature of terrorism is merely a clear demonstration
of the desire
to maintain confusion by refusing to deal with the
cause and by dealing only with its effects.

24. We shall now proceed to our debate. The first
* speaker is the representative
of Guinea, on whom
I now call.
.
25. Mr. DOUKOURE
(Guinea) (interprecatiun from
French): Mr. President, the delegation of the State
Party of Guinea is truly proud to convey to you its
-sincere congratulations
as you take up the presidency
of the Council.
3

. 30. The Republic of Guinea is a young developing
State. Its objective is to solve economic difficulties
and all that narrows man’s horizon. It desires to make
the greatest possible contribution
so that a world of
peace, justice and universal security may be attained.
That is why it energetically
condemns ail acts of
hijackings, banditry, pillage, carnage and destruction,
including the illegal and unjust occupation of foreign
territories. It vigorously condemns the brutality and
killing to which millions of people of Africa, Asia and
Latin America are subject. Wherever one people
forcibly attempts to reduce another to a bestial state;
that is terrorism at its worst because it is its very roots.

33. If Uganda had refused to permit the landing of
the airbus in distress at Entebbe, it is certain that for
lack of fuel the aircraft would have crashed, immediately killing all passengers. And then the intemational outcry against Uganda would have been even
angrier. France itself had to ask its representatives
to intervene as quickly as possible and speak to President Idi Amin so that the airbus would be able to land
at Entebbe. Thus Uganda cannot be reproached for
having acted as it should have in such tragic circumstances. If the fact of receiving that poisoned package
indicated any kind of connivance with the hijackers,
then France also participated by intervening with the
Ugandan Government so that the airbus might land at
Entebbe.

31. The large countries,
whose histories record
much mistreatment
of other peoples and so much
good treatment of their own, cannot be prouder than
Africa, which has terrorized no one. Members will
recall that after the Second World War the League of
Nations was to decide where the Jewish State was to
be located. Some had proposed the Fouta-Djalon
in
Central Guinea; others preferred Uganda and even
Angola. To make myself even clearer, I must here
refer to an article entitled “When Angola was almost
a Jewish State”, published by the Jewish Press on
9 July last and therefore having an Israeli source. It
says:

34. France is very experienced. It knows the values
of civilization
and it respects international
law. That
is why it acted as it did. It would certainly not accept
having the Loyada case serve as an example for
Zionist strategy. While the other countries involved,
in a spirit of full solidarity and collaboration,
harmonized their actions so that the problem might be solved,
Israel, with. characteristic disloyalty, abused the confidence of ‘its partners. Prouder, more stubborn,
motivated by its ideas of destruction, Israel, risking
the killing of all involved, forgetting its nationals,
invaded alone, machine-gunned
alone, assassinated
alone, and, raising its bloodstained hands, cried out,

“With Angola, the former colony of Portugal, at
the centre of world headlines in recent months, it
is a remarkable fact that 65 years ago that African
jungle area almost became a Jewish State. The
bizarre story begins with the split within the Zionist
movement in the days of Herzl. In the wake of the
British offer for a Jewish homeland in Uganda and
Kenya, a deep division appeared within the Zionist
movement. Herzl and others, including the British
Zionist Israel Zangwill, wanted to accept the offer
since to them the land of Israel was the first choice
but the main thing was to find any place of refuge
for the oppressed Jews of East Europe. . . . When
the Zionists finally rejected any other land except
that of Israel, Zangwill broke with them and organized his own Jewish Territorialist
Association.“*

“This rescue operation is an achievement
of
great importance in the struggle against terrorism.
It is Israel’s contribution
to humanity’s
struggle
against international
terror.” [S/!2123, annex.]
Not content with the disorder concerning which it
does not consider itself guilty, Israel affirms that this
operation
.
“should not be viewed as the final chapter. It will
give us encouragement as we continue our- efforts,
but the struggle is not over: new efforts, new methods and unremitting
sophistication
will be required.” [Ibid.]
35. Uganda has fallen victim to its own humanism
and its excessive confidence in the moral values and
infinite perfectibility
of man. Uganda was confident
of the good will of France, the Federal Republic of
Germany, the United Kingdom and other countries.
It felt itself involved, and was to serve as a contact in
the unravelling of this sensitive matter. It waited, and
it acted in accordance with reason in the face of folly.
Uganda’s good will was, however, thwarted by the
invasion of its airport. It was waiting for negotiations;
it received executioners.
It was therefore a most
serious piece of trickery that Uganda and Africa as
a whole were faced with on 4 July 1976, the date of
the bicentenary of the United States, which Israel
celebrated with the carnage at Entebbe.

This reminder is of great importance, because thousands of kilometres
separate ,Israel from Entebbe,
but Zionist aviation had to make this trajectory to meet
an old dream-that
of being master of. Uganda.
32. Several countries were concerned by the hijackers’ ultimatum,
and Israel was not the only one.
In their ultimatum,
the hijackers communicated
their
demands to the Governments of Israel, France, the
Federal Republic of Germany, Kenya and Switzerland.
All those countries save Israel adopted the best possible attitude in such circumstances-that
is, they
kept their wits about them and acted with tact and
intelligence so as to avoid the worst.

36. Israel declares that Africa has applauded its
barbarous actions. What an odious slander! Was a

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

-4
..

F. Clarity, whose statement
matter for us:

single African pleased to see Ugandan blood shed in
that rescue operation? Is there a single African woman
or African child who would have acted thus, rather
than bite its nails and say, “I had nothing to do with
it, but I must still pay for it”. We have sad memories
of Dachau, of Buchenwald, of Auschwitz. We have
sad memories-of the crematoriums
where millions of
Jews were reduced to ashes. But were those ovens in
Entebbe, in Uganda, in Africa?
.
37. The Nazis were Israel’s worst enemies. What
did Israel do to punish them? And what does Israel
mean when it speaks of the cowardice of the Africans?
Is it not real cowardice to let the guilty lion go free
and to interrogate the docile antelope? Those who
were judged at Nuremberg were not really the guilty
ones, according to Israel. Rather, according to the
Israelis, the guilty were the peoples of Africa who
learned the best lessons from the war-that
is, to
eliminate slavery, colonialism
and imperialism!
And
it is upon the people of Africa that they vent their
rage at not having been able to destroy Dachau and
Auschwitz. They find satisfaction in burning Entebbe.
To celebrate such an act, as some have done, just
shows the sort of person one is the kind of morality
one advocates.

has best clarified

the

“The statement of the commander, Michel Bacos,
52 years old, appeared to contradict some accounts
of the events at Entebbe airport indicating that
Uganda troops had replaced the hijackers guarding
the hostages.
“... Commander
Bacos said ‘Ugandan
were never substituted for the hijackers’.‘**

soldiers

Despite the alleged misinterpretation
of the note
of thanks addressed to Marshal Idi Amin, Commander Bacos said that, and we quote: “the Ugandan
authorities had made efforts to assure decent material
conditions for the hostages*‘.* The French authorities, we believe, have confidence in this senior officer, the only offtcer in command of his aircraft. No
passenger is better qualified than he is to give an
accurate account of what occurred, unless for the
purpose of gagging the truth and imposing a lie.
41. We wish to draw the attention of the Council to
the real danger that this precedent represents-a
precedent which Israel wishes to see established because
it is convinced it will remain unpunished. On page 71
of the book entitled South Africa: Civilizations
in
Conjlict3, which was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for
international
reporting, Mr. Jim Hoagland writes:

38. Israel’s justification
for its aggression is, as we
have heard, that never again will Jews experience the
nightmare of being sorted out and separated from
others. But who counted and separated them at
Buchenwald? Was it Africa? Who counted and separated them at Dachau? Was it Africa? Who counted
and separated them at Dachau? Was it Uganda? Who
counted and separated them at Auschwitz? Was it
President Idi Amin? Of course not. Neither Marshal
Idi Amin nor Uganda nor Africa knows how to segregate or to discriminate
against anybody. But instead
of rising up against the Nazis, they fall upon Africa,
which they believe to be weak and ready to be dismembered. Only our dignity and sense of our own
worth prevent us from replying to such insolence.

“To Afrikaners, the parallels are as obvious as
they are embarrassing to the Israelis. They and the
Israelis are essentially white, Europeanized peoples
who have carved their own nations out of a land
inhabited by hostile, non-European
majorities that
would destroy the two nations if Afrikaners, and
the Israelis, listened to the United Nations and
depended on world opinion. Their religions are
similar, each being a ‘chosen people’. Israel... is
the other Western outpost in the third world.***
At the bottom

39. Precedents have been cited here that supposedly
served to inspire this barbarous act. Books have been
spoken of, pages referred to and authors mentioned
which have been interpreted so narrow-mindedly
that
international
law would appear to give the authorization to kill everybody and to declare one’s country
the only peaceful country on earth. International
law
is too civilized, too well worked-out and too humane
hot to condemn the violation of the air-space of a
sovereign State, unauthorized
landing in a country,
and, what is worse, the destruction of the human and
material resources of a State Member of the United
Nations.

of the page, we read:

“C. L. Sulzburger,
the astute foreign affairs
columnist for The- New York Times, reported in
1971 from Johannesburg that the Israeli 1967 tactics
are given major attention in South Africa’s military
manoeuvre schools.. . Sulzburger, a serious.. . journalist, reported ‘unconfirmable
rumours* that a
South African mission flew to Israel during the Sixday War to study tactics and that the Israelis passed
on to the South Africans secret plans of the French
Mirage fighter engine they had secured in Switzerland.“*
42. May we not wonder whether a secret South
African mission was not to learn, in this new school
of 4 July 1976, the art of invading Luanda, Maputo,
Conakry or-tomorrow
perhaps-Algiers?
We know

40. There could be no better testimony in this matter
than the statements made by the commander of the
Air France airbus. May I be permitted to quote The
N~IV York Times article of 6 July entitled “Pilot says
Africans Didn’t Stand-In for Guinea” by Mr. James

* Quoteb in English by the speaker.

5

that South Africa had adopted a law authorizing it to
intervene by force anywhere in Africa, that the interests and security of the apartheid regime are threatened. We know that, according to the Jewish Chrqnicle of 2 July 1976, 20,000 Israelis reside in South
Africa, and that in Soweto, one of the schools that
was the site of the recent massacres is the Morris
Isaacson Primary School, the name of which honours
the memory of a Jew who settled there in 1896. We
know-and
The Star, a South African newspaper, in
its issue of 24 April 1976 confirms this-that
inventories of joint Israeli-South
African forces have been
made. As proof of this, we quote the following:

attack against the Ugandau MIGs and the destruction
of the airport were not measures of reprisal against
the ,hijackers, but rather measures ‘against the sovereignty of the State of Uganda, a Member of the United
Nations.
46. It is for these reasons that, pursuant to the mission entrusted to my delegation, we call upon the
Council: first, vigourously to condemn Israel’s act of
aggression against our sister Republic of Uganda;
second, to require of Israel immediate
reparations
for the material damages inflicted by its aircraft on the
fraternal people of Uganda; and third, to take all
necessary measures to prevent international law from
degenerating to the point where it itself might endanger world peace and security.

“Israeli armed forces total 34,000 .regulars and
122,000 conscripts, with mobilization
up to 400,000
possible within 72 hours. Our total is 50,000, of
whom 35,400 are conscripts. Another 138,000 citizen
force men can be called up. Israel also has far more
artillery than South Africa and a formidable array
of anti-tank missiles. Israel has 38 brigades...*‘*
Why these calculations
purpose of formulating
Africa and threatening
peoples?

47. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I thank the representative of Guinea for the very kind
words he has addressed to me and, particularly,
to
my country. I also wish to thank him for having quoted
the statement I made in the Sixth Committee during
the twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly.
It will be very u>eful to me, I must say; I do not have
to go and look for it now.

of joint forces, if not for the
plans of aggression against
the total destruction of our

48. I now call on the Minister
of Mauritius.

43. If in our debates we are dealing with the question
of victory over international
terrorism, my delegation
indeed advocates the complete destruction of terrorism, starting with the destruction of its causes,
that is to say, wiping out colonialism, neo-colonialism,
the unlawful occupation of the territory of other
States, and imperialism
in general. The Republic of
Guinea will never agree that the struggle against terrorism can be synonymous with the destruction of
airports of other sovereign States, and my delegation
regards such an act as terrorism by one sovereign
State against another sovereign State.

Affairs

49. Sir Harold WALTER
(Mauritius):
Mr. President, I wonder whether I should congratulate you on
assuming such a high office or sympathize with.you,
for how uneasy lies the head that wears a crown. Be
that as it may, you have my best wishes for a successful term of office.
50. I should like to join the chorus of others who
have spoken before me to pay a humble tribute to that
great leader, Chairman Chou-teh, whose untimely
death is an international loss. His example as a servant
of democracy with a philosophy of persuasion rather
than force will, I hope, serve those nations which
need further instruction in the art of peaceful negotiations, patient discussions and forbearing tolerance.

44. If the Council fails to examine the complaint
before it bearing in mind the grave consequences that
will result therefrom if through complacency
Statesponsored piracy is legalized, if Israel is allowed to go
unpunished, this will only prove to the peace-loving
world that we have fallen into the trap of the wolf who
has become the shepherd, and that the only security
left for dur peoples is to avoid everything that migh,
serve to set us against each other.

51. As Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
Organization .of African Unity, I have been charged,
together with our sister States Guinea and Egypt, to
support our sister State, Uganda, in a just case of
flagrant violation of territorial
integrity and sovereignty by the State of Israel on the night of 3 to 4 July.

45. From no& on there must be a clear-cut distinction made between the allies of our enemies and our
own allies-our
own allies being those who share the
common aspirations for the peace and progress of
mankind, thdse whose assistance will not tomorrow
be a source of murder. The delegation of the Republic
of Guinea is sure that the world’s peoples will not be
duped by the reasons put forward by Israel in this
adventure. We are convinced that this operation had
aims other than the liberation of the hostages. The
* Quoted in English by the speaker.
*

for Foreign

52. The representative of Israel at the opening of his
statement [1939rh meeting] mentioned the principle
civis romnnus sum,
the principle
recognizing
a
State’s duty to defend its nationals abroad. Yes, but
the world does not belong to Rome nor are Romans
allowed with impunity to trample upon other nationals
.through bloodbaths. Rome conjures up the pinnacle
of imperialism.
The principle recognizing a State’s
duty to defend its nationals abroad is right, but it does
not lure that State into raping the sacrosanct integrity
of another State.
6

was also able to attend them. From that time, the
passengers seemed to be guarded, at least in part,
by persons who were not among the first group of
hijackers;
external security was provided,
at a
distance of 50 metres, by Ugandan soldiers.

53. Listening to the representative of Israel in his
skilful use of lr magic d~r verhe and the masterly
expose of his concept of sophistry in the presentation of the events leading to that fateful night, a feeble
man would almost be crowded to death. If we pause
and do not “let winged fancy roam”, can we disregard
the following facts, as evidenced by no less a person
than the representative of France, who is an interested
party and on whom the responsibility
for the plane,
the crew and the passengers lay? I quote:

“On 29 June, at 1.15 p.m., Marshall Idi Amin
submitted to the French Ambassador the text of
the conditions laid down by the hijackers for the
return of the hostages. The Ambassador of Somalia
was present at that meeting. He emphasized that
he, as the senior Arab Ambassador,
had been
chosen to represent the hijackers. Thereupon,
all
the conditions of the hijackers were communicated
to the Governments concerned.

“The French authorities, when informed of this
hijacking, alerted some of their embassies, including
that in Kampala, asking them to take steps for the
plane to be given permission to land, since it was
soon going to run out of fuel. That is why our Ambassador in Kampala
approached
the Ugandan
authorities about this, and permission to land was
given immediately.”
[Ibid., pcm. 182.1

“On 30 June, the representative of the PLO in
Kampala informed our Ambassador that women
and children might be released by the hijackers in
the course of the day. Forty-seven passengers were
in fact freed at 1 p.m.

54. That is a very important piece of independent
and objective evidence, and the Council will see, in
the course of my expose, that it is the basic tenet
which will destroy the case presented to the Council
by the representative of Israel. This facet of independent and factual evidence is what the representative
of Israel called in his statement:

“On the same day, at 5 p.m.,‘ we learned from a
local radio station that the hijackers had told the
President of Uganda that they would blow up the
plane and all the remaining hostages if their demands were not met by the countries concerned
the next day, 1 July, by 3 p.m.“-The
importance
of that paragraph is obvious as one continues reading
from the statement by the Ambassador of France.
Remember the times and the dates: 5 o’clock on
30 June, and 3 o’clock on 1 July, the next day.“In the course of the evening the Ambassador of
France was received by Marshal Idi Amin, whom
he asked to secure an extension of the deadline”.
-It was the Ambassador of France who requested
Marshal Idi Amin to obtain the extension of the
deadline.-“
On 1 July, shortly after the time-limit
had run out, the Ugandan Radio announced that the
hijackers, as a result of the intercession of Marshal
Idi Amin, had agreed, first, to release about 100 hostages, with the exception of Israeli nationals and
those with dual nationality,
and, secondly, to
extend the deadline to 4 July, 11 a.m. The crew
had asked not to be released until all the passengers
had been released.

“The destination
of the hijackers was, in accordance with a previously prepared plan”-the
operative words are “previously
prepared plan”“Entebbe
Airport, outside Kampala in Uganda.”
[Ibid.,

para.

78.1

55. There is no need for me, in the light of the two
statements I have just cited, to belabour this point,
which can be dismissed very casually, that Uganda
was no accomplice in this pervasive act of international terrorism. And yet, this was equated by the
representative of Israel as: “The weight of evidence
before us reveals prior knowledge and active connivance on the part of the Government of Uganda...”
[Ibid., para. 901. The question of prior knowledge,
from what I have just cited from the French representative’s statement, is easily disposed of.
56. So we are left now with the second part of the
Israeli representative’s
statement,
regarding
connivance”.
Let us see whether these remarks were
justified
and whether they are supported by the
slightest atom of evidence. Here again, I go to the
unchallenged evidence of the representative of France.
May I point out, en passant, that we have heard the
version of the Ugandan side and the version of the
Israeli side. If there is any doubt, then let us take the
independent version-that
which the representative
of France gave. to the Council in all objectivity
and
coolness and without any passion whatsoever:

“On 1 July, late in the morning, the Ambassador
of Israel in Paris informed the Minister for Foreign
Affairs that the Israeli Government was prepared,
in exchange for the release of the hostages, to free
a ‘certain number’ of prisoners whose names appeared on the hijackers’ list. He requested that that
information
be communicated
to the President of
Uganda by the Ambassador of France in Kampala.
The Israeli Government
expressed the hope that
the terms and conditions for the exchange ,would
be negotiated through the intermediary
of France.

“Through the efforts of Marshal Idi Amin, a few
minutes later the passengers were allowed to leave
the plane and food was brought to them. A doctor

“On the same day, at 3 o’clock, 100 passengers
of the airbus were in fact released and handed over,
by the Ambassador-of Somalia, to the Ambassador
7

must be brushed aside and tokens of conciliation
made? Instead of being taxed with active connivance,
one should recognize, in all fairness, that the:President
of Uganda revealed such passion, patience and diligence as, like faith, could have moved mountains.

of France. The Ambassador of France was received
in the afternoon by the President of Uganda, in the
presence of the Ambassador of Somalia: He transmitted to them the communication
received from
the Israeli Government.
He suggested, fm-thermore, resorting to the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations..

60. Unfortunately,
and sadly too, for all the efforts
and expense involved Uganda got as a reward the
death of some of its people, when the bugles of Israel
sounded the wrath of war and the rape of Uganda to
the whole world for ever. The quality of the villainy
is acknowledged and praised, but the villainy itself is
unforgi’veable and inexcusable.

“Towards the end of the day, the Ambassador
of Somalia informed our Ambassador in Kampala
of the hijackers’ reply. They stated that they were
prepared to study the terms for the release’ of the
prisoners held by the countries concerned. They
made it clear that they rejected the idea of involving
the Secretary-General.

61. I do not intend to mention any other country,
but is is right that Africa should be vigilant and not
allow division in its ranks. Perhaps it is fitting that
I quote these words of John Donne: “Do not listen
for whom the bell tolls. It may toll for thee. No man is
an island unto himself’.

“In the meantime,
the Foreign Ministry
had
indicated to the Israeli authorities that it agreed to
instruct our Ambassador to undertake the negotiation for the release of the hostages, on the basis of
the replies received from the Governments
concemed .

62. Whatever punishment does to a nation, it does
not induce a sense of guilt. We have seen the representative of the’state of Israel bask in the glory of the
skilful and detailed perpetration
of an outrage. But
let us not forget that the currency with which one pays
for peace is made up of courage and readiness to
serve honour at any cost. Ambition’s
debt is paid.

“On 2 July, the Ambassador of Israel made
known the position of the Israeli Government.”
-Take note of those dates: 1 July at 3 o’clock, and
2 July at 11 o’clock.-“It
wanted the terms of the
exchange to be determined
beforehand.”
[ihid.,
purus.

18.5194.1

63. The Organization
of African Unity proclaimed
to the world at large at its meeting in Addis Ababa
in 1970 that it condemns unequivocally
international
terrorism in whatever shape or form, but at the same
time will do everything in its power to uphold the
sacred principle enshrined in both the United Nations
Charter and the Charter of the Organization.of
African
Unity, that territorial
integrity and political sovereignty cannot be violated.

57. Can we disregard the fact that it was through the
President of Uganda that the pas.sengers were allowed
to leave the plane and food was brought to them? Can
we disregard the fact that there was a first release of
47 passengers, through the intervention of the President of Uganda? Can we disregard the fact that 100
more hostages were released, on the intervention
of
the President of Uganda? Can we disregard the fact
that the deadline was postponed from 1 July to 4 July
at 11 a.m., through the intervention of the President
of Uganda?
.
58. Can we, furthermore,
disregard the fact that
the pilot of the plane, Captain Bacos, said, as reported
by a responsible newspaper, The New York Times,
of 6 July. “The watch over us was exclusively secured
by the hijackers. Ugandan soldiers were never substituted for the hijackers”.
The New York Times
report goes on:

64. The very purpose .of the United Nations is to
guarantee individual, security through collective and
mutual protection. As Ambassador Scranton of the
United States said:
“Africa symbolized the challenges and hopes of
removing the last vestiges of colonialism
so that
all nations and peoples could choose their own
destinies and overcome the burdens of’ economic
disadvantage.”

“Last night one of the plane’s flight officers read
a statement on behalf ,of the crew, complimenting
President Idi Amin of Uganda for ‘his constant
care’ of the hostages during their detention.

65. We are told here by the representative of Israel:
“Israel’s rescue operation was not directed against
Uganda. Israeli forces were not attacking: Uganda”.
[Ibid., para. 1211. Yet, in the same breath, he accused
the Ugandan authorities of having aided and abetted
that band of terrorists, and qualified it by “active
connivance” -but
they did not attack Uganda; ‘the
attack was not against Ugandan soldiers.

“Commander
Bacos said tonight that the statement had been misinterpreted
and what the crew
meant to express was merely that ‘the Ugandan
authorities had made efforts to assure decent material conditions for the hostages’.”

66. We must be living in a world of dreams. Over
20 Ugandan soldiers died, and as many were wounded.
Those very people who were responsible for the safe

59. Can we also disregard the fact that in such deljcate negotiations,
with any party at that, hostility
8

month of July. As your close colleague and neighbour
in this Council, he has shared with you many pleasant
moments as the Council sought to come to grips with
many of the complex issues which have exercised our
minds over the past 18 months. Ambassador Jackson
and the rest of the Guyanese delegation have every
confidence that your wisdom, your proven diplomatic
skills, your tact and your patience will undoubtedly
enable the Council to arrive at just decisions during
your term of office. In the conduct of the work of the
Council you can be assured of our complete support.

keeping and comfort of the hostages paid the supreme
sacrifice at the hands of Israeli gunmen.
67. To all intents and purposes, the trend of events
since the intervention
of the President of Uganda on
request can lead to one-and
only one-conclusion:
that gradually, but consistently,
the President was
succeeding in defusing the time bomb, and none of
the facts of that painful night augured a fatal ending
to this dramatic and sordid affair.
68. Before I conclude, it is but right that I quote
some gleanings of the responsible press. This will
show how we must not allow our views to lead us to
mistake the trees for the forest.
69.

The Guardian

73. I wish also, on behalf of our Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Ambassador Jackson, to express thanks
for your very kind words regarding their conduct of
the proceedings of the Council during last month. Of
course, the successful conclusion of the issues before
the Council last month was really due to the unstinted
efforts of all members of the Council.

wrote:

“Over the years, the repeated question has been
how a nation of such military bravado and daring
can be so politically
cautious at the peace game.
One touch of the imagination that made this rescue
possible might have transformed the Middle East
time and again:”
70.

The Financial

74. Permit me, on behalf of the Guyanese delegation,
to extend to the delegation of the People’s Republic
of China our most sincere condolences at the passing
away of Comrade Chou-teh, Member of the Central
Committee of the Communist
Party of China. Comrade Chou-teh played a dynamic role in charting the
process of liberation of the Chinese people. His efforts
have served as an inspiration to many.

Times wrote:

“The rescue will turn into a tragedy rather than
a triumph if the result is further to encourage the
Israelis to ignore the reality that the problem of the
Middle East is ultimately
the problem of the Palestinians, and that it will begin to be solved only
when the moderate Palestinian leaders are offered
the hope of a negotiated settlement.”

75. For many, the day of 4 July had been a time of
rejoicing.
Millions
of -Americans
participated
in a
planned celebration of the two hundredth anniversary
of the securing of their independent State and of their
resolve to defend that sovereignty. And in that celebration, those Americans
were joined by others
throughout
the world who uphold the ineluctable
triumph of the cause of freedom, the cause of integrity
and sovereignty, and the cause of the liberty of the
individual human being.

71. As a son of Africa, and as an African, I feel with
concern this violation of territorial integrity and sovereignty. What guarantee is there for the small independent nations? Have we got to live under the umbrella of fear all the time as a result of the dangerous
precedent which this has constituted?
But I am
an optimist, and I will conclude, Mr. President, by
leaving for your meditation and that of the members
of the Security Council the following lines:

76. Yet others rejoiced for another reason, for on
that day some people put into operation a plan ‘of
action which, from their limited perspective,
was
successful. I refer to the aggression conceived, prepared and executed by the Government
of Israel
against the black African country of Uganda, as well
as to the reaction of peoples and Governments in some
sections of the world.
__..
-.-.
77. But for others,’ 4 July was a day of mourning,
for on that day Ugandans were shot at in cold blood
by Israeli invaders. Many Ugandans were killed or
wounded as a result of the brazen and naked military
aggression by Israel against Uganda. The Ugandans
mourned, and many of us mourned with them.

“Fates, we will know your pleasure.
That we shall die, we know:
It is but the time
And drawing days out that man stands upon,
His time of fearing death.
Stoop, Africans, stoop
And let us bathe our hands in this act of bloodshed
Up to the elbows and besmear our swords.
Then walk we forth even to Entebbe
And waving our red weapons over our heads,
Let’s all cry ‘Peace, Freedom and Liberty’.”

78. The reasons which summon the Council in to
session today are older than the United Nations itself.
Pre-eminent among them is the belief of some in their
innate superiority and the.desire by them and others
to regulate inter-State relations on the basis of might
and power.

72. Mr. HAYNES
(Guyana):
Sir, unfortunately
Ambassador Jackson is not here. He has, however,.
asked me to extend to you his warmest congratulations and those of the Guyanese delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
9

79. On the other hand, the international
community
has, over the years, progressively elaborated a number of fundamental norms designed to give effect to
the concepts of equality of States and of sovereignty
and to lead to the conduct of international
relations
based on respect for international
law. At the apex of
that law stands the Charter of the United Nations.
80. In the present case, that is, the military action by
Israel against Uganda, Article 2 (4) of the Charter
enjoins all Member States, including the State of
Israel, to
“refrain in their international
relations from the
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
or political independence of any State”.
Furthermore, after 25 years of labour and effort on the
part of the United Nations, a definition of aggression
[General

Assembly

resolution

3314 (XXIX),

annex]

was universally accepted. One of the acts which that
definition qualifies as an act of aggression is

of strength lies in their respect for and faith in the
principles of legitimate
international
conduct enshrined in the Charter of the .United Nations.”
82. Israel’s latest act of aggression against a Member
State raises many fundamental
questions. Not least
among them is the attempt to romanticize the act and
the sustained effort-some
say, a’ deliberate effortto hoodwink the international
community
into believing that the Israeli action was legitimate
and
justified. How else can one rationally view the persistence with which it is reported that the Israeli officer
killed at Entebbe was “shot in the back”? How else
can one view the fact that the release of a large number
of hostages before 4 July has conveniently been erased
from the outpouring of the mass media so readily
available in New York? Why, one wonders, does
Israel compare its violence against Uganda with the
stamping out of the slave trade when Britain ruled the
waves? Does Israel imply that international
law has
stood still since the nineteenth century? Or is Israel
seeking to be clothed in the garb of an international
buccaneer?

“The invasion or attack by the armed forces of
a State or the territory of another State, or any
military occupation, however temporary, resulting
from such invasion or attack”.

83. But there are other questions. First, can there
be any doubt that unless Israel’s action is condemned
by the Council, an extremely dangerous precedent for
international
lawlessness would have been created?
For such a precedent would seriously threaten the
security of small States and leave the integrity of their
territory and their sovereignty exposed to the caprices
of emboldened States willing to employ the methods
of bandits. Finally, one must ask rhetorically,
would
Israel contemplate action of a similar kind against a
European State?

81. The action taken by the State of Israel against
Uganda on 4 July is nothing but naked and brutal
aggression. Guyana strongly condemns Israel for its
aggression against the black African country of
Uganda. On 8 July, my Government issued the following statement:
“The Government
of Guyana condemns in the
-strongest possible terms the invasion of Uganda’s
territory by Israeli military forces on 3 July 1976.
This act is in total contravention
of the norms of
international
law and more particularly of the fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter,
which calls for full respect for the territorial integrity of sovereign States. By its act the Government
of Israel once more demonstrates not only its total
disregard for these fundamental principles, but also
for the independence and sovereignty of a black
African State.
“The Government
of Guyana is deeply concerned at the attempts already being made to romantizice the act carried out. at Entebbe Airport in
an effort to remove the focus of attention from what
has been essentially the invasion of one territory
by another. It is this invasion, this military adventure, this total disregard of the consequences of its
act--consequences
that may well result in the
breakdown of peace and security in the area-that
must excite the conscience of mankind Bnd call
down on Israel the full force of international
sanction. If it is allowed to escape the full force of international sanction, a dangerous precedent will be
created to the detriment of States whose only source
*

84. Earlier I made reference to the attempts at justification of Israel’s action against Uganda. It is being
argued that the principle of sovereignty is subordinate
to the principle of human freedom and that Israel has
the right, whenever it in its wisdom chooses, to violate
the sovereignty of ‘other States in order to secure the
freedom ot its own citizens. This is nothing but a
modem-day version of gunboat diplomacy, for acceptance of such a principle will send the international
community
down a slippery path to a situation in
which might and power reign supreme.
85. The principles by which the Council should be
guided are those enshrined in the Charter, upheld and
preserved from erosion by the vast majority of the
international community.
No State, not even the State
of Israel, has the right to subvert those principles and
to make them subserve its own national interests. To
attempt to justify the Israeli action for short-term
political objectives is to hold the entire international
community to ransom. Those who, like Israel, seek to
give legitimacy to the violation of the sovereignty of
‘other States are making many small States, whose faith
in and commitment
to international
law are unshakable, hostage to the dictates of naked power. Guyana
cannot willingly be a party to any such machinations.
10

92. This meeting of the Council has been called to
consider the events which took place at Entebbe
International
Airport on the night of 3 to 4 July, and
in particular the action undertaken by the Government
of Israel to secure the release’ of a number of Israeli
hostages held there. As we all know, however, events
did not start there but rather with the hijacking on
27 June of an Air France jetliner on a flight from
Athens to.Paris. At the outset, therefore, I must put
on record in the strongest possible terms my Govemment’s utter condemnation of this act of air piracy and
of the subsequent holding hostage for several days of
over 250 innocent passengers and crew at Entebbe
Airport. It is intolerable to my Government
that, in
the year 1976, the international community should still
be held to this kind of ransom by latter-day highwaymen. We believe it is the duty of the entire intemational community
to make clear their condemnation
and abhorrence of such evil actions, which put at risk
the lives of the innocent and, indeed, strike at the
fabric of the community of nations. We deeply deplore
the loss of human life at Entebbe Airport which resulted from this action. At the same time, we are
extremely pleased that the lives of so many of the
innocent hostages were saved and that the hijacking
attempt itself finally ended in the failure it so richly
deserved.

86. In like manner, Guyana holds dear respect for
human life. We do not condone hijacking; we deplore
every incident in which innocent lives of men, women
and children are wilfully and uselessly wasted.
87. Those who seek to misconstrue the implications
of the issue with which we are faced today-that
is,
the aggression of Israel against Uganda-only
render
more difficult the global search by the international
community through the General Assembly for a solution to the phenomenon
of international
terrorism.
Guyana, for its part, remains ready to make its contribution to that ongoing search at the appropriate time
and in the appropriate forum.
88. Though not as readily reflected in the media of
this environment,
the voices of those against aggression have not been silent. Suffice it point out that the
Foreign Minister of Algeria spoke for many countries
and many peoples when he said:
“This act cannot but arouse the indignation
of
the non-aligned
countries and constitutes a dangerous precedent in the conduct of international
relations, opening the way to all kinds of adventures.” [S/12/32, annex.]
And the Secretary-General
himself has, in a statement
as courageous as it is forthright, referred to the act as
a serious violation of the sovereignty of a Member
State. We note that the Secretary-General’s
observation drew stringent commentaries from some quarters.
We, however, wish to assure him of our continued
support for his dedicated efforts in the cause of peace
and justice.

93. Last Friday [/939th
meeting],
the Ugandan
Foreign Minister, in replying to the representative of
Israel, made some extraordinary
and unfounded allegations about the case of Mrs. Dora Bloch, a British
citizen with dual Israeli nationality. The true facts are
as follows.

89. In conclusion, my delegation expresses the hope
that, in pronouncing itself on this issue, the Council
will have a clear perception of the real issue involved
and that it will not be deflected by considerations of
short-term political gains from discharging its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security in a manner that is consistent with the purposes and principles of the Charter.

94. When we first had news of the hijacking of the
Air France plane on 27 June, we inquired if any of the
Israeli nationals among the passengers ,aboard had
British nationality.
Both Air France and the Israeli
authorities later informed us that there were none still
aboard..On Sunday, 4 July, we learned that among the
hostages released on 2 July was Mrs. Bloch, who
had been admitted to Mulago Genera1 Hospital. The
British Acting High Commissioner
in Kampala was
immediately
instructed to assist Mrs. Bloch in leaving
Uganda.

90. Mr. RICHARD
(United Kingdom):
Mr President, first may I offer you the congratulations
of my
delegation on your assumption of the office of President of the Council. It gives us particular pleasure to
welcome you to this office as the representative of a
fellow member country of the European Economic
Community,
with which we have extremely close and
cordial relations. We are delighted that this important
meeting should be taking place under your presidency.
May I also congratulate
your predecessors,
the
_ Foreign Minister of Guyana and Ambassador Jackson, for the skilful way in which they conducted our
sometimes exhausting debates during the month of
June.

95. A member of the High Commission staff visited
Mrs. Bloch on the evening of 4 July in the hospital
-in other words, long after the Israeli aircraft had left
Entebbe Airport. It is simply not true to assert, as the
Ugandan Foreign Minister did before the Council on
Friday, that Mrs. Bloch had left hospital on the evening of 3 July and had been returned to Entebbe
Airport so as not to jeopardize the lives of the other
hostages. There is no doubt that she was still there
after the Israeli action, and this.is also confirmed by
the fact that she was also seen in hospital by a member
91. I should also like to take this opportunity
to
of the French Embassy. My Government
is entirely
extend our most sincere condolences to the delegation Z satisfied that the Ugandans had custody of Mrs. Bloch
of China on the death of Mr. Chou-teh.
at the time of the Israeli raid and thereafter.
11

96. On 9 July the British High Commissioner
in
Uganda was able to see President Amin. He told the
President that my Government found it impossible to
accept the Ugandan Government’s
statements, that
there was great concern in Britain about Mrs. Bloch’s
fate and that he hoped an immediate inquiry would be
conducted into her disappearance.
97. Her Majesty’s Government’s
position is fully
set out in a statement made today in the House of
Commons by the Minister of State in the Foreign and
Commonwealth
Office. I should like to quote directly
from it:
“On 7th July Y-that
is, the Minister of State“told the House that we were sending our High Commissioner back to Kampala to discuss Mrs. Bloch’s
disappearance urgently and fully with the Ugandan
Government.
Mr. Hennessy”-that
is, our High
Commissioner--“saw
President Amin on 9th July.
On 10th July the Ugandan
Government
sent
Mr. Hennessy a note which continued to deny knowledge of the whereabouts of Mrs. Bloch and repeated
that Israel shouldered the responsibility
for her as
for all other hostages.
“As we said at the time, this is totally unacceptable in that Mrs. Bloch was seen by a member of
the High Commission staff in hospital well after the
Israeli operation at Entebbe Airport was over. We
are just not satisfied with the results of any inquiries
the Ugandans may have made.
“Our High Commissioner
in Kampala arrived
home this morning. I have had a report personally
from him. As a result I deeply regret to have to
inform the House that there seems little doubt that
Mrs. Bloch was taken from her room in Mulago
Hospital at about 9.30 p.m. local time on 4th July
and that she is no longer alive. We extend our
deepest sympathy to all her family. In whatever
circumstances Mr. Bloch’s death took place, the
Ugandan Government must bring those responsible
to justice.”
98. From what I have already said it will be clear
that I cannot tell the Council with any certainty what
precisely happened to Mrs. Bloch. The strong probability is that she is now .dead. There is only one Government that can know what happened to her, and if it
does not know already it is the only Government that
has the means of finding out-namely,
the Govemment of Uganda. We now look to it to do so.
99. We have listened with great attention and interrest to the accounts given earlier in this debate by the
representative
of Uganda and Israel of the events
which took place from the time of the hijacking on
27 June to the action undertaken by Israel on 3 July.
No one in this Council can have failed to notice the
remarkably different interpretations
given by the’two
representatives.
What surely emerges very clearly

from all of this is the need to avoid a repetition of a
situation in which, notwithstanding
the preoccupation
which many of us have with the obligation of every
State to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States, a Government is driven to take unilateral action within the territory of another State in
order to ensure the safety of its citizens. In the view
of my delegation, it is on this aspect of the problem
that the Council should concentrate
its attention
now, looking towards the avoidance of such events
in the future rather than seeking to pass judgement on
what took place at Entebbe.
*
100. This problem of hijacking is an international
problem which faces us all equally. Already in the
brief time that has elapsed since the events which we
are considering, a further hijacking incident has taken
place, this time involving a Libyan aircraft, which
happily did not result in any casualties. Equally
important, it is a problem which can be satisfactorily
dealt with only by a concerted effort by the whole
international
community.
I should say that in my
country it would seem incredible if the Council should
address itself to what happened at Entebbe without
at the same time considering what should be done
about hijacking. It would not only be incredible, it
would be dishonest. We cannot examine half the case;
we have to try to deal with the whole of it.
101. Already a certain number of steps have been
taken in connexion with hijacking. Members of the
Council will recall the decision which we adopted by
consensus on 20 June 1972 [S/10705]. Other intemational action has also been taken in the form of the
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure
of Aircraft, signed at The Hague on 16 December
1970;’ the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation, concluded at Montreal on 23 September 1971;4 and also
the Standards and Practices Governing Airport Security and Air&aft Safety recommended
by the International Civil Aviation Organization.
What is needed
now, it seems to us, is, first, to make the existing
international
action which has already been taken as
effective as possible and to ensure the maximum
compliance with it by all members of the international
community.
Second, we should consider whether
there is any further action which the international
community,
and specifically the United Nations, can
take to supplement these measures so as to prevent
further acts of hijacking and to punish those responsible. Let us try to use the events of recent weeks as
a catalyst for international
action in this field to make
it as certain as we can that future acts of hijacking will
not succeed. Only in this way wiIlwe be able to make
a real contribution
to the solution of a problem which
confronts us all, and to fufil the primary aim of the
Council in helping to maintain international peace and
security.
102. The Council must now give thought to the terms
of a draft resolution which comprehends the various

12.

factors that have been stressed by different speakers
here; and it must do so in no partisan, or one-sided,
fashion but in a deliberate and considered way. If the
Council were to ignore one or other of the principal
strands, it could hardly expect the expression of its
views to be acceptable to the world outside, the world
of ordinary men, women and children who may find
themselves caught up in, and indeed the victims of,
violence, wherever they may live.

109. The international
cqmmunity
is deeply divided
on this issue. It is surely the function of this Council,
above all, to try to bridge those divisions, not to
deepen them. I therefore commend this draft resolution to the Council in the hope that, once the excessive
rhetoric has subsided, wisdom and the rule of law may
yet prevail.
110. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of the United Kingdom
for the congratulations
he
addressed to me personally. I especially appreciated
the reference made by Ambassador .Richard to the
close partnership of our two countries in the European
Community.

103. We, together with our colleagues in the delegation of the United States, have therefore set out to
-incorporate these various factors in a draft resolution
[S/12138] which has now been submitted. We have
tried to bring together the question of hijacking and
the necessity to ensure safety of air travel, on the one
hand, with the necessity to respect sovereignty and
territorial integrity on the other.

111. Mr. SUNDBERG
(Sweden): First of all,
Mr. President, allow my delegation to congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency for this
month. Some time ago in the Council you expressed
the hope that this month would be a quiet one. Your
wish has obviously not been granted. But it is a source
of great satisfaction to our delegation that it is under
your wise and experienced leadership that we are now
going to hold this important debate. Let me, at the
same time, also express my delegation’s great debt of
gratitude to Ambassador Jackson of Guyana, and to
his distinguished Foreign Minister, for the diplomatic
skill with which they conducted the affairs of the
Council during the indeed very busy month of June.

104. Our draft starts by noting the letters of the two
principal parties, and by recalling the concern of the
international
community
for safety in air travel as
exemplified by The Hague and Montreal Conventions
and the obligations which those conventions impose
upon the parties to them. I believe that those considerations are common ground between us all.
105. We then come to the operative paragraphs and
start at the beginning, as the chain of -events which
ended at Entebbe started, with hijacking. Paragraph 1
condemns-and
there surely is no one here who does
not condemnthe hijacking. Paragraph 2 deals specifically with events in Uganda. It deplores the loss
of life which resulted from that hijacking. With paragraphs 3 and 4 we move from matters of fact to the
two principles on which the debate here has been concentrating: on the one hand, sovereignty and territorial integrity; on the other hand, the safety of international civil aviation. Paragraph 3 reaffirms the need
to respect sovereignty
and territorial
integrity
in
accordance with the Charter and international
law.
Paragraph 4 looks to the future and seeks to engage
the international
community
once again in finding
further means of ensuring the safety. of those who
travel by air.

112. My delegation would also like to offer its sincere condolences to the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China on the death of Marshal Chou-teh,
who had played such a leading and important role
throughout the history of the People’s Republic.
113. It is appropriate that the United Nations and,
in particular, the Security Council should be the forum
for a discussion of this terrible drama that has the
attention of-the whole .world. The principles relevant
to these events are of such importance for the security of ‘all nations that a discussion here is indeed
entirely justified. Our task is to assess what has happened against the background of the provisions of
the Charter. We must undertake this task in a spirit
of balanced judgement,
keeping in mind the overriding interest, shared by all of us, of promoting equity
and lawfulness in international
relations.

106. To sum uu. this draft seeks to recommend.
with a sense of bilance and of justice, an outcome to
this debate which would command a wide measure of
support from the Council.

114. Let me first of all, on behalf of the Swedish
Governement,
express again our feelings of relief
for the return of the crew and nearly all the passengers
of the hijacked plane. I wish also to repeat our condolences and to voice our sorrow at the death of many
persons from several countries.

107. This is bound to.be a difficult debate. It involves
questions that affect us all. On the one hand, there is
the principle of territorial integrity; on the other hand,
there is the equally valid consideration
that States
exist for the protection of their’peoples, and they have
the right, perhaps the duty, to exercise that right.

115. The drama was started by an abhorrent act of
terrorism perpetrated
by a group of extremist Palestinian Arabs and Europeans. There is no excuse
for this criminal act. Whatever the motives, whatever the circumstances,
terrorist acts, such as the
holding of hostages for ransom to achieve political

108. In judging’ the events at Entebbe, these two
principles have to be reconciled. They can be reconciled only by an approach along the lines of the draft
resolution submitted by the United States of America
and ourselves.
13

con-

bound to be abused, especially by the big and strong,
and to pose a threat, especially to the small and weak.

116. We should remember that an action of this
kind is a serious crime, whether it is undertaken in
peace or as a method in armed conflict. Even in such
a conflict, civilians are expressly protected under
universally accepted standards. No claim by terrorists
that their deeds are justified as a method of warfare
can therefore be accepted.

122. In our view, the Israeli action which we are now
considering involved an infringement of the national
sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Uganda. We
understand the strong reactions against this action,
which cost the lives of many Ugandan citizens and led
to heavy material damage. At the same time, we are
aware of the terrible pressures to which the Israeli
Government and people were subjected, faced with
this unprecedented
act of international
piracy and
viewing the increasing threat to the lives of so many
of their compatriots. Furthermore,
when the decision
to act was taken, the Israeli Government was in possession of evidence which, it felt, strongly suggested
that the Government which had the responsibility
for
the protection of the hostages did not do everything
in its power to fulfil this duty.

aims, must be categorically
demned.

and unequivocally

117. There is widespread agreement that the world
must react vigourously against terrorist acts and take
all possible protective measures. New efforts must
be undertaken to achieve broad international
agreement to combat terrorism, in the form, of generally
recognized standards of international
conduct. We
must work towards general recognition of the clear
obligation resting on every State to do everything in
its power, where necessary in collaboration with other
States, to prevent acts of terrorism and, even more,
to refrain from any action which may facilitate the
perpetration
of such acts. In particular,
any State
where hijackers 1an.d.with hostages must be prepared
to shoulder the heavy responsibility
of protecting all
victims under circumstances which are bound to be
difficult and delicate.

123. The problem with which we are faced is thus
many-faceted.. My Government,
while unable to reconeile the Israeli action with the strict rules of the
Charter,‘does not find it possible to join in a condemnation in this case.
124. The events which we are considering should
serve as a forceful reminder that the attempts to reach
a political settlement of the situation in the Middle
East, taking into account the legitimate interests of
all parties, must now be intensified. The status quo
does not give peace. Time does not work for peace.
A very grave responsibility
rests with all the parties
to do their utmost in contributing towards the achievement of a just and lasting peace. The peoples in then
area must finally have the opportunity to live without
the constant threat of violence, terror and war.

118. In the case which is now before us, queries
have been raised which cannot be dismissed as to the
compliance
of the Ugandan Government
with the
principles just. indicated.
119. The principle embodied in Article 2 (4) of the
Charter is fundamental
to the world order to which
we subscribe as Members of the United Nations. We
are thereby all enjoined “to refrain in [our] international relations from @e threat or use of force
against, the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations”.

125. Mr. CHOU
Nan (China) (frunslation
porn
Chinese): In their speeches at this morning’s meeting,
the Foreign Minister of Mauritius and the representatives of Guinea, Guyana, the United Kingdom and
Sweden expressed condolences on the passing of
Chou-teh,‘Chairman
of the Standing Committee of the
National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic
of China. On behalf of the Chinese delegation, I wish
to express deep thanks for their cordial sentiments.

120. This principle has been quoted and invoked on
innumerable occasions. This is understandable,
for it
seeks-to protect a right which all peoples find basic:
the right to live in peace in their own land. The upholding of this right is of particular importance to the
small and the weak States. It is they which run the
greatest risks of seeing their independence threatened
and becoming the victims of outside intervention.

The meeting

rose at I.30 p.m.
Notes

121. The Charter do-es not authorize any exception
to this rule except for the right of self-defence and
enforcement
measures undertaken
by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter. This is no coincidence or oversight. Any formal exceptions permitting
the use of force or of military intervention in order to
achieve certain aims; however Iaudable, would be

’ Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful SeizuR of Aircraft
(Hijacking), signed at The Hague on 16 December 1970 (United
Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 860, p. 105).
2 OSJicinl
Records
of the General
Assembly,
Session.
Skth Cu/n/~ritfee. 1369th meeting, para.

Tkwnty-seventh

27. (The official
records of the Sixth Committee are issued in summary form.)
3 Boston, Houghton Mifllin Company, 1972.
4 United Nations, Treat-v Series, vol. 974, p. 177.

‘14
Litho is United Nations, New York

00300

83%USUl-February

198%-2,200
