A/63/PV.67

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-third session

67

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 11 December 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nicaragua)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beck
(Solomon Islands), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will consider today the reports of the Sixth Committee
on agenda items 72 to 79, 99, 110, 119, 129, 150, 151,
153 and 156.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Marko Rakovec of Slovenia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Sixth Committee that are
before the General Assembly.
Mr. Rakovec (Slovenia), Rapporteur of the Sixth
Committee: I have the honour today to present the
reports of the Sixth Committee on its work during the
sixty-third session of the General Assembly. The
Assembly allocated to the Committee 14 substantive
and 3 procedural agenda items, organized under three
of the headings corresponding to the priorities of the
Organization, namely, “Promotion of justice and
international law”, “Drug control, crime prevention
and combating international terrorism in all its forms
and
manifestations”
and
“Organizational,
administrative and other matters”. I propose to
introduce the reports of the Sixth Committee on the
various items in the order in which they fall under each
of these three headings.
I shall begin with the first heading, “Promotion of
justice and international law”, under which the Sixth

Committee considered 8 items and adopted 11 draft
resolutions.
The report on agenda item 72, “Nationality of
natural persons in relation to the succession of States”,
is contained in document A/63/436, and the draft
resolution recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the report.
The report on agenda item 73, “Criminal
accountability of United Nations officials and experts
on mission”, is contained in document A/63/437, and
the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 10 thereof. The
draft resolution builds upon last year’s resolution on
the topic, while including a number of additional
elements aimed at enhancing international cooperation
to ensure the criminal accountability of United Nations
officials and experts on mission. Moreover, the
Secretary-General would be requested to report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session on the
implementation of the resolution, on the basis of
information received from Governments and the
Secretariat.
The report on agenda item 74, “Report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its forty-first session”, is contained
in document A/63/438. The Sixth Committee
recommended three draft resolutions for adoption by
the Assembly, which are reproduced in paragraph 12 of
the report. It is recommended that the Assembly adopt
the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the
International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly by

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

08-64317 (E)

*0864317*

A/63/PV.67

Sea, contained in the annex to draft resolution III of the
report, and authorize a ceremony for the opening for
signature to be held on 23 September 2009 in
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
The report on agenda item 75, “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its
sixtieth session”, is contained in document A/63/439,
and the two draft resolutions recommended to the
Assembly for adoption are reproduced in paragraph 10
of the report. In one of the resolutions, the Assembly
would, inter alia, take note of the draft articles on the
law of transboundary aquifers, presented by the
International Law Commission, the text of which
would be annexed to the resolution.
The report on agenda item 76, “Status of the
Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts”, is contained in document A/63/440, and the
draft resolution recommended to the Assembly for
adoption is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof.
The report on agenda item 77, “Consideration of
effective measures to enhance the protection, security
and safety of diplomatic and consular missions and
representatives”, is contained in document A/63/441,
and the draft resolution recommended to the Assembly
for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the report.
The report on agenda item 78, “Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization”, is contained in document A/63/442, and
the draft resolution recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption appears in paragraph 9 thereof.
Finally, the report on agenda item 79, “The rule
of law at the national and international levels”, is
contained in document A/63/443, and the draft
resolution recommended to the Assembly for adoption
is reproduced in paragraph 8 thereof. In connection
with operative paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, the
Sixth Committee has reached an understanding set out
in paragraph 7 of the report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the 11 draft
resolutions without a vote, and it is my hope that the
General Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
I shall now turn to the second heading, “Drug
control, crime prevention and combating international
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”. The
Sixth Committee considered agenda item 99,

2

“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”, under
this heading. The relevant report is contained in
document A/63/444, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 11 thereof.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is my hope that the Assembly
will be able to do the same. I wish to point out that,
should the Assembly adopt the draft resolution on
measures to eliminate international terrorism, it would,
inter alia, request the Ad Hoc Committee established
pursuant to resolution 51/210 to report to the Assembly
during the current session in the event of the
completion of the draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism. As in the past, it is envisaged
that the item in question will remain open in the
Assembly’s agenda.
Under
the
third
and
final
heading,
“Organizational, administrative and other matters”, the
Sixth Committee considered five substantive and three
procedural items. I will start with the substantive items.
The Sixth Committee considered agenda item
129, “Administration of justice at the United Nations”.
The relevant report is contained in document A/63/451,
and the draft decision recommended to the General
Assembly for adoption is reproduced in paragraph 11
thereof. Should the Assembly adopt this draft decision,
the Ad Hoc Committee on the Administration of Justice
at the United Nations established pursuant to Assembly
decision 62/519 of 6 December 2007 would be
reconvened from 20 to 24 April 2009 in order to
continue the work on the outstanding legal aspects of
the item, taking into account the results of the
deliberations of the Fifth and Sixth Committees on the
item, previous decisions of the Assembly and any
further decisions that the Assembly may take during its
sixty-third session prior to the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Committee. The Ad Hoc Committee would report on its
work to the Assembly at its sixty-fourth session.
The Sixth Committee also considered agenda
item 150, “Report of the Committee on relations with
the Host Country”. The relevant report is contained in
document A/63/452, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption is
reproduced in paragraph 8 of the report.
Furthermore, the Sixth Committee considered
three requests for observer status in the General
Assembly. It recommended that the Assembly grant

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

observer status to the following organizations: the
South Centre, under agenda item 151; the University
for Peace, under agenda item 153; and the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, under agenda item 156.
The relevant reports for each of the requests are found
in documents A/63/453, A/63/455 and A/63/454,
respectively, and the relevant draft resolutions are
reproduced in paragraph 7 of each report.
The draft resolutions and the draft decision under
these items were also adopted by the Sixth Committee
without a vote, and it is my hope that the General
Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
Finally, under this cluster, the Sixth Committee
considered three procedural items, namely item 110,
“Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly”;
item 119, “Programme planning”; and item 5,
“Election of the officers of the Main Committees”. The
report under agenda item 110, containing the
provisional programme of work of the Sixth
Committee at the sixty-fourth session, is contained in
document A/63/445. The draft decision by which the
General Assembly would take note of the provisional
programme of work is reproduced in paragraph 7 of the
report. The report on agenda item 119 is reproduced in
document A/63/450, and no further action is
recommended for the Assembly to take. Furthermore,
there is no report with regard to agenda item 5.
Consistent with previous practice, the election of the
officers of the Sixth Committee for the sixty-fourth
session will be taken up at a later stage in the course of
the current session.
International law continues to play an essential
role in the conduct of international relations. It is the
foundation upon which the Charter of our Organization
is firmly based. Over the years, the Sixth Committee
has been called upon to play an important role in
assisting the General Assembly in performing its tasks
related to the codification and progressive development
of international law. This year, through the adoption of
the draft resolutions and draft decisions set out in the
reports that I have just introduced, the Sixth Committee
has continued to focus its efforts on enhancing the role
of the Organization and the attainment of its objectives
with regard to three of the priority areas identified by
the General Assembly: promoting justice and
international law; drug control, crime prevention and
combating international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations; and organizational, administrative and
other matters. In some instances, the draft resolutions

08-64317

require specific actions by States. It is my sincere hope
that such actions will be taken in the months to come.
That concludes my introduction of the reports of
the Sixth Committee. Let me take this opportunity to
express my gratitude to the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, His Excellency Ambassador Hamid Al
Bayati, for his commendable leadership. I also wish to
thank the other members of the Bureau, Ms. Ana
Cristina Rodríguez-Pineda, Mr. Scott Sheeran and
Mr. El Hadj Lamine, for their cooperation and for the
support given to me as Rapporteur. Further, I would
like to express my gratitude and appreciation to the
secretariat of the Sixth Committee, in particular
Ms. Mahnoush Arsanjani, head of the Codification
Division, for their tireless and highly professional
support. It is sad news that Ms. Arsanjani is leaving her
Office. On behalf of the Sixth Committee, I wish her
all the best in the future.
Finally, I wish to express my sincere thanks to all
representatives and colleagues for their invaluable
contributions to the success of this year’s session of the
Sixth Committee.
The Acting President: I thank the Rapporteur of
the Sixth Committee. I would like to join him in
thanking the Chairman of the Committee and the other
members of the Bureau for their excellent work.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Sixth
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the
Sixth Committee have been made clear in the
Committee and are reflected in the relevant official
records.
May I remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is
considered in a Main Committee and in plenary
meeting, a delegation should, as far as possible,
explain its vote only once, that is, either in the
Committee or in plenary meeting, unless that
delegation’s vote in plenary meeting is different
from its vote in the Committee.”

3

A/63/PV.67

May I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Sixth Committee, unless the
Secretariat is notified otherwise in advance. I therefore
hope that we may proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations that were adopted without a
vote in the Sixth Committee.
Agenda item 72
Nationality of natural persons in relation to the
succession of States
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/436)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/118).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 72?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 73
Criminal accountability of United Nations officials
and experts on mission
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/437)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/119).

4

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 73?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 74
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its
forty-first session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/438)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it three draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 12 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I to III.
Draft resolution I is entitled “Reports of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its resumed fortieth and its fortyfirst sessions”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
63/120).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/121).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is
entitled “United Nations Convention on Contracts for
the International Carriage of Goods Wholly or Partly
by Sea”. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution
63/122).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 74?
It was so decided.

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

Agenda item 75
Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its sixtieth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/439)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report. We will now
take a decision on draft resolutions I and II.
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report
of the International Law Commission on the work of
its sixtieth session”. The Sixth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution
63/123).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “The law of transboundary aquifers”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution
63/124).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 75?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 76
Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/440)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/125).
The Acting President: I call on the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes
to speak in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted.

08-64317

Mr. Taleb (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My country would like to explain its position
on the resolution just adopted under agenda item 76,
“Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of
victims of armed conflicts”.
We joined the consensus on the resolution despite
our reservations regarding the preambular paragraph
referring to the entry into force of the Protocol
additional to the Conventions and relating to Adoption
of an Additional Distinctive Emblem (Protocol III) of
8 December 2005. My country continues to have
reservations regarding that Protocol, which was
adopted when we were adopting conventions related to
international humanitarian law. Those reservations,
which were expressed during the negotiations leading
to the adoption of the Protocol and were not mentioned
in its text, still stand.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 76?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 77
Consideration of effective measures to enhance the
protection, security and safety of diplomatic and
consular missions and representatives
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/441)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/126).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 77?
It was so decided.

5

A/63/PV.67

Agenda item 78
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of
the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/442)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/127).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 78?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 79
The rule of law at the national and international
levels
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/443)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/128).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 79.
Agenda item 99
Measures to eliminate international terrorism
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/444)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution.

I shall first call on those representatives who wish
to speak in explanation of position before action is
taken on the draft resolution.
Ms. Chandra (India): Recent events have
demonstrated that there should be no complacency in
addressing issues relating to terrorism. It is necessary
that the international community urgently convey a
strong message that abhorrent acts of terrorism will not
be tolerated and will encounter severe condemnation
and punishment. We are joining the consensus on this
draft resolution. Nevertheless, we reserve the right to
introduce a proposal under this agenda item at any time.
Mr. Taleb (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation is joining the consensus on the
draft resolution under agenda item 99, entitled
“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”,
despite our reservations regarding the inclusion of a
military organization among the organizations listed in
its twenty-first preambular paragraph.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
We will now take a decision on the draft
resolution. The Sixth Committee adopted it without a
vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/129).
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 99.
Agenda item 110
Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/445)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision, entitled “Provisional
programme of work of the Sixth Committee for the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly”. The
Sixth Committee adopted it. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 110.

6

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

Agenda item 119

Agenda item 151

Programme planning

Observer status for the South Centre in the
General Assembly

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/450)
The Acting President: May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to take note of the report of
the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 119.
Agenda item 129
Administration of justice at the United Nations
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/451)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft decision recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report. We will now
take action on the draft decision. The Sixth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 129.
Agenda item 150
Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/452)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/130).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 150?
It was so decided.

08-64317

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/453)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/131).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 151?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 153
Observer status for the University for Peace in the
General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/455)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/132).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 153?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 156
Observer status for the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea in the General Assembly
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/63/454)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it a draft resolution recommended by the Sixth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. We will now
take a decision on the draft resolution. The Sixth

7

A/63/PV.67

Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
63/133).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 156?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded its consideration of all the reports
of the Sixth Committee before it. On behalf of the
Assembly, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank His Excellency Mr. Hamid Al Bayati, Permanent
Representative of Iraq and Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, members of the Bureau and delegates for a
job well done.
Agenda item 11
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Letter dated 20 November 2008 from the
Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations (A/63/560)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.52)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Representative of India to introduce draft
resolution A/63/L.52.
Mr. Sen (India): I have the honour to address the
General Assembly today as Chair of the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme for 2008. In this capacity,
it is my privilege to present, in fulfilment of the request
of this Assembly made via paragraph 21 of its
resolution 62/11, a report on the progress made in
implementation of the Kimberley Process during the
year.
Diamonds have played a particularly significant
role in causing and prolonging conflict in several
countries as a result of the misuse of wealth generated
from this resource. In addition to financing devastating
armed conflicts, the illicit trade in rough diamonds also
impacts negatively on the legitimate international trade
in diamonds. Efforts to address the problem through
the perspective of an overall development agenda must
focus not only on the supply side, but also on all parts
of the supply chain, including processing, trading and
purchase by the consumer.

8

It is in this context that the Kimberley Process
has proved to be remarkably successful in breaking the
linkage between conflict and illicit trade in diamonds,
thereby protecting the peace, livelihood and security of
millions of people across the globe. This success has
translated into an increase in legitimate trade in
diamonds. Today, diamonds have emerged as a vehicle
of economic progress and as a means to confront
development challenges in many countries. Over these
years, the Process has emerged as a model for multistakeholder efforts, in which national Governments,
industry and civil society have successfully
collaborated to prevent conflict and promote peace,
stability and development.
India was privileged to lead the Kimberley
Process during 2008 in its continued multipronged
efforts to further its implementation. The inclusiveness
of the Process is a key area of its success. Membership
is open on a non-discriminatory basis to all those
willing and able to adhere to the requirements of the
Scheme. Today, a substantial number of the diamond
mining, trading and processing countries are part of the
Kimberley Process. Mexico joined the Process in 2008,
and approval has been given for the Republic of the
Congo to resume trading in rough diamonds.
In addition, the inclusiveness of the Scheme is
reflected by the fact that almost all participants are
members of at least one of the many working groups of
the Process. The commitment of participants has also
been reaffirmed by their participation in review visits
and technical workshops designed to enhance
knowledge and skill in the sector and by their proactive
extension of financial assistance to other participants.
During 2008, the Kimberley Process engaged
with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela by
organizing a visit of the Chair’s nominees following
Venezuela’s
announcement,
during
the
June
intersessional meeting in New Delhi, that it would
voluntarily separate from the Process for a period of
two years and would cease certification for the export
of its diamonds. The visit enabled the Process to arrive
at a better understanding of the challenges faced by the
country in its diamond sector. Venezuela no longer
exports or imports rough diamonds. The Process has
since decided that it will continue to engage with
Venezuela in order to assist and support the country in
developing appropriate internal controls over its
alluvial diamond mining consistent with the minimum
standards of the Process. Venezuela will continue to

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

participate in the Process, attend its meetings and
submit production statistics during the period of
voluntary separation.
This is yet another example of the mutual
inclusiveness inherent in the Scheme and attests to the
willingness of the Kimberley Process family to stand
together, to learn from global best practices and to
proactively provide assistance as and when required.
Transparency is another hallmark of the
Kimberley Process. The Process took a step forward in
that regard by releasing the sub-annual data for roughdiamond trading and production for the period 2004 to
2007. The statistics and annual reports submitted by
participants and the reports of peer review visits
continue to be the key elements of monitoring. All
participants in the Scheme have submitted their
respective statistics and annual reports for 2007, which
have been analysed to identify implementation issues
and best practices. In addition, statistical analysis for
each peer review visit has been undertaken.
During the year, the Kimberley Process
completed its ongoing work to finalize the diamond
production profiles for Côte d’Ivoire, the Marange
diamond field in Zimbabwe and Togo. Statistical
protocols have been developed to complement that
work. Moreover, an initiative has been launched to
harness information technology in order to improve the
quality of the data.
Artisanal alluvial producing participants in the
Kimberley Process continued to follow up on the
recommendations of the Process regarding artisanal
alluvial production. A consolidated matrix of the
inventories of those participants was published for the
first time. The inventories will be updated every six
months. In addition, technical assistance and training
in support of the implementation of the Process
continued.
During 2008, the Kimberley Process further
deepened its engagement with the United Nations.
Process experts participated in the joint visit by the
United Nations and the Kimberley Process visit to Côte
d’Ivoire. At the request of the United Nations, a
Process expert visited Mali to examine a seized
consignment of rough diamonds and confirmed its
possible Ivorian origin. The Process will continue its
close cooperation with the United Nations in Côte
d’Ivoire, which continues to be the subject of United

08-64317

Nations sanctions and is not trading in rough
diamonds.
During its chairmanship of the Kimberley
Process, India has endeavoured to strengthen the
Process, particularly by building on previous traditions
and conventions and by coordinating with the working
groups and committees of the Process for improved
implementation of Process decisions. In that regard, we
express our gratitude to past Chairs of the Process for
their efforts. Our sincere thanks go also to the chairs of
the working groups and committees and to all Process
participants, industry and civil society for all the
cooperation and support that we received during the
year.
As Chair of the Kimberley Process, India also has
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/63/L.52,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict:
breaking the link between the illicit transaction of
rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to
prevention and settlement of conflicts”. The support of
the United Nations for the Process has been a key
element of its success, and the General Assembly has
traditionally adopted an annual resolution expressing
support for the activities of the Process.
As in previous years, this draft resolution
highlights the important activities undertaken by the
Process during the year. It also expresses satisfaction at
the systematization of the work of the Kimberley
Process with respect to continuing to develop
transparent and uniform rules and procedures. It
welcomes the guidelines endorsed by the New Delhi
plenary, recommending interim measures on serious
non-compliance with Kimberley Process minimum
requirements setting out the guiding principles for
determining serious non-compliance and an indicative
list of escalating measures. The draft resolution also
highlights the development perspective of the Process
by acknowledging that the diamond sector is an
important catalyst for achieving poverty reduction and
meeting the requirements of the Millennium
Development Goals in producing countries.
We look forward to the support of all delegations
in adopting this draft resolution, which would reaffirm
the continued importance that the General Assembly
attaches to the work of the Kimberley Process.
Before concluding, I should like to make two
small corrections to draft resolution A/63/L.52 as
circulated, to bring it into conformity with the text

9

A/63/PV.67

agreed during the informal consultations. In the middle
of operative paragraph 10, the phrase “urges the
Kimberley Process to” should be replaced with “led to
the recommendation that the Kimberley Process”. In
operative paragraph 13, the phrase “enabling Côte
d’Ivoire to meet” should be replaced with the word
“meeting”. Further, the phrase “sanctions imposed for”
should be replaced with “sanctions on”.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): On behalf of the
African Group, the delegation of the Kingdom of
Morocco expresses its sincere appreciation to the
delegation of India, Chair of the 2008 Kimberley
Process, for providing leadership during its tenure. The
African Group is fully supportive of the Kimberley
Process, which, after only a few years of operation, has
managed to increase the transparency and effective
regulation of the trade in rough diamonds.
The African Group welcomes with great
appreciation the substantial progress achieved in
consolidating and strengthening the Kimberley
Process, an instrument that stands as a vital tool of
conflict prevention and deterrence. Before the
introduction of the Process by the United Nations in
the General Assembly as resolution 55/56 of
1 December 2000, the illicit diamond trade fuelled
some of the most devastating conflicts witnessed by
the African continent. In addition to financing
conflicts, the illicit trade in rough diamonds also had a
negative impact on the legitimate international trade in
diamonds. However, it must be recognized that the
constant mobilization of the international community
has allowed significant strides to be made in halting
and preventing the illicit diamond trade.
The Kimberley Process, whose membership
represents 99.8 per cent of world diamond production,
has played a leading role in orienting international
efforts towards the attainment of the universal
objective of breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict. In
that regard, the Kimberley Process is a mechanism that
is both innovative and useful. It approaches the
problem of conflict diamonds not merely at the level of
extraction but also from the standpoint of processing
and trading. Its Certification Scheme has been
particularly effective in validating and regulating the
production of and trade in rough diamonds. It truly
affirms the sovereignty of States in the Process and is
driven by voluntary efforts by its participants.

10

It is thanks to the Kimberley Process that conflict
diamonds today make up only a small percentage of the
world’s diamond market. Today, conflict diamonds
represent less than one per cent of international trade,
while in the 1990s they represented 15 per cent of such
trade.
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has
evolved into a complex system that allows for greater
transparency in the diamond trade. According to the
Kimberley Process Working Group on Statistics, in
2006 the Certification Scheme monitored $35.7 billion
in rough diamond exports, representing more than 480
million carats, and members of the Kimberley Process
issued 55,000 certificates.
Diamonds are one of the major natural resources
with which the African continent is endowed. Every
year, about 65 per cent of the world’s diamonds, worth
over $8.4 billion, come from Africa. In Southern Africa
alone, the diamond industry employs more than 38,000
people, and at the global level it is estimated that about
10 million people are supported, either directly or
indirectly, by the diamond industry. Therefore, the
economies of a great number of African States rely on
the production and trade of diamonds. The active
involvement of the African countries in the Kimberley
Process and their leadership stand as testimony to their
willingness to use these resources for the benefit of
their populations’ economic and social well-being and
for the building of infrastructure critical for
development.
In that connection, the Group of African States
would like to underscore the efforts of the Republic of
Angola for the creation in 2006 of the African
Diamond Producers Association, the objective of which
is to coordinate policies and strategies for the sustained
and durable development of the African diamond
industry.
It is important to strengthen the features of the
Kimberley Process that have been built up through the
last eight years to become its distinctive advantages.
Among these advantages, inclusiveness should be
preserved so as to enlarge the partnership among
producing, exporting and importing countries, the
diamond industry and civil society.
In less than eight years, the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme has been able to bring most of the
world’s rough diamond trade under its control and has
set up an effective body of global governance. In order

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

to maintain this performance and guarantee the
effectiveness of the Kimberley Process, the widest
possible participation of the international community
remains essential.
The Group of African States stresses that
technical assistance provided by the donor countries is
crucial to Kimberley Process participants and helps
them to strengthen their internal controls and improve
data gathering methods through reinforced cooperation
in the field of statistics.
Equally important for the ongoing effectiveness
of the Kimberley Process is the subregional
cooperation aimed at stemming the illicit cross-border
movement of rough diamonds in West Africa and South
America. Transborder cooperation remains a crucial
means of strengthening the international community’s
capacity to monitor and control the movement of rough
diamonds, particularly where porous borders make
doing so a challenge. In that respect, the African Group
calls for better coordination in and sharper focus on the
linkage between the work of the Kimberley Process
and that of the United Nations in its endeavour to
maintain international peace and security.
Finally, the Group of African States takes this
opportunity to assure the incoming Chair of the
Kimberley Process — Namibia — of our continued
goodwill, support and cooperation in the coming years.
Mr. Delacroix (France) (spoke in French): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union regarding agenda item 11, “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
The European Union, which participates as a
single member in the Kimberley Process, would first
like to recall the importance it attaches to the Process,
which allows the international community to act in a
transparent and coordinated manner in order to
eradicate the trade in conflict diamonds. One year ago,
on the occasion of the annual debate on the role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict, the European Union
reported to the General Assembly and handed over the
chairmanship of the Process to India (see A/62/PV.57).
Today, as we conclude this year of the Indian
chairmanship, the European Union is pleased to note
that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has
further developed as a unique and effective tool for
conflict prevention and has achieved significant
progress in combating the scourge of conflict
diamonds.

08-64317

The credibility of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme depends, first and foremost, on
effective implementation by its participants, and the
European Union is glad to note that there has been
significant progress in this respect. The implementation
of the Brussels Declaration on rough diamond trading
and manufacturing centres has enabled the Kimberley
Process to support efforts by producing and exporting
countries to strengthen controls. This redoubling of
efforts has resulted in significant seizures of illicit
diamonds and demonstrated the concrete impact of the
Kimberley Process.
Moreover, the Kimberley Process has itself been
further strengthened, in particular with the launching of
a second round of review visits in diamond trading and
manufacturing centres such as Israel and the United
Arab Emirates, but also to conflict-affected countries
such as the Central African Republic, Liberia and Côte
d’Ivoire. The European Union, as Chair of the Working
Group on Monitoring, welcomes the continued
commitment of participants that are subject to scrutiny
by the Kimberley Process. We are pleased to announce
that the European Community, as the largest trading
entity in the world, is fully committed to this exercise
and will receive a Kimberley Process review visit in
February 2009.
The inclusive nature of the Kimberley Process
has further expanded in 2008, with 75 countries now
participating, including the 27 European Union
member States. The European Community, as Chair of
the Participation Committee, is proud to have
supported Mexico’s accession in 2008 to the status of
participant. The decisions on Venezuela have shown
that the Kimberley Process can maintain dialogue with
a
country
experiencing
difficulties
in
its
implementation of the Certification Scheme, while
ensuring that the Scheme’s integrity is not affected.
The European Union believes that the Kimberley
Process is a mechanism for dialogue and technical
resolution that is especially relevant to the issue of the
illicit trade in rough diamonds. We believe that it is not
in the participants’ interest to politicize the issues
addressed by the Process during the annual
consideration of this agenda item by the General
Assembly. To the contrary, we consider it imperative
that the Process remain independent and consensual. It
is in that spirit of consensus that the European Union
contributed constructively to the New Delhi meeting to
and the negotiations on draft resolution A/63/L.52 and

11

A/63/PV.67

made proposals to ensure that the text could be adopted
by consensus.
However, the European Union believes that draft
resolution A/63/L.52, entitled “The role of diamonds in
fuelling conflict”, presented to the Assembly for
adoption, does not accurately reflect the discussions
that took place from 3 to 6 November 2008 in New
Delhi or take into account the situation in all those
countries whose participation in the Kimberley Process
was mentioned at the sixth meeting of the Process. In
particular, we regret the fact that no reference is made
to the continuing challenges faced by Zimbabwe in
implementing the Process, even though Process
participants noted them with concern.
The European Union also regrets that it was not
possible to make a more positive statement, as is
customary, regarding the election of the new Chair and
Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process. For its part, and
as is customary every year the European Union
welcomes the choice of Namibia as Chair and Israel as
Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2009.
While reaffirming our strong support for the
Kimberley Process and for its consideration within the
framework of the General Assembly, we wished to
express those reservations about the negotiation
process for the draft resolution. Despite those
reservations, we hope that the draft resolution can be
adopted by consensus.

The Russian Federation welcomes the admission
of Mexico as a participant in the Kimberley Process
and the full readmission of the Republic of the Congo
to the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. While
the overall number of Process participants has reached
49, representing 76 countries, we believe that it need
not stop there. We support the aspirations of an
additional 11 States to become participants in the
Kimberley Process and, in principle, encourage
admission to the Process of all States directly or
indirectly involved in rough-diamond operations.
The Russian Federation welcomes the adoption,
at the New Delhi meeting of the Kimberley Process, of
decisions aimed at retaining those participants in the
Process that are experiencing temporary difficulties in
fulfilling the requirements of the Certification Scheme.
We also welcome the willingness of the Process to
provide support and technical assistance to such
participants. As practice has shown, the capacities of
the Process make it possible to effectively overcome
difficulties in implementing the minimal requirements
of the Scheme.

Mr. Alimov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation takes a generally
positive view regarding the work of the Kimberley
Process. We note its dynamic development and its
enhanced international credibility. We welcome the
major contribution made by India, as Chair of the
Process for 2008, in fulfilling the requirements of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme for rough
diamonds with regard to problematic participants and
the recommendations resulting from the triennial
review of the Scheme.

The Russian Federation believes that the
normative basis for the Kimberley Process should be
improved and adapted to the requirements related to its
development and that a legal basis should gradually be
developed for the activities of its working groups,
participants and observers. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption at the meeting of documents setting out
rules and criteria for the selection of candidates for
Vice-Chair of the Process, for the readmission of
former Process participants and for the participation of
guests of the Chair, as well as temporary measures to
suspend participation in the Certification Scheme. The
Russian Federation, as Chair of the Committee on
Rules and Procedures, believes it is essential to
continue to develop transparent and uniform rules and
procedural standards and to develop a mechanism for
consultations and coordination within the Kimberley
Process.

The Process plays an important role in the
accomplishment of tasks defined by the decisions of
the Security Council and other United Nations bodies.
The Russian Federation supports the efforts of the
Kimberley Process to develop coordination with the
Security Council in order to prevent conflict diamonds
from entering the legal trade and welcomes the positive
impact of the contributions of United Nations agencies
in enhancing the effectiveness of the Process.

In conclusion, we wish to thank India for its
skilful and effective coordination of the work on draft
resolution A/63/L.52, on conflict diamonds. In
addition, we thank all partners, who have demonstrated
a thoughtful and flexible approach and a readiness to
compromise. We welcome the agreements reached on
all paragraphs of the draft resolution concerning the
substantive activities of the Kimberley Process.
Adopting this annual draft resolution by consensus

12

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

should remain a key priority for delegations in the
future.
Ms. Mongwa (Botswana): Let me begin by
expressing our sincere appreciation to the delegation of
India for the able manner in which they have
conducted the affairs of the Kimberley Process during
the course of their chairmanship. The report on the
progress made towards the implementation of the
Kimberley Process, presented as document A/63/560,
and draft resolution A/63/L.52, on the role of diamonds
in fuelling conflict, are clear testimony of India’s
sterling leadership in that regard.
We associate ourselves with the statement made
by the representative of Morocco on behalf of the
African Group.
The draft resolution is an important instrument
that is predicated on a unique relationship between the
United Nations system and the Kimberley Process, a
voluntary tripartite body consisting of 75 countries, the
diamond
industry
and
non-governmental
organizations — that is, 49 participants that have
committed themselves to operationalizing the
principles and objectives of the Kimberley Process
through the implementation of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme.
As members may be aware, the primary objective
of the Kimberley Process is to eliminate illicit rough
diamonds from the legitimate diamond trade in order to
prevent such illegal transactions from promoting armed
conflict and illegal activities that threaten international
peace and security. It is thanks in no small measure to
the unwavering support of the international
community, embodied in General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions such as this, that the
Process is able to effectively and successfully attain its
objective.
This annual draft resolution, which complements
the Kimberley Process, serves to validate, consolidate
and nurture that mutually beneficial relationship. It is
also a demonstration of our individual and collective
resolve and tenacity in doing everything in our power
to continue to contribute to the prevention and
settlement of conflicts by breaking the link between the
illegal trade in rough diamonds and armed conflicts.
It is therefore heartening to note from the
progress report that the Kimberley Process continues to
make significant strides in regulating the international

08-64317

trade in rough diamonds in order to ensure that all
rough diamonds produced are from legitimate sources.
While the report underlines challenges related to
non-compliance by some participants that need to be
addressed and other shortcomings, to a large extent it
describes positive developments. These include
enhanced implementation of Process requirements,
greater participation in review mechanisms and
increased transparency and accuracy in reported
statistics, which are a key monitoring tool of the
Process.
Undoubtedly, these commendable milestones
epitomize what we can accomplish through the highest
possible level of cooperation among Governments,
civil society and the private sector. It therefore goes
without saying that the widest possible participation in
the Kimberley Process is essential for effective
implementation, monitoring and compliance. We are
pleased that the Kimberley Process continues to grow
in size and scope, thus reaffirming its importance and
relevance and its contribution to international peace
and security.
My delegation remains confident that, through
this initiative, we will continue to reduce the
devastating impact of conflicts fuelled by trade in
conflict diamonds. In this way, people in affected
countries will no longer be afflicted by the curse of
natural resources that has brought suffering and
despair, but may instead enjoy the fundamental human
rights of peace, security and safety.
In this connection, we note with satisfaction that
as a result of the invaluable work of the Kimberley
Process, today more than ever before, diamonds have
become a major source of financing for social progress
and economic development in many countries,
particularly in Africa. We are therefore optimistic that,
in the not too distant future, our deliberations will shift
focus towards the role of diamonds in preventing
conflict or, in other words, to “diamonds for
development”.
My delegation attaches great importance to this
issue for a number of reasons. Diamonds are a
mainstay of our economy and, to a very great extent,
account for our socio-economic accomplishment. Two
years ago, my former President, Festus Mogae,
presented the Kimberley Process report to the General
Assembly, in his capacity as the Chair of the
Kimberley Process. That year President Mogae said:

13

A/63/PV.67

“For our people in Botswana every diamond
bought means food on the table, better living
conditions, better health care, safe drinking water,
more roads and much, much more. It means at
this time when our future is threatened by the
AIDS pandemic, Botswana gives free antiretroviral drugs to all those in need, provides
food, clothing and support for over 60,000 AIDS
orphans and finances programmes to prevent
mother-to-child transmission of the virus.”

The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme also
offers a precedent for the international community to
address the link between natural-resource trade and the
fuelling of conflict.

In short, for us diamonds are for development, and they
enhance our prospects for achieving all our
development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.

2008 has been a notable year for the Kimberley
Process. We salute India’s stewardship as Chair of the
Kimberley Process in 2008, which led to the
establishment of interim measures on non-compliance
and the further encouragement of countries to comply
with the minimum standards of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme. Under Indian leadership, the
Kimberley Process reaffirmed recent efforts to bolster
internal controls over the diamond market by diamondproducing, trading and manufacturing countries.

Conflict diamonds should continue to be a matter
of serious concern to the international community. It is
thus imperative that this issue remain on the agenda of
the Assembly to ensure that we continue to consolidate
the achievements made and to build on the best
practices in preventing diamonds from fuelling
conflict. It behoves us to work continuously towards
our common objective of saving present and future
generations from the scourge of war, as enshrined in
the ideals of the Charter of the United Nations, by
supporting initiatives like the Kimberley Process.

We were pleased in 2008 to welcome Mexico as a
participant and to recognize the resumption of rough
diamond exports from the Republic of the Congo. We
applaud Liberia’s continued efforts to create an internal
diamond monitoring system and to strengthen controls
so that diamonds are now contributing to the country’s
economic development. 2008 has also been marked
with Venezuela’s decision to voluntarily separate for a
period of two years while it develops a plan of action
to implement Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
minimum standards.

Finally, I should also like to take this opportunity
to welcome Namibia as the incoming Chair of the
Kimberley Process for 2009 and to assure it of the
continued cooperation, support and goodwill of my
delegation.

During this year, the Kimberley Process has also
recognized continued efforts to control illicit diamond
flows from Côte d’Ivoire. But there is more that has yet
to be done in order to ensure that all diamonds will be
conflict free. We would encourage Kimberley Process
countries to redouble their efforts to intercept illicit
diamond shipments from Zimbabwe. Those diamond
shipments contribute to heightening both the political
turmoil and humanitarian crisis in that country. One of
the successful means to promote stability in diamondproducing countries is to foster Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme controls at the same time that
support for development opportunities in mining
communities is provided.

Ms. Halpern (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution on the role of diamonds in fuelling conflict.
Those nations that participate in the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme deserve recognition for their
commitment to reducing the number of conflict
diamonds that reach the worldwide diamond trade and
international gem markets. The unique multistakeholder approach in which Governments, the
diamond industry and civil society organizations have
collaborated and continue to collaborate to achieve this
goal needs to be encouraged for even greater
effectiveness. By working together, this multifaceted
partnership has the potential to ensure that the
legitimate trade in diamonds will reduce poverty,
provide for economic development and help achieve
the Millennium Development Goals.

14

The United States recognizes donor assistance for
the effective implementation of the Kimberley Process
and for development of commerce in both participating
and candidate countries. We look forward to working
closely with Namibia as it assumes the Chair and with
Israel as it assumes the Vice-Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2009.
The millions of lives that have already been lost,
together with the extensive devastation from diamond-

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

fuelled civil wars that have already occurred, make it
imperative that the Kimberley Process continue to be
supported and promoted, so that diamonds will no
longer fuel conflict.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Allow me to start
by expressing our greatest appreciation to India, Chair
of the Kimberley Process, for the very able manner in
which it has conducted the affairs of the Process. We
wish also to welcome the chairmanship of Namibia for
2009 and express our full willingness to cooperate with
Namibia to ensure the success of its chairmanship.
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme has
been in place for five years. The campaign to stop the
circulation of conflict diamonds has been successful
for the most part, although there are still some
challenges for African countries that produce alluvial
and artisan diamonds, particularly countries emerging
from conflict, whose post-conflict situations must
continue to deserve our special attention until they
consolidate their reconciliation and democratization
processes.
African Governments continue to be committed
to the objectives that guided the creation of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, which were
to halt the flow of rough diamonds used by rebels to
finance armed conflicts with the purpose of subverting
legitimate governance. This commitment on their part
has significantly contributed to the promotion of
regional and international peace and security. The
protection of the alluvial diamond production industry,
on which several countries depend for the
implementation of sustainable economic and social
development programmes, will continue to be one of
our most important priorities.
Angola is one of the 75 Governments currently
represented in the Kimberley Process, where it has
been providing its contribution in the various working
groups that compose this process, in particular as Chair
of the working group on artisan alluvial production. In
this context, Angola has been encouraging African
countries that produce artisan alluvial diamonds to
constantly improve their internal controls through the
recommendations foreseen in the 2005 Moscow
declaration on internal controls over alluvial diamond
production.
This year, the Angolan Government invited the
non-governmental organization Partnership Africa
Canada and the Diamonds for Development initiative,

08-64317

through our Ministry of Geology and Mining, to work
with the national entities that are involved in the
Kimberley Process in Angola with a view to
stimulating coordinated action focused on the
normalization of artisan alluvial activities. Several
seminars have been organized with the participation of
local non-governmental organizations, with objectives
such as considering small-scale mining and human
rights and the relationships between greater society and
small-scale artisan activities.
The current political and military situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is of great concern,
as that country is one of the major African diamond
producers, with more than 80 per cent of its national
production coming from small-scale artisan alluvial
exploration. Efforts at the regional level, especially in
the Great Lakes region and the Southern Africa
Development Community area, and at the international
level, through the United Nations, must prevent the
war from assuming greater proportions, which could
endanger that country’s achievements in the context of
the Kimberley Process.
Also, we hope that the elections in Côte d’Ivoire
culminate in the conclusion of the reconciliation
process and that that country will again benefit from
lawful diamond production to serve the reconstruction
of the economy.
Angola will continue to provide the necessary
means to the working group on alluvial production so
that the group can fulfil its obligations while also
counting
on
the
solidarity
of
international
organizations and civil society in the search for
alternative solutions that will improve internal controls
in diamond-producing countries. The Government of
the Republic of Angola will remain committed to the
strengthening of the activity of the Association of
Diamond-Producing Countries of Africa and to
organizing the World Diamond Summit, which will
take place in Luanda in November 2009 under the
central theme of “The reputation of diamonds”.
The Summit, which will be held for the first time
in Angola, will seek to bring together distinguished
members of diamond-producing countries and leading
companies and specialists in the industry for a
discussion around the concept “Diamonds: the
commodity of many emotions”. The Summit will also
provide a transparent platform for interactive dialogue

15

A/63/PV.67

on the technical and human aspects that characterize
diamond mining activities around the world.
Angola has been a regular participant in the
Kimberley Process and was one of the pioneers of its
launching, as it has suffered the consequences of a war
in which diamonds were used as the main source of
funding. The launching and efficient application of the
Kimberley Process has greatly contributed to ending
the armed conflict in Angola. I would therefore once
again like to use this occasion to express my country’s
commitment to working with all the relevant actors, in
particular, other members of the Kimberley Process,
countries that produce and import diamonds, private
diamond
companies
and
non-governmental
organizations, to fight this scourge.
To conclude, I urge the Governments of the
African diamond-producing countries, especially those
with artisan, alluvial and small-scale production, to
devote special attention in their national mining
development plans and to their internal controls in
order to eliminate the entrance or exit of diamonds not
in compliance with their national legislation and with
the standards of the Kimberley Process. In this
connection, combating the traffic of diamonds, in
particular transnational traffic, must constitute
permanent action, not only by all countries affected by
it, but also by the entire international community,
through bilateral, subregional and regional cooperation,
in order to eradicate this crime.
We have great appreciation for the leadership of
India in the Kimberley Process during the mandate that
has just ended, and we wish to salute Namibia once
again for its election to the chairmanship of the Process
for 2009.
Mrs. Ithete (Namibia): Namibia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of
Morocco on behalf of the African Group.
My delegation is pleased to support draft
resolution A/63/L.52, under the agenda item entitled
“The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”. By taking
up this agenda item, the General Assembly once again
recognizes the reality that the illegal trade in diamonds
remains a crucial factor in prolonging conflicts in
many parts of the world. The General Assembly is also
making a clear statement that clean diamonds can
contribute to prosperity and development in many of
our countries.

16

Indeed, for many diamond-producing countries,
especially in Africa, diamond mining is one of the
main sectors contributing to the economy and is thus
an important generator of export earnings and a
catalyst for poverty alleviation and the provision of
essential social services such as health care, education
and the development of much-needed infrastructure
including houses, schools, hospitals and roads.
From our own experience in Namibia, we owe
our advances in development to the exploitation of
mineral resources, especially diamonds, which account
for more than 40 per cent of our export earnings,
10 per cent of gross domestic product and 7 per cent of
Government revenue. Last year alone, Namibia
produced diamonds worth approximately 4.6 billion
Namibia dollars.
Namibia, therefore, attaches great importance to
the Kimberley Process. We believe that the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme not only sets benchmarks
in the regulatory process and management of the
diamond trade, but it also guarantees transparency in
marketing our diamonds and provides a valuable
platform for cooperation among participants in the
Kimberley Process.
As a participant in the Kimberley Process,
Namibia has put in place a robust and comprehensive
regulatory regime in order to protect the integrity of its
diamond industry from conflict diamonds. In addition,
a number of Government agencies, including the
Diamonds Inspectorate in the Ministry of Mines and
Energy and the Protected Resources Unit of the
Namibia Police, have been established and are
specifically charged with protecting our diamonds from
smuggling and other illicit activities. In this way,
Namibia is contributing to international efforts aimed
at curbing the flow of conflict diamonds and ensuring
international peace and security.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to thank
India for the leadership it has provided as Chair of the
Kimberley Process this year. As incoming Chair,
Namibia looks forward to a year of close cooperation.
Mr. McNee (Canada): It is my honour to speak
today on behalf of Australia, New Zealand and
Canada — the CANZ delegations.
Let me begin by congratulating India on its
successful tenure as Chair of the Kimberley Process
over the past year. Important improvements to the

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

Process have been made under India’s stewardship,
including the endorsement of interim measures to
address serious instances of non-compliance and
further systematization of the work of the Kimberley
Process through the development of transparent rules
and procedures. Canada would also like to extend a
warm welcome to Mexico as the forty-ninth participant
in the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.
Let me also take this opportunity to welcome
Namibia as the incoming Kimberley Process Chair, and
to congratulate Israel on having been selected as ViceChair for 2009. We very much look forward to working
with these delegations as, together, we continue to
advance the implementation of the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme in the coming year.
The CANZ delegations remain fully supportive of
the Kimberley Process, which continues to increase
accountability, transparency and effective governance
of the trade in rough diamonds, and which has had
tremendous success in preventing conflict diamonds
from entering the legitimate diamond market.
The CANZ delegations welcomes the progress
that Ghana has continued to make in improving its
system of internal controls over rough diamonds. We
commend the constructive and transparent manner in
which Ghana has engaged in the Kimberley Process
and express our admiration for the commitment Ghana
has shown to completing reforms to its internal
controls. The CANZ delegations recognize that, in
doing so, Ghana is making an important contribution to
ensuring that illicit diamonds do not enter the
legitimate diamond trade, and, as such, represents a
model to be emulated.
Canada also welcomes plans by the Ivorian
Government to re-establish control over diamondproducing areas in that country and looks forward to
the lifting of rough diamond sanctions on Côte d’Ivoire
when circumstances permit. This year, the Kimberley
Process and the United Nations participated in a joint
field mission to Côte d’Ivoire. Canada looks forward to
continued collaboration between the Kimberley
Process and the United Nations on this issue.
The CANZ delegations note with satisfaction that
a resolution was achieved regarding Venezuela’s status
within the Kimberley Process. We support the
continued engagement of the Kimberley Process with
Venezuela, in an effort to bring that country into

08-64317

compliance with the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme’s minimum requirements.
These positive developments notwithstanding,
there are reasons for concern. There are numerous
reports that have recently emerged regarding illicit
diamond mining in Zimbabwe. The CANZ delegations
note the danger of these exports tainting international
diamond markets both within and outside of the control
of the Kimberley Process. We urge all Kimberley
Process participants to enhance their own vigilance
with regard to the implementation of Kimberley
Process minimum requirements, as controlling the
illicit flow of diamonds is a shared responsibility of all.
The CANZ delegations recognize the valuable
role the non-governmental observers have played in
monitoring the implementation of Kimberley Process
minimum requirements and note with satisfaction that
the number of civil society organizations participating
in the Kimberley Process is expanding, especially from
the global South. We welcome the important
contributions that these organizations have made to the
credibility and transparency of the Process, and we
encourage all participants to continue to work
constructively with these organizations.
(spoke in French)
The Kimberley Process is making a major
contribution in breaking the link between rough
diamonds and armed conflict, and stands as a living
testament to what can be achieved through the honest
partnership of Governments, the United Nations, civil
society and the private sector. It is — and will
remain — an important tool for our ongoing efforts to
prevent conflict. Nonetheless, it is clear that much
work remains for the international community in this
area.
In celebrating the sixtieth anniversary of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it is timely to
recall that the Kimberley Process was created in the
spirit of ending the role that diamonds can play in
fuelling conflict and human rights abuses. While the
Kimberley Process focuses on stopping the trade in
conflict diamonds that are used by rebel movements, it
is imperative that the international community be
vigilant in monitoring for human rights abuses related
to the production of and trade in diamonds, and States
should work together to end these practices. We must
not let diamonds linked to human rights abuses enter
the international diamond market and place at risk an

17

A/63/PV.67

industry that is of great importance to many of our
economies.
We look forward to strengthening and deepening
the implementation and enforcement of the
Certification Scheme in the months ahead.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): Israel would like to
recognize and extend our sincere appreciation to India
for its leadership of the Kimberley Process during the
current year.
More than 60 years after the founders of the
United Nations declared that the international
community had an obligation to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, conflicts and
violence
have
become
more
complex
and
multidimensional. In our ongoing efforts to counteract
these increasingly multifaceted conflicts, we must
continue to confront the resources and funding that fuel
such violence. Our efforts to eradicate blood diamonds
remain a work in progress. We have achieved some
notable successes, but more remains to be done.
Israel is proud to have been the first country to
adopt the Kimberley Process. We issued our very first
Kimberley certificate in 2003 and, since then, we have
engaged in a vigorous process to ensure that all
diamonds bought, sold or transferred through Israel are
conflict-free.
This year, Israel welcomed a delegation
representing the Kimberley Process to review Israel’s
compliance with all relevant Kimberley Process
mechanisms. At the conclusion of the visit, the head of
the delegation noted Israel’s commitment to the
Kimberley Process principles and added that Israel’s
system of spot checks and overall organization was
“worthy of emulation in other Kimberley Process
countries”.
Israel would like to express its gratitude to the
sixth Plenary of the Kimberley Process Certification
Scheme that recently met in New Delhi to elect Israel
as Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process. We welcome
the selection of Namibia as Chair of the Process, and
we look forward to working together. In a spirit of
mutual cooperation and collaboration, it is Israel’s goal
to strengthen the Kimberley Process and to increase its
effectiveness, especially with regard to non-compliant
countries.
Israel continues to support all relevant United
Nations sanctions pertaining to conflict diamonds, as

18

these efforts, combined with those of the Kimberley
Process States, help diminish the number of conflict
diamonds that enter the world diamond trade. This
must be a joint effort on the part of the international
community. We must ensure that diamonds are not used
to fuel conflict.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
Before we proceed further, I should like to
consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to consider the draft resolution contained
in document A/63/L.52, as orally corrected. In that
connection, since the draft resolution was circulated
only this morning, it would be necessary to waive the
relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure,
which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting”.
Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with that proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/63/L.52, entitled
“The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the
link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and
settlement of conflicts”, as orally corrected.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of draft resolution A/63/L.52, the
following countries have become sponsors: Armenia,
Australia, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Guyana, Japan,
New Zealand, the Philippines, the Russian Federation,
Thailand, Ukraine and the United States of America.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/63/L.52, as orally
corrected?
Draft resolution A/63/L.52, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 63/134).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
delegations wishing to speak in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted, may I remind

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): We would first like
to thank the Indian delegation very much for its
leadership and for the very constructive way in which
it conducted the deliberations on the resolution we
have just adopted. Israel fully supports the Kimberley
Process and is committed to it. In fact, Israel, as I
stated just a few minutes ago, was the first country to
adopt the Kimberley Process. However, it is regrettable
that we were not able to join in sponsoring the
resolution today.
We have witnessed a disturbing and provocative
act of politicization. It is the established practice, when
it comes to resolutions on this item, to welcome the
selection of the Chair and the Vice-Chair of the
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, and we see
no need to deviate from that established practice. It is
because of the worldview of several countries — Iran,
Syria and Libya — that that practice was changed. For
that reason, we did not sponsor the resolution.
Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The General Assembly has just adopted a
resolution entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling
conflict: breaking the link between the illicit
transaction of rough diamonds and armed conflict as a
contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts”.
The primary objective of the resolution, in our view,
was to prevent the illicit diamond trade from playing a
role in escalating conflicts in diamond-producing
countries, on the basis of the principles of the
Kimberley Process and to prevent the illicit
exploitation of peoples’ natural resources, especially
through transnational activities, which deprive such
countries of their natural wealth.
In this respect, our delegation joined the
consensus as an expression of gratitude to the
leadership of the Kimberley Process for this year for its
significant role in implementing the objectives of the
Kimberly Process, and specifically for that reason. In
support of the efforts of our brothers on the African
continent to combat the illicit diamond trade, we
decided not to insist on submitting the entire draft
resolution to a vote, and will merely express our
reservation on the content of operative paragraph 20 of
the resolution, because we believe that having selected
Israel as Vice-Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2009

08-64317

is a misreading of the noble objective that I mentioned
at the beginning of my statement.
It is a well-known fact that most Israeli diamond
merchants, who are reserve officers in the Israeli army,
are exploiting the diamond trade in Africa and
elsewhere to carry out destructive transactions, sell
arms, foment domestic turmoil and disturbances in
some States and finance armed conflicts and recruit
children to fight in them. All of this helps to fuel and
escalate conflict and adversely influence international
peace and security.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda item
11?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14
Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/525)
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation is
taking the floor in its capacity as Chairman of the Zone
of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic, on
behalf of the Zone’s 24 members: Angola, Argentina,
Benin, Brazil, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Congo, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Namibia, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sao Tome and Principe, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
Togo and Uruguay.
I would like to underline that the contribution by
Angola referred to in part II of the report (A/63/525)
was made on behalf of the 24 members of the Zone
following a decision of its Permanent Committee and
that it reflects our common position in this collective
effort.
I should like to begin, Sir, by reiterating our
satisfaction with the way in which you have been
conducting the work of the Assembly this morning. My
delegation also thanks the Secretary-General for the
submission of his report, as well as for following up on
the implementation of resolution 41/11, on the Zone.
The members of the Zone are particularly grateful
to the delegation of Colombia, the Department of

19

A/63/PV.67

Public Information, the Office of Legal Affairs, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Office in Geneva and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their
contributions to this report and for their interest in the
issues of the Zone.
The report (A/63/525) before the General
Assembly today is, per se, eloquent on how the zone is
making gradual but steady significant qualitative
changes by creating basic conditions for a fully
operational mechanism for South-South cooperation in
which a wide range of partners can find their place. We
are particularly pleased to see how those changes are
being noticed and taken into account by our partners,
as the replies from various bodies mentioned in the
report clearly refer to the implementation of the
Luanda Plan of Action and the Luanda Final
Declaration. In effect, the adoption of the Luanda Plan
of Action as a framework for concrete action was a
turning point in the revitalization of the zone.
We are thankful to all partners for the actions that
they have been carrying out in the various countries
located within the zone of peace and cooperation of the
South Atlantic. However, we would welcome as a
desirable development the regular exchange of
information regarding the activities that partners have
developed within the zone. Such exchanges could be
carried out and coordinated through the zone’s
chairmanship.
For our part, while stressing that it is important
that we cooperate among ourselves, maximizing the
use of our internal capacities and resources, members
of the zone will spare no effort in involving relevant
partners in the attainment of our objectives, including
by seeking their expertise with a view to the successful
holding of the meetings of the ad hoc working groups
mentioned in paragraph 8 of the present report.
The Office of Legal Affairs was instrumental in
the holding of meetings of experts on the law of the sea
in two member States of the zone — in Brazzaville,
Republic of the Congo, in 1990, and in Montevideo,
Uruguay, in 1991. We would welcome the continuation
of such coordinated action. Another useful example
would be utilizing the zone to address the issue of drug
trafficking, as its membership comprises countries in
South America and Africa with coasts on the Atlantic
Ocean, a transit route used by dealers to transport illicit
drugs.

20

We fully appreciate the positive developments in
the field of peacebuilding, including in the zone
member States Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau, which
are on the agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Other members, such as Liberia, Guinea and Côte
d’Ivoire, have benefited from the assistance of the
Peacebuilding Fund.
Mr. Parlog (Republic of
President, took the Chair.

Moldova),

Vice-

The issues of peace, security and development are
interrelated and inseparable; they also require a
suitable international environment. The members of the
zone are therefore concerned over the negative
developments in the world economy and the
persistence of conflicts. In that connection, we are
deeply concerned at the situation prevailing in some
parts of Africa, including in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, a member of the zone. We hope that no
effort will be spared in overcoming that complex
situation, including combating the illicit exploitation of
that country’s natural resources. In addition, we are
alarmed by the conflict in Somalia and the consequent
scourge of piracy, which has increased pressure on the
Atlantic Ocean route. It is necessary to decisively fight
the practice of piracy and, more important, to find a
solution to the long-lasting Somali conflict.
The zone of peace and cooperation of the South
Atlantic was established as a mechanism to contribute
to the strengthening of international peace and security
and the promotion of the principles and purposes of the
United Nations, in which we fully believe. The
members of the zone are therefore determined to
promote the noble objectives of peace, security and
development as rights to be exercised by all.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 14.
Agenda item 42
Sport for peace and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/63/466)
Draft resolution (A/63/L.51)
The Acting President (spoke in French): I now
give the floor to the representative of Switzerland, who
will introduce draft resolution A/63/L.51.

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to present, on behalf of Chile and
Switzerland, draft resolution A/63/L.51.
Switzerland and Chile thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (A/63/466) and the United
Nations Office of Sport for Development and Peace for
its excellent work. The report presents an impressive
catalogue of initiatives undertaken or supported by
Member States and United Nations bodies. It also
shows what can be accomplished when all actors pull
together.
That is why I should like to emphasize the
commitment and resolve of the sponsors of the draft
resolution. We see sport as an effective and
constructive tool not only for the promotion of peace
and development, but also for the gradual creation of
an atmosphere of tolerance, dialogue and respect,
which are essential elements in these turbulent times.
More than 30 countries are currently sponsors of
the draft resolution, which remains open for
sponsorship.
Sport is about fairness in competition and
individual excellence in teamwork. That is what sport
teaches us, and it also applies to United Nations
activities. Thus, in terms of achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, we are past half-time and have
fallen far behind. The current financial crisis is making
it even more difficult to mobilize resources for
development and peace. It is only by acting as one
united team in which all do their level best that we will
be able to cross the finish line as winners in 2015.
Sport contributes in two ways to the Millennium
Development Goals. First, when practised wisely, sport
has proved to be an effective tool for attaining the
objectives of education, health, development and
peace. Secondly, the world of sport — with its athletes,
its national and international federations, its clubs and
its industry — has always actively supported and
encouraged efforts to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. It would be unforgivable if we did
not take full advantage of that support.
Chile and Switzerland have the honour to
introduce today the draft resolution on “Sport as a
means to promote education, health, development and
peace”, contained in document A/63/L.51.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
takes note of the many programmes and initiatives

08-64317

covered in the Secretary-General’s report and
recognizes the need for greater coordination of efforts at
the international level. Furthermore, the draft resolution
emphasizes the positive impact of mass sports events
such as the 2008 Olympic and Paralympic Games in
Beijing or the International Federation of Association
Football Under-20 Women’s World Cup that just ended
in Chile. These three events, among many others,
represent valuable contributions to the international
promotion of sport and physical education.
The draft resolution also refers to the particularly
important body of work accomplished by the Sport for
Development and Peace International Working Group.
The Working Group has vigorously promoted sport for
development and peace, and has brought together 50
States, 10 United Nations agencies, programmes and
funds, as well as numerous intergovernmental bodies,
sports federations and civil society organizations. It has
delivered a comprehensive framework to better
integrate sport into States’ national and international
development strategies and issued in Beijing its final
report containing recommendations addressed to
Governments. Copies of that report are available just
outside of this Hall.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s decision to
incorporate the Sport for Development and Peace
International Working Group into the United Nations
system under the leadership of the Special Adviser.
Indeed, in our view, there is no better body than the
Secretariat to take on the important responsibility of
working with Member States on the implementation of
national policies that promote sport for education,
health, development and peace.
The other operational paragraphs of the draft
resolution spell out a range of measures aimed at
strengthening sport for development and peace at the
national and international levels. In particular, the draft
resolution welcomes the Secretary-General’s decision
to renew the mandate of the Special Adviser and to
establish a United Nations Office on Sport for
Development and Peace as a policy and
communications platform. It invites all relevant actors
to cooperate with the Office, as provided in the Action
Plan contained in the Secretary-General’s report in
document A/61/373.
The Special Adviser and his Office are not a
luxury but a necessity. The Office has played a
paramount role in raising awareness of sport for peace

21

A/63/PV.67

and development within the United Nations system,
garnering support from Member States, and providing
a global point of reference, leadership and inspiration
to grassroots activities. We are confident that the
Special Adviser and his Office will continue to ensure
a system-wide and coherent approach to sport within
the United Nations system.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the draft
resolution proposes not only the creation of resources
and infrastructure for sport, but also the far more
ambitious aspiration to create what we might call a
global culture of sport and physical education. That
culture should incorporate young people, adults and the
elderly, as well as athletes with disabilities, women and
men, and the people of developed and developing
countries in order to contribute to a healthier, less
violent and more tolerant world.
Mr. Chabi (Morocco): The African Group has
taken note with great satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “Sport for development and
peace: building on the foundations” (A/63/466), which
was submitted to the present session of the General
Assembly pursuant to resolution 62/271 and which
addresses the progress made at the national, regional
and international levels in encouraging policies and
best practices in the field of sport for development and
peace.
The successive reports submitted by the
Secretary-General on the issue of sport as a vector of
development and peace demonstrate that the
international community is starting to invest in sport as
a medium for attaining some of the most critical
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Partnerships
between Member States, the United Nations and civil
society have allowed sport to become perceived as a
cost-effective tool for advancing human development.
In this regard, the African Group would like to pay
tribute to the remarkable work of the Special Adviser
to the Secretary-General on Sport for Development and
Peace, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, who has risen to the
challenge of advocating and promoting the efforts of
the United Nations system in making sport a tool for
development and peace by forging partnerships across
the different sectors of society.
Sport as a concept is perpetually relevant to all
facets of human life. As an instrument, it can serve to
promote peace, dialogue, reconciliation, solidarity and
the search for peaceful and diplomatic solutions to

22

conflicts. Sport is also an integral part of human
development and well-being, both individual and
collective. Its contribution to development, capacitybuilding, unity and bringing people closer has been
evidenced on many occasions. Through competition,
sport promotes high moral values, such as tolerance
and respect for the adversary through a disciplined
approach. In this regard, the specificity of sport derives
from the spirit of healthy competition, which provides
a channel through which people of different religious,
cultural, racial and political backgrounds can interact
and enhance their respect for one another.
The report of the Secretary-General demonstrates
how sport has the potential to have a positive impact
on the attainment of the MDGs and peace by raising
awareness and promoting the values of cooperation and
mutual understanding.
Sport can be a powerful tool for social inclusion,
integration and equal opportunity. Therefore, sport for
development and peace strategies need to be explicitly
incorporated
into
national
and
international
development plans and policies. That being said, the
challenge that remains is creating effective
coordination between the efforts of the Sport for
Development and Peace International Working Group,
the United Nations system and sports organizations.
The latter should develop common strategies to
promote the principle of sports for all. In this regard,
some Member States have developed successful
national sport for peace and development strategies.
Our wish is to see these countries exchange their
experiences through a forum like the Group of Friends
that is co-chaired by Switzerland and Tunisia.
The African Group would like to commend China
for its successful organization of the XXIX summer
Olympic Games and the XIII Paralympic Games. The
success of China, as the first developing country ever
to host such a large-scale event, is a cause for pride and
encouragement for other developing countries to hold
world sports events. We have no doubt that through
such events, sport transcends the barriers of language,
politics and religion, and stimulates the body, mind and
spirit of athletes who feel part of the global
community.
We welcome the multifaceted partnerships and
initiatives that allow the mobilization of Member
States, United Nations funds, programmes and
specialized agencies. Our hope is to see such

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

partnerships expanded under the guidance and lead of
the United Nations Office of Sport for Development.
While we welcome the inclusion of this Office into the
United Nations system, we call for additional
investment in the Trust Fund that was recently set up in
order to sustain the structure’s activities.

(MDGs). The Chinese delegation wishes to express its
appreciation in that regard. We welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s appointment of Mr. Wilfried Lemke as his
Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace
and appreciate the good work that he has done since
assuming his duties.

Dialogue and encounter through sports hold great
potential in the area of peacebuilding and conflict
prevention. The United Nations Office of Sport for
Development and Peace has conducted a certain
number of activities in a number of African countries.
We look forward to seeing a greater consolidation of its
activity.

From 8 August to 17 September 2008, China had
the honour to host both the XXIX Olympiad and the
XIII Paralympic Games. It was the first time that China
had hosted the Olympic Games. Together, the Chinese
people and people from many other countries
experienced the exciting moments of the Olympic
competitions; witnessed the splendour and long history
of Chinese culture; felt the openness and harmony of a
modern China; carried on the Olympic spirit of unity,
friendship and peace and the Paralympic spirit of selfrespect, self-confidence, self-reliance and selfimprovement; and wrote a new and splendid chapter of
the Olympic Games.

On the African continent, a special effort needs to
be made by the United Nations on partnerships to
further promote sport for peace and development. The
richness of Africa is its youth, and the continent strives
to channel its extraordinary energies through creativity,
education and common understanding. If children are
the future, then sport can be the medium to instil
positive values in them and give them a future.
While we recognize that sport alone cannot
resolve complex economic and social challenges, it
nevertheless has the power to promote ethos-building
among the youth of all our countries. One way to
attract young people is to invite sports celebrities to
serve as spokespersons and goodwill ambassadors so as
to help foster the positive values of sport and the
achievement of development goals.
Through its strong mobilization power and its
appeal, sport is a human right. The African Group
remains convinced that sport is a life initiation that
guarantees capacity-building of the individual to the
benefit of the sustainable peace of his or her
community and country.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report entitled “Sport for development
and peace: building on the foundations” (A/63/466),
which provides a comprehensive assessment of the
various programmes and initiatives in that regard
carried out by United Nations Member States, funds,
programmes, specialized agencies and other partners
over the past year, as well as a full account of the
major contributions made by the XXIX Olympiad and
the XIII Paralympic Games, both held in Beijing, to the
promotion of peace and development and the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals

08-64317

For that, we wish to thank all States Members of
the United Nations. With their support, the General
Assembly, at its sixty-second session, adopted by
consensus a resolution sponsored by China and 186
other Member States on observing the Olympic Truce.
The resolution reaffirmed the determination of Member
States to promote cooperation and resolve differences
through sport; provided valuable opportunities to
initiate dialogue and build mutual trust in regions of
conflict; and created conditions for the promotion of
development, education and health care through sport.
We wish to thank the relevant international
organizations, Governments and peoples. With the
support of members of the Assembly, the Beijing
Olympic torch relay completed its tour of 19 cities in
19 countries on the five continents outside China,
spreading and perpetuating the Olympic spirit.
We wish to thank the leaders of many countries
and international organizations who, despite their busy
schedules, took the time to come in person to Beijing
to attend the opening or closing ceremonies of the
Olympic Games or the Paralympic Games, to support
or participate in the Beijing Olympics and to cheer on
the athletes.
We wish to thank the 16,000 athletes of the
Olympic Games and the 4,000 athletes of the
Paralympic Games. Upholding the Olympic spirit, they
strove to be swifter, higher and stronger; gave perfect
expression to transcendence, equality and integration;

23

A/63/PV.67

demonstrated excellent competitive skills and good
sportsmanship; and achieved remarkable results,
breaking 38 world records, 85 Olympic records, 279
parathletic world records and 339 Paralympic records.
We wish to thank the tens of thousands of
wonderful volunteers who came from China and from
all over the world. It is they who, with their smiles and
their excellent volunteer service, ensured the smooth
running of the Olympic Games and the normal
functioning of the cities involved, creating a miracle in
the history of the Olympic Games and giving a
powerful impetus to the development of volunteerism
in China.
We wish to thank the many construction workers
from all over China. Beginning in 2001, when Beijing
won the bid to host the Olympic Games, they worked
around the clock with great diligence and built a host
of beautiful architectural masterpieces, exemplified by
the Bird’s Nest and the Water Cube, which not only
embody the characteristics of our time but also have a
national flavour, thus providing excellent stadiums,
gymnasiums and athlete villages for the Beijing
Olympic Games.
The Beijing Olympic Games gave a big boost to
the development of popular sports activities in China.
The Chinese Government carried out an outreach
programme on knowledge about the Olympic Games
for more than 400 million adolescents. It was by far the
largest programme ever carried out in the history of
China to disseminate and popularize sports knowledge.
The Beijing Olympic Games was also a perfect
expression of the integration of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations with the Olympic
ideals. In order to promote and publicize the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
which recently came into effect, the Chinese
Government had a memorial wall built in the square of
the Paralympic Village. It was the first time in the
history of the Paralympic Games that a memorial wall
had been built that centred on the theme of a United
Nations convention. Chinese leaders, Paralympic
athletes and leaders of organizations for persons with
disabilities from 147 countries and various regions
attended the wall unveiling ceremony and jointly
appealed to the international community to be more
committed to the promotion and protection of persons
with disabilities and to support the Convention with
concrete action.

24

Sport is an important way to improve people’s
health and to enhance both the physical fitness and the
quality of life of a nation’s population. The Chinese
Government attaches great importance to and brings
into full play the major role of sport in facilitating the
fuller development of the human person, in promoting
economic and social progress and in achieving the
MDGs. We support using sport as a means to promote
education, health and gender equality and to guarantee
the rights of persons with disabilities and
environmental protection. The Chinese Government
supports the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General
on Sport for Development and Peace and the relevant
bodies in continuing to play active roles in integrating
sport into development cooperation in various fields.
The Beijing Olympic Games have come to an
end, but the task of carrying forward the spirit of sport
and promoting peace and development remains a longterm challenge. The Chinese Government will continue
to integrate sport into its national economic and social
development strategies, accelerate the building of
sports facilities and infrastructure and improve the
system of public fitness facilities so as to provide more
and better public sports facilities and services to our
people and enable them to enjoy the good health and
the benefits of development brought about by sport.
Mrs. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): While
the report of the Secretary-General submitted for our
consideration (A/63/466) is subtitled “building on the
foundations”, the Secretary-General has taken
decisions in recent months that go beyond merely
consolidating achievements, because they effectively
make sport a means to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals and an element of peacebuilding.
The General Assembly is preparing to adopt a
draft resolution that is substantial, as it welcomes the
Secretary-General’s decision to incorporate, under the
leadership of his Special Adviser, the Sport for
Development and Peace International Working Group
within the United Nations Office of Sport for
Development and Peace.
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity
to pay tribute to the work of Mr. Adolf Ogi, the
Secretary-General’s first Special Adviser, and to his
successor, Mr. Wilfried Lemke, who can count on the
support of the authorities of Monaco.
of

Sport for development is one of the main focuses
international cooperation activities of the

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

Principality of Monaco. In addition to the partnership
with UNDP for the “Humanist sport at the service of
youth development in cities” programme for 2008 to
2010, Monaco supports Centre Yeelen Olympique, a
sports centre and school in Bamako, Mali, which offers
future professional football players academic or
vocational training. Monaco also supports a Toreball
field construction project in Madagascar for a
specialized school for blind children.
In the context of major sports events, we are
seeking to further promote sport for peace and
development. I would mention in this regard the annual
football match between the Monaco team and the
Formula One drivers team to benefit the Monaco
chapter of the World Association of Children’s Friends
and the “No Finish Line” relay race, organized by
Junior Chamber Monaco on Universal Children’s Day.
Sport contributes to the development of
individuals and communities, but it is also a factor for
post-conflict reconciliation and peacebuilding. The
second international Peace and Sport forum, under the
leadership of His Serene Highness Prince Albert II of
Monaco, has just concluded in Monaco. Peace and
Sport is an organization created in Monaco by Joël
Bouzou, an Olympic medallist and world champion of
the modern pentathlon. The organization is supported
by Governments, international sports governance
bodies, international organizations, major international
private companies and international champions and
creates synergies among the various stakeholders for
two types of activities: an international annual forum
and “Projets sur zone”, which are projects for concrete
action in crisis areas around the world, whether in postconflict situations or in situations of extreme poverty
or social instability.
Approximately 300 political and sport decision
makers, representing more than 50 countries and five
continents, spent three days at a meeting in Monaco to
boost synergies among the group of institutions and
individuals who are in a position to undertake efforts to
mitigate tensions and the consequences of conflict or
even prevent them, through sport.
Educating young people on the values of sport is
an essential element for changing mindsets and
promoting a lasting culture of peace, but we also think
that political decision makers need to realize that sport
is a tool for effective social inclusion and a way of
bringing communities together.

08-64317

The Peace and Sport organization will establish
in 2009 a resource centre and an information and
exchange network to boost the coordination of
projects, make better use of resources, improve the
effectiveness of efforts on the ground and make such
efforts more permanent.
The forum’s participants have also decided to
mobilize the organizers of large-scale sports events to
contribute to actions undertaken to promote peace
through sport, as the draft resolution advocates. The
Peace and Sport Awards were awarded during this
forum. In particular, for the first time, the prize for
peace and sport picture of the year was awarded. It
depicted the historic handshake between the Turkish
President, Mr. Abdullah Gül, and the Armenian
President, Mr. Serzh Sargsyan, on 6 September 2008 in
Yerevan, Armenia, on the occasion of the football
World Cup qualifier between the Turkish and Armenian
teams, which ended 18 years of diplomatic silence.
The Olympic Games in Beijing were the first
since the International Convention against Doping in
Sport, adopted under the auspices of UNESCO, came
into force. The biggest testing programme of all time
was undertaken at the Games. More than 4,770 antidoping tests were carried out. But above all, the Games
were able to show, starting with the wonderful opening
ceremony, everything that sport as the universal
language represents everything we should prize and
defend: talent, work, honesty, inclusion, discipline, fair
play, confidence, team spirit, surpassing oneself and
fraternity.
Mr. Fluss (Israel): I want to thank the President
of the General Assembly for convening this important
debate. We also wish to thank the Secretary-General
and his staff for his report (A/63/466) and its specific
reference to the Peace Players International programme
in our region.
To many, sports serve merely as exercise. But in a
global context, sports serve as a common language that
can foster international friendship and harmony. In a
spirit of healthy competition, people from diverse
backgrounds, religions, cultures and races can join
together in a common cause and a shared experience. A
competitive sporting experience between people
transcends our differences and reminds us that, as
human beings, we have far more that binds us together
than that draws us apart. Such an idea is enshrined in
dusty football fields as well as in the international

25

A/63/PV.67

Olympic stage. In the words of the charter of the
Olympic Games, sports and friendly competition can
serve to create a peaceful society, concerned with the
preservation of human dignity.
In our own region, we have tried to harness the
spirit of sports to forge relationships and build bridges
between peoples and cultures. Israel has an active
network of organizations that seek to use the medium
of sports to promote peace and coexistence.
The Peres Centre for Peace, a non-governmental
organization, is one of the most active organizations
that promote peace through sports. Its ground-breaking
programmes have been lauded by the international
community as an important way to bring young Israelis
and Palestinians together to learn from one another and
develop cross-cultural ties. The Peres Centre’s twin
peace and sports schools bring Israelis and Palestinians
together for sports training and competition along with
peace education activities.
This year, Israelis came together with
Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip to play
football and basketball. To some, this may have looked
liked an ordinary sports event. But these games and
additional education programmes served to transcend
political, cultural and religious divides.
As these programmes have proven to be a
successful way to foster a culture of peace, they have
expanded their scope and reach. Participants now
publish a bilingual newspaper in Hebrew and Arabic to
ensure that current and former participants remain
connected to their teammates and to the values they
learned together.
On a governmental level, Israel’s international
development programme, MASHAV, also uses sports
as a tool for development and peace. MASHAV offers
technical cooperation programmes in these areas,
which have been shown to be effective and productive
tools to promote peace and development. The Israeli
Government remains committed to these programmes.
All of these governmental and non-governmental
successes should serve as examples of what we can
achieve through sports. Through positive engagement,
we are bridging divides and solving problems that had
seemed intractable.
Unfortunately, not all sporting events can be
carried out in the same positive spirit. Though it is a
painful part of our history, it is also worth remembering

26

what happened at the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich,
when gunmen from the terrorist group Black September
broke into the Olympic Village, disguised as athletes,
and killed 11 Israeli athletes, coaches and referees. The
reverberations of this abhorrent and monstrous act of
terrorism are still felt in Israel — and around the world,
for that matter — to this very day.
In this regard, Israel was pleased by this year’s
Olympic Games in Beijing, which featured a striking
example of the values of sports as an ideal means of
stimulating body, mind and spirit and, in turn,
overcoming barriers of language, politics and religion.
The abuse of sports and international competition for
political means is an affront to the very ethos and
virtues of the Olympic tradition.
Many conflicts and development challenges can
seem intractable. We must find new and dynamic ways
of confronting difficulties and of building bridges
between people.
The use of sports to promote a culture of peace
and development can be an effective way to build
peace from the ground up and foster momentum for
development. Yet sports alone cannot foster enduring
peace. Supporting factors, such as an interest in peace
among different groups, media involvement, strong
civil society participation and dedication by sport
organizations, are needed for sport to be an effective
vehicle of peace.
Israel strongly supports this concept and calls on
the nations of the world to use the opportunities
provided by sports to foster peace and development
and to continue strengthening the supporting factors to
ensure the widest participation. Israel pledges itself to
fully support this endeavour.
Mr. Rohde (Germany): I should like, first, to
underline that it is an honour for my Government to be
among the sponsors of draft resolution A/63/L.51,
entitled “Sport as a means to promote education,
health, development and peace”. I should also like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the remarkable
work achieved by the Special Adviser to the SecretaryGeneral on Sport for Development and Peace, Wilfried
Lemke.
As a sponsor of the draft resolution, Germany
recognizes the importance of sport as a means for
mutual understanding and dialogue between peoples.
Sporting activities connect us and can help to

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

overcome barriers, such as cultural, linguistic and other
differences. They play a valuable role in bringing
people from different backgrounds together and can
contribute to promoting social cohesiveness and
rapprochement between cultures.
Sport programmes can also foster social inclusion
within cultures by overcoming discrimination against
and social marginalization of women and disabled
persons. The participation of girls and women in
sporting activities can help to promote their selfconfident participation in social life and to form their
leadership potential.
Furthermore, sport can be conducive to the
attainment of the entire spectrum of internationally
agreed development goals. Sport thus constitutes an
appropriate complementary element to advance the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals.
As experience has shown, sport programmes can
also be supportive of internal political stabilization and
social integration after periods of conflict. They can,
for example, play a major role in the rehabilitation and
reintegration of child soldiers and other young people
involved in conflict activities.
The Federal German Government therefore
strongly supports the General Assembly’s engagement
in the promotion of sport as a means for development
and peace. It provides the United Nations Special
Adviser on Sport for Peace and Development and
financially supports his Office through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Sport for Development and
Peace. Germany will continue to strongly support the
office in 2009.
Ms. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): At the outset, I
should like, on behalf of Kazakhstan, to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General for the report
contained in document A/63/466, entitled “Sport for
development and peace: building on the foundations”,
which lays out a comprehensive picture of the progress
achieved to date at the national, regional and
international levels in the realization of strategies and
programmes in the field of sport for development and
peace. The focus of the report on the new opportunities
revealed since the Games of the XXIX Olympiad and
the XIII Paralympic Games in Beijing rightly stresses
that the Games hosted by China were the first ever held
in a developing country, encouraging further
improvements which expand far beyond sport itself and

08-64317

thus contribute to attainment of the Millennium
Development Goals.
We also highly commend the solemn appeal of
the President of the General Assembly to all Member
States to observe the Olympic Truce during the 2008
Summer Games in Beijing, as reflected in General
Assembly decision 62/550. We call upon the
international community to observe the Olympic Truce
in the future, in accordance with that appeal.
Taking account of the ongoing development of
physical training and sport in Kazakhstan, my
Government has developed a relevant draft law as one
of the development measures soon to be authorized by
parliament. At the national level, this law will secure
and protect the rights of the people of Kazakhstan to
equal access to physical training and sport. It will
create a system of legal guarantees and necessary
conditions for the development of mass sports,
preparation of sport reserves and training of the
national teams by stipulating relations, rights and
duties of and among individuals and sport-related legal
entities.
Kazakhstan has established the concepts and
goal-oriented complex programmes for athletes to
practice in preparation for the XXX Summer Olympic
Games, to be held in London in 2012, as well as the
XVI Summer Asian Games, to be held in Guangzhou in
2010.
In observance of the UNESCO Convention
against Doping in Sport, the Government of
Kazakhstan is currently considering, including at
special meetings of the Expert Council on
Kazakhstan’s
cooperation
with
international
organizations, the relevant law for ratification of the
Convention.
We would like to note in particular the use of
sport as an instrument for development and peace, as
demonstrated by all countries during the XXIX
Summer Olympic Games in Beijing. For the first time
ever, the Olympic torch relay was escorted, as part of
the ceremony, through the streets of Almaty,
Kazakhstan. This event was of note not only for
athletes of my country but for the entire nation, which
was proud to pass on the torch to others.
With regard to the Paralympic Games, it is
noteworthy that Kazakhstan has been paying increasing
attention to the use of sports in the process of the

27

A/63/PV.67

rehabilitation of disabled persons. Besides creating
necessary conditions for persons with disabilities and
holding mass sporting events and other forums for
them throughout the country, the Republic of
Kazakhstan is at present in the process of signing the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. For the
purpose of encouraging more involvement in sport
through financial and other incentives for disabled
athletes, my Government provided remuneration for
those athletes who took first to sixth place in any sport
at the Beijing Paralympic Games.
In addition, my Government is undertaking
measures that contribute to the attainment of greater
achievement not only in professional but also mass
sport. Such measures include the creation of favourable
legal conditions for the development and operation of
non-profit organizations which work, based on sport
interests, to unite communities, regardless of their
differences, or which use sports in policy promotion or
for educational or physical and mental health
rehabilitation purposes. One of the major considerable
benefits of sport is its effectiveness as a tool for
inspiring young people, igniting patriotic ideals and
promoting values of equity, tolerance, peace, respect
for rules and the concept of hard work, true
competitiveness and fair play.
In 2011, Kazakhstan will host the VII Asian
Winter Games and is currently undertaking direct
measures to be ready for this important sport event.
The Ministry of Tourism and Sport of my country has
already held negotiations with leading world architects
to allocate land for the construction of sports facilities.
The preliminary state budget estimates for hosting the
Games amount to $1 billion.
My delegation believes that the positive dynamics
of United Nations efforts to integrate sport for
development and peace will be further enhanced by
awareness-raising and advocacy aimed at more
comprehensive development practices. That can be
achieved through strengthened cooperation and
concerted efforts by Member States to establish a
global framework for the role of sport in promoting
development and peace.
Mr. Stone (Australia): Australia is committed to
the principles of sport for development and peace and
to the role that the United Nations can play in
furthering those principles. We welcome the report of

28

the Secretary-General on that subject (A/63/466) which
is before the Assembly this morning. We also welcome
the Secretary-General’s decision to renew the mandate
of the Special Adviser on Sport for Development and
Peace and his appointment of Mr. Wilfried Lemke to
carry out that role. We look forward to working closely
with Mr. Lemke in order to share our experiences and
help identify best practices in sport-for-development
programmes.
We would like to thank Switzerland and Chile for
facilitating the draft resolution before us today
(A/63/L.51). Australia is pleased to be a sponsor of the
draft resolution.
By supporting sports-based activities in
developing
countries,
Australia
is
providing
opportunities for young men and women to develop
skills in leadership, teamwork, self-discipline and
respect for themselves and others, as well as providing
a positive outlet for their energies. The Australian
Sports
Outreach
Programme
supports
major
programmes in seven countries and provides grants for
smaller activities in more than 40 countries in Africa,
the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific. The Programme
aims to increase the capacity of partners, such as local
authorities and communities, to plan and conduct
sport-based activities that contribute to addressing
locally identified development priorities. In Vanuatu,
for example, 1,200 youth leaders are being trained to
deliver village-based sports programmes under the
guidance of traditional leaders.
Earlier this year, the Governments of Papua New
Guinea and Australia announced a partnership, the
Papua New Guinea-Australia Sport for Development
Initiative, to assist the Papua New Guinea Sports
Foundation in leading, managing and delivering
programmes in support of Papua New Guinea
Government policies. Australia has committed funding
to the programme until 2016.
With the expansion of our programmes, Australia
has established a dedicated sport-for-development
adviser position within our international aid agency,
the Australian Agency for International Development.
Australia also has a number of programmes to address
the involvement of women and girls in sport-related
activities. These include the Sport Leadership Grants
for Women, which provide opportunities for training
and skills development to enable women to take on
leadership and decision-making roles in sport.

08-64317

A/63/PV.67

Sport is integral to Australia’s way of life, to our
view of ourselves and to how we are viewed by the rest
of the world. It helps build the social cohesion that
binds families, communities, regions and the nation,
and it forges ties between nations. We remain
committed to using sport as a valuable agent for
development and peace around the world.
Ms. Wilson (Jamaica): I thank the Assembly for
its indulgence in giving me the pleasure and honour to
speak on behalf of my Government on agenda item 42,
“Sport for peace and development”. This is a pleasant
yet humbling task for me, as it comes in the wake of
outstanding performances in the track and field events
of the XXIX Olympiad, held in Beijing earlier this
year, by athletes from Jamaica and the Caribbean
region.
Our island has nurtured a tradition of sports and
sportsmanship — a tradition that every Jamaican is
proud to identify with today. We cannot forget the
audacity of the bobsleigh team from our tropical
shores, which, against all odds, qualified for the 1988
Winter Olympics. We recall the determination of our
national football team, the Reggae Boyz, which rose
from virtual obscurity to qualify in 1998 for the
prestigious Fédération Internationale de Football
Association (FIFA) World Cup football tournament in
France. Our athletes have consistently maintained
world-class status at regional and international
competitive games. And, more recently, Usain Bolt
thundered down the track in Beijing like a bolt of
lightning, capturing the hearts and the imagination of
sporting and non-sporting enthusiasts alike.
The Beijing experience served to endorse
something of which our country, our people and our
Government were already convinced: sport can be very
big for individuals, for communities and for our nation.
Sport generates important values such as team spirit,
discipline, solidarity, tolerance and fair play. It also
promotes the active contributions of individuals to
society and so helps to foster responsible citizenship
and civic pride. Those are values that are at the core of
the pursuit and attainment of peace and development.
The Government of Jamaica is therefore
committed to further exploring and harnessing the
possibilities of the contributions that sport can make as
we seek to achieve economic and social development
for our people.

08-64317

It is in that context that we place on record our
appreciation for the comprehensive report of the
Secretary-General contained in document A/63/466,
which reviews the programmes and initiatives
implemented by Member States, United Nations funds,
programmes and specialized agencies and other
partners, using sport as a tool for development and
peace.
In particular, Jamaica supports the view
expressed in the report by the Sport for Development
and Peace International Working Group, which
recognizes that, while well-designed programmes
promoting sport for development and peace hold
significant potential for helping to drive the attainment
of the Millennium Development Goals and related
development goals, sport alone cannot ensure peace or
solve complex social problems. We concur with the
Working Group that sport should instead be positioned
as a highly effective tool in a broader toolkit of
development practices and should be applied in a
holistic and integrated manner with other interventions
and programmes to achieve optimal results.
With that in mind, the Government of Jamaica
has undertaken a number of initiatives at the national
level to implement initiatives to promote sport for
development and peace in keeping with General
Assembly resolutions on the issue, including last year’s
resolution 62/271. It is also on that basis that Jamaica
decided to sponsor the current draft resolution,
circulated as document A/63/L.51.
Jamaica is committed, for example, to the
promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of
women through sport. Traditionally, many of our elite
athletes have been women, who are acknowledged and
celebrated by our country. As I say this, I think of
Merlene Ottey, Deon Hemmings, Veronica CampbellBrown and Shelly-Ann Fraser, to name only a few. I
am pleased to inform the Assembly that the final draft
of our gender policy is now in place. With final
approval and implementation by the Cabinet, the policy
will further reinforce the ideals of gender equality in
sport, among other things.
One of the principal strategies adopted by the
Government through the Institute of Sports is the
promotion and development of sports in schools. One
of its primary roles is to promote sports in order to
unearth talents in primary, secondary and tertiary
educational institutions through its network of sports

29

A/63/PV.67

personnel across Jamaica. Sports development
therefore plays a significant role in the educational
development of Jamaica’s young population.
Sport plays a significant role in development
cooperation. Many of the deliberations on development
strategies and assistance in bilateral treaties or with
multilateral agencies feature some action in support of
cooperation in sports. Consequently, Jamaica has
concluded bilateral agreements with a sport component
that are currently being implemented, and others are
being
negotiated.
Through
those
bilateral
arrangements, we have shared our national
experiences, best practices and financial, technical and
logistical resources for the development of sports
programmes. We intend to continue our engagement
with international partners on this important
development issue.
As I speak, the ministry in my capital with
responsibility for sports is quite close to completing
the first draft of what is intended to be a dynamic and
effective sports policy for Jamaica. The Government
has also announced its intention to include a process in
which all our people will make their contribution to the
policy. As we in Jamaica say, the intention is to have
wide-ranging consultations in every “nook and cranny”
of Jamaica, in recognition of the significance and the
role of sports in bolstering economic and social
development.
As we are all aware, there is international
pressure everywhere to deal with the challenges of
doping in sports. All over the world, countries are
being called upon to treat doping in sports as a matter
of national security and priority. In this regard, Jamaica
has established an Anti-Doping Commission in an
effort to implement the International Convention
against Doping in Sport. Jamaica is also party to
various international instruments that either focus on
sports or contain a sports component.
Sports development has provided ordinary
Jamaicans in recent times with exciting opportunities
for self-definition. We cannot help but feel a
spontaneous outpouring of patriotism and pride as we
all define ourselves through each and every wonderful

30

achievement of our sportswomen and men. Only four
months ago, that feeling surged in all Jamaicans at
home and abroad when our team left Beijing with a
record number of world records, a record number of
Olympic records and a record number of medals. We
define ourselves in moments like those, and we are
reminded of the prowess and resilience of the Jamaican
character.
Jamaica is committed to a renewed focus on
sports as an element of national definition and
transformation, as recreation and leisure, as a vehicle
for peace, as a tool for education and health and in
terms of the economic benefits to be derived from it.
We look at sports in the context of reengaging
communities and as a tool of the social transformation
process. In this regard, our Government aims to
provide opportunities for our people to re-create
themselves
through
community
sports.
The
Government has therefore pledged to build more
sporting and recreational facilities island-wide, so that
our people can, at the end of a day, simply have fun.
Through the work of our Social Development
Commission, we are putting in place programmes to
unearth and develop talent at all levels. We are
committed, through the school and community sports
programmes, to make sports and recreation an integral
part of the healthy Jamaican lifestyle programme. We
all know that sport builds character, helps us in time
management, reduces conflict and contributes to
healthy relationships and friendships. Sport is a school
for life.
It is truly astounding that a tiny island like
Jamaica can remain at the forefront of athletics at all
levels. We hope to maintain the tradition of our notable
sportsmen and women, inspired by our early pioneers,
Herbert McKinley and Arthur Wint, a tradition which
spawned the success of more recent athletes such as
Donald Quarrie, Burt Cameron, Grace Jackson, Asafa
Powell and Usain Bolt, as we seek to fulfil our
international obligation in keeping with the United
Nations mandate on sport for peace and development.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

08-64317
