VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

2. Takes note with appreciation of the oral report of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and of the assessment of the needs of the refugees in
Djibouti contained in the report prepared by the mission;
3. Endorses the report of the mission to Djibouti and
the recommendations contained therein;
4. Invites the High Commissioner to continue his
humanitarian assistance to the refugees in Djibouti;
5. Requests the High Commissioner to continue to
ensure that adequate assistance programmes are organized for the refugees, to keep the refugee situation in
Djibouti under constant review and to maintain close
contact with Member States and the governmental and
non-governmental organizations concerned to mobilize
the necessary assistance to the Government of Djibouti
to cope effectively with the refugee situation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its first regular session
of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35/183.

Assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia

The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/39 of I August 1978, by which the Council requested the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, in co-operation with the Administrator of the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Food Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the World Health Organization and other specialized agencies, as well as non-governmental and
voluntary organizations, to render maximum possible
assistance to the Governments of the countries in the
Horn of Africa,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution I 980/54 of 24 July 1980, by which the Council requested the Secretary-General, in consultation with the
High Commissioner, to appeal to the international community to find ways and means of mobilizing urgently
humanitarian assistance for displaced persons and
voluntary returnees in Ethiopia,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia, 105 prepared pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution I 980 /8 of 28 April 1980,
Having heard the statement of the representative of
the Secretary-General, 106 in which he requested the assistance of the international community in carrying out
the recommendations and proposals contained in the report,
Having heard the statement of the Commissioner for
Relief and Rehabilitation of Ethiopia, 101 in which he
outlined the grave situation facing the large number of
displaced persons in Ethiopia and the difficulties encountered by his Government in providing for their relief and rehabilitation,
11

" A/35/360andCorr.l-3.
"'" Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth Session.
Third Committee, 51 st meeting, paras. 13-15.
101
Ibid., 53rd meeting, paras. 40-46.

Taking note of the appeal of the Secretary-General' in
his note verbale of 11 November 1980,
I. Endorses the appeal of the Secretary-General in
which he urged Governments and international organizations to provide prompt and generous assistance to
displaced persons;
2. Endorses also the appeal of the Economic and
Social Council to Member States, intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations and all voluntary
agencies to assist the Government of Ethiopia in its efforts to provide relief and rehabilitation to displaced
persons;
3. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to displaced persons in Ethiopia and the
recommendations contained therein;
4. Commends the Secretary-General for the preparation of the comprehensive report on the needs of displaced persons \n Ethiopia;
5. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue his efforts to mobilize humanitarian assistance for the relief and rehabilitation of certified voluntary returnees;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1981 and to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session on the progress achieved in the implementation of the present resolution.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

35/184.

Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/174 of 17 December 1979,
in which it, inter alia, noted with concern the continued
influx into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia
of student refugees from Namibia and South Africa and
the urgent need to provide facilities for their care, health
and education,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 108 the annex to which contains the findings of
the review missions sent by him to Botswana, Lesotho,
Swaziland and Zambia in May and June 1980 to examine the status of the programmes of assistance to student refugees in southern Africa,
Conscious of the responsibilities and obligations
shared by the international community to assist the
countries of asylum by providing financial and material
assistance to enable them to cope with the influx of these
student refugees,
Co~vinced that the discriminatory policies and repressive measures being applied in South Africa and
Namibia will lead to a further exodus of student refugees from these countries,
Recognizing the need to strengthen the capacity of the
countries of asylum to deal with any new emergency
which may develop as a result of a sudden influx of student refugees from Namibia and South Africa,
Disturbed by the adverse effects which the application
of apartheid, particularly the bantustan policy, is having on settled communities living in South Africa in
areas bordering Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland, and
"" A/35/149.
