138

General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

Reiterating that accelerated development requires the
real and effective participation of women and men in all
aspects of the development process,
Noting with satisfaction the resolution on women and
industrialization adopted by the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at New Delhi from 21 January to
9 February I 980, 14 '
I. Welcomes the inclusion in the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade of special provisions relating to the
integration of women in over-all development, in particular the need for all countries to pursue the objective
of securing women's equal participation both as agents
and as beneficiaries in all sectors and at all levels of the
development process; 149
2. Endorses the resolution on women and industrialization adopted by the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization as an important contribution towards the
advancement of women and requests the SecretaryGeneral to transmit to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session the report of the Executive Director
of that organization referred to in the resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
review and appraisal of progress made in implementing
the recommendations related to the mobilization of
women in development of the World Plan of Action for
the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year 150 and the Programme of Action
for the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for
Women 151 is made part of the review and appraisal of
progress made in the implementation of the International Development Strategy for the Third United
Nations Development Decade;
4. Calls upon all appropriate organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to give sustained attention to the integration of women in the formulation, design and implementation of development
projects and programmes, in the context of the implementation of the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade;
5. Calls upon all Governments, regional commissions and other organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to make every effort to implement the recommendations and resolutions of the
World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women related to the integration of women in the development process;
6. Urges the United Nations Conference on New
and Renewable Sources of Energy __ an.9 the United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries,
as well as the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system concerned with the International
Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, proclaimed by the General Assembly in its resolution 35 / 18
of I 0 November 1980, to take fully into account the
needs and concerns of women;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
'" See ID/CONF.4/22 and Corr. I, chap. IV, sect. B.
See resolution 35 /56 above. annex, para. 51.
"" See Report of the World Conference of the International Women's
Year, Mexico City, 19 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication.
Sales No. E.76.IV. l ), chap. II, sect. A.
'" See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Copenhagen. 14 to
30 July 1980 (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and
corrigendum), chap. I, sect. A.
149

Nations, to continue the efforts to assess the effects of
the present international economic structures on the
economic and social situation of women in areas such as
trade, technology transfer, agriculture and food prices,
and industrialization;
8. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women and with the specialized agencies and other bodies concerned within the
United Nations system, to develop specific actionoriented research and training programmes in this regard, in particular in the field of technical co-operation
for development;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
implementation of paragraph I of resolution 34/204 on
the role of the relevant United Nations agencies and organizations in assisting Governments in the implementation of the provisions on the integration of women
in rural development:
I 0. Further requests the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive and detailed outline for an interdisciplinary and multisectoral world survey on the
role of women in over-all development, taking into account the relevant recommendations of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women, as
well as the results of the relevant United Nations conferences on development issues, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/79.

United Nations Children's Fund

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/62 of 25 July 1980,
Having considered the report of the Executive Board
of the United Nations Children's Fund on its session
held at United Nations Headquarters from 19 to 30 May
1980," 1
Believing that the International Year of the Child has
given new impetus to recognition of the importance of
the well-being and upbringing of children and of services on their behalf,
Appreciating the important responsibilities placed
upon the United Nations Children's Fund as lead
agency of the United Nations system responsible for coordinating the development aspects of the follow-up
activities of the International Year of the Child, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 34/4 of
18 October 1979, as well as the responsibilities relating
to children in the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 15 '
Recognizing the need for a much greater effort on the
part of all concerned in the international community .to
sustain the impetus generated by the International Year
of the Child and to achieve the goals and objectives of
the International Development Strategy for the Third
United Nations Development Decade, 1 ' 4
Having in mind the importance of the objectives of
social and human development, including the well-being
"' Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1980. Supplement No. II (E/1980/41).
1
"
See resolution 35 Sh above. annex, sect. II. para. 50.
1
"
Ibid .. sect. 11.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

of children, as an integral part of the development process set forth in the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 1 "
Aware that the expanded activities of the United
Nations Children's Fund will require increased funds. as
established by the Executive Board,
l. Commends the policies and activities of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 1980 /62;
3. Fully appreciates the responsibilities of the United
Nations Children's Fund and the broad range of activities on behalf of children to be undertaken by it in
light of the still enormous unmet needs of children in the
developing countries;
4. Urges the United Nations Children's Fund, with
the support of its national committees. to respond
imaginatively and vigorously to its important responsibilities in the follow-up activities of the International Year
of the Child, in close co-operation with the relevant organizations of the United Nations system and with the
international community generally:
5. Appeals to Governments and the relevant organizations of the international community to re-examine
their own activities on behalf of children with a view to
accelerating progress towards the achievement of the
goals and objectives of the International Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development
Decade and to co-operate fully with the United Nations
Children's Fund;
6. Expresses its appreciation to all Governments that
are contributing to the United Nations Children's Fund
and appeals, with a sense of urgency. to all Governments, especially those that are not contributing at a
level commensurate with their capacity, to increase their
contributions, if possible on a multiyear basis, so that
the Fund may reach its income target of $350 million for
1982, as presented in the medium-term work plan approved by the Executive Board of the United Nations
Children's Fund at its session held from 19 to 30 May
1980. 1 ; 6

84th plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/80.

Role of qualified national personnel in the social
and economic development of developing
countries

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 33 / 135 of 19 December
1978 on the role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries,
Taking into account Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1979/52 of 2 August 1979 and 1980/63 of
25 July 1980 on the same subject, in which the Council,
inter alia, requested the General Assembly to consider
possible comprehensive action within the United Nations
system in order to assist the developing countries in their
endeavour to strengthen the role of qualified national
personnel in the over-all social and economic development of those countries,
''' Ibid., para. 42.
'" Official Records of the Econo11Jic and Social Council. I 9RO, Supplement No. 11 (E/1980/41). paras. 75-77.

139

Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May I 974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, as well as its resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Referring to the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, 157
Bearing in mind that the United Nations Development
Programme has been acting as lead organization within
the United Nations system for the preparation of a
study on the role of qualified national personnel in the
social and economic development of developing countries,
I. Takes note of the report of the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme on the
role of qualified national personnel in the social and
economic development of developing countries; 1;x
2. Commends to the attention of the developing
countries the above-mentioned report and the recommendations contained in chapters IV and V thereof;
3. Invites the competent organizations of the United
Nations system to give due attention to the recommendations contained in chapters IV and V of the
report with a view to contributing, within their established procedures and possibilities, to the implementation of the recommendations;
4. Calls upon the developed countries effectively to
assist the developing countries, in particular the least
developed among them, in their efforts to increase national capacities and facilities for training qualified
national personnel and strengthening their role in socioeconomic development
5. Invites the Governments of developing countries,
in accordance with their national development priorities
and programmes, to continue to pay special attention,
with a view to further improving and expanding their
national systems of training qualified personnel, to
measures directed towards:
(a) Achieving the equality of all members of their
society in the field of education, irrespective of race,
nationality, sex or religious and social status;
(h) Eliminating illiteracy;
(c) Increasing the role of government in the field of
education;
(d) Instituting compulsory education for all children
of school age;
(e) Achieving the planned development of national
educational and training systems;
6. Further invites the recipient Governments and the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to take into account the urgent need
for qualified national personnel while identifying intercountry projects in the third programming cycle, I 9821986:
7. Requests the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation to make the
necessary arrangements, within existing possibilities, for
a periodic dissemination of information on the national
experience of countries with different socio-economic
systems in training qualified national personnel and enhancing their role in national social and economic development;
'' See resolution 35; Sha hove, annex.
' 'DPl443.
