S/PV.7671

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7671st meeting

Friday, 15 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Liu Jieyi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2016/305)
Letter dated 13 April 2016 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/342)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-10635 (E)
*1610635*

S/PV.7671

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2016/305)
Letter dated 13 April 2016 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/342)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Mr. Omar Hilale, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of Morocco.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2016/305, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic. I also wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/342, which contains a
letter dated 13 April 2016 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Mr. President,
you have before you the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/305) on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), which presents to the Council the
significant process made in the country over the past
few months.
Today, I would like to update the Council on
key developments that have taken place since the
issuance of the report. On 30 March, Faustin-Archange
Touadéra was sworn in as President of the Central
2/6

15/04/2016

African Republic, and that step formally ended the
country’s transition phase. The promulgation of the
new Constitution by the outgoing Head of State of
the Transition on the very day of the inauguration
symbolized in the strongest possible terms a return to
constitutional order and marked an important milestone
after three years of severe and arduous crisis.
On 31 March, the day after the inauguration
of President Touadéra, the country held the second
round of legislative elections. Those elections went
off peacefully throughout the country, which I think
is worth noting. The final results of this round were
announced on 5 April, with the result that some key
political figures, including some former presidential
candidates Dologuélé, Méckassoua and Ziguélé, won
parliamentary seats. By-elections will have to be
organized for some 10 constituencies in the country
where formal results from the second round were
invalidated. In the interim, transitional institutions
such as the Transitional National Council and the
Transitional Constitutional Court will remain in place
until the legislative process is completed and the Court
has validated the final results of all legislative elections,
which is expected to take place later this month.
Meanwhile, President Touadéra has moved quickly
to form a new Government. On 11 April, last Monday,
following the appointment of Prime Minister Sarandji a
week earlier, on 2 April, the President issued a decree on
the formation of the Government. The new Government
is much leaner than the previous one, with some
23 ministerial posts, including four women. It is also
worth underscoring that four appointees are members
of the Muslim community. The new Government — it
should also be mentioned — includes representatives
from each of the country’s 16 prefectures. On the flip
side, no representatives of armed groups are among the
new members of the Government.
I would now like to share some impressions
from my recent visit to the Central African Republic
to attend the inauguration of President Touadéra on
behalf of the Secretary-General. Like many others, I
was very much struck by the President’s attachment to
democratic values. He vowed publicly, for example, to
respect the newly promulgated Constitution, including
the two-term limit for presidential mandates. He also
made it clear that he was prepared to work tirelessly
towards national unity. When I met with the President,
he told me that his priorities for the country would
be to re-establish security, with a particular focus on
16-10635

15/04/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

disarming armed groups. He also said that it was a
priority for him to advance reconciliation, economic
and social development and good governance. He
robustly reaffirmed that he is determined to continue
working very closely with international partners.
During my visit, I personally witnessed the
important progress made in the Central African
Republic towards healing past rifts among the various
communities in the country. As an illustration, when
I visited the Boeing district in Bangui — an outlying
district where Muslim and Christian communities were
until very recently viciously fighting each another and
causing much damage — to my great astonishment
I found the two communities engaged in a local
reconciliation process, which stands as a model and
is supported by MINUSCA. This is worth noting as
a positive step. The Ambassador of the United States
was also in Bangui on that day and he joined me in the
discussion with the communities in Boeing.
If I may say so, it is very heartwarming to see
how, in the space of a few months, the attitudes of
the communities have changed so much. Experiences
such as these — and there are many I could point to in
the country — can serve as a basis for the long-term
process of reconciliation. I think that it also shows
the resilience of the Central African people and their
widely-held feeling that they have to work collectively
peace and unity.
As I said at the outset, the Central African Republic
has reached a critical milestone with the successful
holding of free and fair elections. If I may, I would say
that in that part of the world there are not that many
presidential elections where the winner is not known in
advance. There are few elections that take place without
difficulties or whose results are not challenged by the
loser or where the post-election transition is smooth.
I therefore think that the Central African Republic
elections serve as an excellent model.
That marks the conclusion of the transition and
the start of a new phase for the country. The new
Government must now deliver tangible progress for the
Central African people because the expectations are
high — expectations of peace and of lasting security,
and, simply, of the improvement of living conditions
for people. I told the President that the first 100 days
will be decisive.
Throughout the electoral process, there was positive
momentum upon which, I think, we must build, based

S/PV.7671

on the principles and the agreements reached last May
during the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation.
It is the Government’s responsibility to work for the
establishment of a lasting peace and stability that will
benefit all citizens. And rapid tangible progress must
be achieved in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. I would highlight — as I believe
it is important — the repatriation of too high a number
of refugees and internally displaced persons, which
will not be easy. However, expectations are high, and
this will be important.
What will also be important is the launch of key
reforms in the security and defence sector, that is, with
regard to the future of the Central African armed forces.
To stimulate economic development, which has been
a problem for decades, the State’s authority must be
extended throughout the country. I understand that all
the prefects are already in place in the 16 prefectures.
I also understand that almost all of the sub-prefects
are in place. However, that must then be reinforced
in the various administrations. It is also necessary to
improve access to basic security services, strengthen
the judicial and penal chain, make progress in the
fight against impunity — an element important to
national reconciliation — and ensure universal respect
for human rights. As far as MINUSCA is concerned,
it will continue to provide its full support to the new
Government as it works to realize those changes.
As I said previously, very significant progress
has been achieved over the last two years. Although
considerable challenges remain, I think we can be
reasonably hopeful. What is important now is that
we continue to focus on the key priorities. It is also
important that the various international partners of the
Central African Republic work together to ensure that
the measures taken have as large an impact as possible.
We have a window of opportunity to help the Central
African Republic. We must not allow that window to
close. The opportunity must not be wasted.
I have just spoken of the positive developments;
now I must mention the absolutely catastrophic and
shocking increase in allegations of sexual misconduct
by the MINUSCA forces and international forces. It is
all deeply regrettable and appalling. Certain cases are
extremely shocking and shameful. It is a genuine scourge.
To address that scourge, as members of the Council are
aware, MINUSCA has established a transparent and
victim-centred approach. In addition, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Coordinator on Improving United

16-106353/6

S/PV.7671

The situation in the Central African Republic

Nations Response to Sexual Exploitation and Abuse,
Ms. Jane Holl Lute, recently travelled to the Central
African Republic to examine the best ways to better
support MINUSCA.
In parallel, my counterpart, the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Field Support, Mr. Atul Khare, and I have
engaged with all of the contingents and the countries
that provide uniformed personnel to MINUSCA.
I did that personally in Bangui. Mr. Khare and I did
it together in New York in order to insist, more than
ever, on the imperative need for swift investigation
and, of course, once the facts have been established,
for deterrent punishments for the perpetrators. We
stand firmly with the victims, who have demonstrated
courage in coming forward and reporting the events
in question. We continue to do everything possible to
ensure that those victims receive the assistance they
need and that justice is delivered as quickly as possible.
I take this opportunity to repeat to all troop- and
police-contributing countries that we are redoubling
our efforts to really address these events, which
are profoundly unacceptable. It is a must that we do
everything possible to put an end to these practices,
which are committed by a handful of individuals. Their
actions utterly compromise the image and the quality
of the contributions and courage demonstrated by the
great majority of their colleagues. I am personally,
along with my colleagues, very directly and actively
engaged in the handling of this problem.
In conclusion, as the members of the Council are
aware, MINUSCA’s mandate is set to expire on 30 April.
The Secretary-General has recommended a technical
roll-over of the mandate to allow the Secretariat to
consult in some depth with the new Central African
authorities before making recommendations to the
Council on the definitive mandate, which should take
the new situation into account, to the extent possible.
I would also like to inform the Council that it is our
intention to work very closely with the Central African
authorities as well our international partners in order to
establish what we sometimes refer to as the compact.
That compact is a framework of mutual engagement
to be formalized between the United Nations and
the Central African authorities and its international
partners, including the major donors. I talked about it
with President Touadéra. He seemed very interested, in
principle. We will therefore focus on that. I consider
it a pilot project within the framework of the Security
4/6

15/04/2016

Council, but something that should hopefully serve
to consolidate the activities of the international
community during the next two or three years in the
Central African Republic, with a focus on accepted
priorities. I believe that with benchmarks and periodic
reviews, every action and all the actors involved in
the country should become more effective. Of course
our colleagues working to consolidate peace are fully
involved in this process, which we will continue over
the next few months.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Ladous for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to brief the Council on
behalf of the Peacebuilding Commission in my capacity
as Chair of the Central African Republic configuration.
I too would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Central
African Republic and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, for the work accomplished and
efforts made in fulfilling his mandate. I would also
like to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous for his exhaustive and
objectively optimistic briefing on the situation in the
Central African Republic.
The Central African Republic configuration would
like to express its satisfaction. We endorse the conclusions
of Mr. Ladsous’ briefing with regard to the peaceful
conclusion of the political transition and the return to
constitutional order in the Central African Republic.
Building on the positive momentum generated by the
Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation, the Central
African people have clearly and strongly expressed their
longing for peace and stability, thereby contributing to
the conclusion of the transition. Moreover, presidential
candidates have demonstrated patriotism and unity but
also responsibility by prioritizing the greater interests of
the nation by complying with the code of good conduct
and accepting the electoral results. Those peaceful
elections, in the situation that exists in the Central
African Republic, would not have been possible without
such a dynamic, combined with the strong engagement
and the coordination of efforts of all stakeholders at the
national, regional and international levels.
16-10635

15/04/2016

The situation in the Central African Republic

As mentioned in the letter of 3 March that the
configuration sent to Mr. Faustin Archange Touadera
to congratulate him on his election, I would like to
reiterate our commitment to continuing to provide full
support to the creation of an environment conducive to
peacebuilding. We also welcome the appointment as
Prime Minister on 2 April of Mr. Simplice Sarandji and
on 11 April of the members of the new Government,
four of whom, we are pleased to note, are women.
The Central African Republic has come a long way
since its relapse in 2013. With the end of the political
transition, the country is now at a critical, indeed
historic juncture, and our collective and timely support
for the people of the Central African Republic and its
new authorities is more important than ever if we are
to ensure that the priorities for peacebuilding will be
pursued. Those goals must be closely aligned with
the national priorities outlined by the President in his
inauguration address — a restoration of stability to
the entire territory through the implementation of the
processes of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation
and reintegration and security sector reform; promotion
of national reconciliation and cohesion; reform of the
public finance system and the productive sectors; and,
lastly, rehabilitation of the country’s public services.
For its part, the configuration, together with the
international community, has provided support to the
Central African authorities before and throughout
the transitional period in overcoming the challenges
resulting from the country’s volatile situation. In that
context, it has also played a key role in supporting
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in their efforts
to raise the international community’s awareness of
the situation and challenges in the Central African
Republic and to advocate for the holding of timely
elections, particularly in relation to mobilizing
resources for the electoral basket fund. Furthermore,
with regard to fighting impunity, in partnership with
the United Nations Global Focal Point for Police, Justice
and Corrections Areas in the Rule of Law in PostConflict and Other Crisis Situations, the configuration
established a reference group aimed at providing a
supporting platform for re-establishing the penal
system and setting up the Special Criminal Court. The
next meeting will deal with the modalities of recruiting
international magistrates for the Special Criminal
Court in order to enable it to begin its sessions.

S/PV.7671

As this new and historic phase begins, the activities
of the Central African Republic configuration will have
to adapt to the new situation and be implemented in a
way that will ensure the appropriate and needed support
for the country’s long-term political stability and
economic prosperity. To that end, its activities should
conform to three closely linked preconditions — they
should be action-oriented, timely and strictly aligned
with the priorities outlined by the national authorities.
Apart from this, our work should be structured around
three phases.
First, in the short term, we should facilitate a rapid
and coordinated response to the challenges that the new
authorities encounter from the very beginning of their
mandate, since we know that the people will have high
expectations of improvement in their living conditions.
Our collective support should therefore emphasize
efforts that let the people see immediate results from
the peace dividend, especially in the area of their basic
public service needs. In that regard, the configuration
will ensure that the various assessments of urgent needs
and initiatives that are currently under way or being
planned by the principal stakeholders are coherent and
coordinated. The aim is to avoid a fragmented approach
within the donor community and to build positive
momentum for a successful future donor conference.
Secondly, in the medium term, we should continue
and strengthen coordination with the national
authorities and principal stakeholders in order to ensure
the implementation of a national development plan. The
configuration is also ready to support the various types
of engagement planned or currently under way in the
Central African Republic. Mechanisms based on mutual
engagement of the United Nations with the country,
such as Global Compact projects, or evaluations aimed
at identifying appropriate forms of support, such as
the World Bank’s 2014 fragility assessment, which
was recently updated, are some specific examples.
Moreover, the principal Central African Republic
donors are engaged in multiple projects, along with
the Peacebuilding Fund, which has been providing the
country with critical and timely financial support for
the past few years.
Thirdly, in the long term, we should ensure
the establishment of a stable and inclusive political
environment that will promote a lasting peace through
an effective national reconciliation effort that reaches
every sector of society, with no exceptions. On the
economic front, we should support the identification of

16-106355/6

S/PV.7671

The situation in the Central African Republic

the key sectors that can ensure economic growth and
recovery and encourage international investment. In
that regard, the Peacebuilding Commission’s experience
in areas such as the mobilization of domestic resources
could benefit the country significantly. All of these
efforts — short-, medium- and long-term — are aimed
at supporting the establishment of a lasting peace and
paving the way for the reconstruction and development
of a country that has been devastated by a long
crisis. The humanitarian situation is still worrying,
particularly as regards internally displaced persons
and refugees. We call on humanitarian organizations
to continue to intervene in support of these people who
have lost everything.
I plan over the next few weeks to visit the Central
African Republic and to meet with the principal
international and regional stakeholders in order to
discuss these initiatives further and decide on the best
way for the configuration to support those efforts.
Indeed, this type of situation is where the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission can make a key contribution
as a catalyst for initiatives and by contributing to a
coherent and coordinated approach. Another important
aspect of our mandate will be to ensure that the Central
African Republic continues to be a top priority for the
international community.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
country is at a critical juncture for its future. The

6/6

15/04/2016

Central African Republic has the potential to become
a success story, after all the previous attempts that
have failed to address the root causes of its instability.
The gravity of the country’s recent conflict is a strong
incentive for the international community to rethink its
engagement with the country in order to turn the page
once and for all.
Lastly,
the
configuration
welcomes
the
recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2016/305) regarding the technical renewal of
MINUSCA’s mandate. The proposal makes sense in
the context of the country’s current situation and, as
Mr. Ladsous just discussed, will give the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, which is about to conduct
a strategic assessment of the Mission, enough time to
engage fully with the new authorities. As we all know,
the success of any long-term solution in a post-conflict
situation requires strong national ownership. That is an
absolute essential for the Central African Republic as
much as it is an obligation for the configuration, the
Security Council and the international community to
help the country to achieve it.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Mr. Hilale for his briefing.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

16-10635
