Resolutions adopted on the reporll!I of the Speeial Political Committee

H
TRADE UNION ACTIVITIES AGAINST apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2671 D (XXV) of 8 December 1970,
Noting the opposition of the international trade union
movement to apartheid and racial discrimination,
Convinced of the need to promote concerted action
by the trade union movement at the national and international levels in the campaign against apartheid,
N oting that the question of apartheid will be before
the International Labour Conference at its fi.fty-seventh
session, to be held at Geneva in June 1972,
Taking note of the report of the Special Committee
on Apartheid conceming ways and means of promoting
concerted action against apartheid by the trade union
movements, 21
1. Appeals to ail national and international trade
union organizations to intensify their action against
apartheid, in particular by:
(a) Discouraging the emigration of skilled workers
to South Africa;
(b) Taking appropriate action in connexion with
the infringements of trade union rights and the persecution of trade unionists in South Africa;
( c) Exerting maximum pressure on foreign economic
and financial interests which are profiting from racial
discrimination against non-white workers in South
Africa, in order to persuade them to cease such exploitation;
( d) Co-operating with other organizations engaged
in the international campaign against apartheid;
2. Decides to give further consideration to the
proposed international trade union conference at its
twenty-seventh session;
3. Requests and authorizes the Special Committee
on Apartheid to send a mission to hold consultative
meetings, if possible, with the workers' representatives
to the fifty-seventh session of the International Labour
Conference, to consider lines of action which the trade
union movement may take against apartheid, including
the holding of the international trade union conference,
and to invite representatives of international and
regional trade union federations to those consultative
meetings;
4. Requests the International Labour Organisation
and invites the workers' representatives to lend their
co-operation to the Special Committee on Apartheid
in preparing and holding the consultative meetings.
1997th plenary meeting,
29 November 1971.
2791 (XXVI). Working Group on the Financing
of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2656 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 and 2728 (XXV) of 15 December 1970,
Having. cons{dered the repo~ of the _Working Group
on the Fmancmg of the Umted Nations Relief and
2 1 A/8515/Rev.l.

45

Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, 22
Taking into account the annual report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
covering the period from 1 July 1970 to 30 June 1971,28
Taking note of the joint appeal made by the President of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
on 17 November 1971,2•
Recognizing with grave concern that the financial
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East continues to be acute, thereby imminently endangering the
already minimum services being provided to Palestine
refugees,
Emphasizing the urgent need for extraordinary efforts
and exceptional measures in order to maintain, at least
at their present level, the activities of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the N ear East,
1. Commends the Working Group on the Financing
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its work and
approves its report, drawing special attention to the
conclusions and recommendations contained in chapter
V of that report;
2. Requests the Working Group to continue its
work for one year in accordance with the provisions
of its previous mandate and, as appropriate, to pursue
urgently with Governments, both bilaterally and on
a regional basis, with specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system, and
with other organizations and individuals concerned, the
implementation of the recommendations approved by
the General Assembly in the present resolution, as well
as the implementation of other resolutions relating to
the mandate of the Working Group;
3. Endorses Economie and Social Council resolution 1565 (L) of 3 May 1971, and in particular urges
serious consideration and early implementation of paragraph 5 of that resolution;
4. Supports the joint appeal made by the President
of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
to Governments to join in the collective effort to solve
the financial crisis of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;
5. Requests the Working Group, after consultation
with ail concerned, in particular the Secretary-General
and the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, and taking into account the views expressed in the course of the debate during the twentyfifth and twenty-sixth sessions of the General Assembly
relevant to the mandate of the Working Group, to
prepare and submit a comprehensive report on ail
aspects of the financing of the Agency to the General
Assembly at its twenty-seventh session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and assistance to the Working Group
for the conduct of its work.
2001st plenary meeting,
6 December 1971.
22 A/8476.
23_Official

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/8413).
24 A/8526.
