Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

bly at its thirtieth session of any measure adopted by
those States;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session an item entitled "Implementation
of General Assembly resolution 3262 (XXIX) concerning the signature and ratification of Additional
Protocol I of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America ( Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".

2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3263 (XXIX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the
Middle East,
Desiring to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security by bolstering and expanding the existing regional and global structures for the
prohibition and/or prevention of the further spread of
nuclear weapons,
Realizing that the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree zones with an adequate system of safeguards could
accelerate the process towards nuclear disarmament
and the ultimate goal of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Recalling the resolution adopted by the Council of
the League of Arab States at its sixty-second session,
hel~ in Cairo from 1 to 4 September 1974, on this
subject,
Recalling the message sent by His Imperial Majesty
the Shahanshah of Iran on I 6 September I 974 on the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle East, 41
Considering that the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones, on the initiative of the States situated within each zone concerned, is one of the measures
which can contribute most effectively to halting the
proliferation of those instruments of mass destruction
and to promoting progress towards nuclear disarmament, with the goal of total destruction of all nuclear
weapons and their means of delivery,
Mindful of the political conditions particular to the
region of the Middle East and of the potential danger
emanating therefrom, which would be further aggravated by the introduction of nuclear weapons in the
area,
Conscious, therefore, of the need to keep the countries of the region from becoming involved in a ruinous
nuclear arms race,
Recalling the Declaration on the Denuclearization
of Africa issued by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity in
July 1964, 4 ~
Noting that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the region of the Middle East would contribute effectively to the realization of aims enunciated
in the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa,
Recalling the notable achievement of the countries
of Latin America in establishing a nuclear-free zone,
4 1 Official Records of the General As.ffmbly, Twenty-ninth
Session. Annexes, agenda item IOI, document A/9693"/ Add.3.
~~ Ibid .. Twentieth Snsiun, A1111exes, agenda item 105, document A/5975.

27

Also recalling resolution B of the Conference of NonNuclear-Weapon States, held at Geneva from 29 August
to 28 September I 968, in which the Conference recommended that non-nuclear-weapon States not comprised
in the Latin American nuclear-free zone should study
the possibility and desirability of establishing military
denuclearization of their respective zones, 43
Recalling the aims pursued by the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 44 in particular
the goal of preventing the further !.pread of nuclear
weapons,
Recalling its resolution 2373 (XXII) of 12 June
1968, in which it expressed the hope for the widest
possible adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by both nuclear-weapon and
non-nuclear-weapon States,
l. Commends the idea of the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East;
2. Considers that, in order to advance the idea of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East, it is indispensable that all parties concerned in
the area proclaim solemnly and immediately their intention to refrain, on a reciprocal basis, from producing, testing, obtaining, acquiring or in any other way
possessing nuclear weapons;
3. Calls upon the parties concerned in the area to
accede to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons;
4. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will lend their full co-operation for the effective realization of the aims of the
present resolution;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ascertain the
views of the parties concerned with respect to the implementation of the present resolution, in particular
with regard to its paragraphs 2 and 3, and to report
to the Security Council at an early date and, subsequently, to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled "Establishment of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region of the Middle
East".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
3264 (XXIX). Prohibition of action to influt>nee
the environment and climate for military
and other purposes incompatible with the
maintenance of international security, human well-being and health

The General Assembly,
Noting the concern of peoples to consolidate pl'.acc
and to pursue efforts designed to save mankind from the
danger of using new means of warfare, to limit the arms
race and to bring about disarmament,
Bearing in mind that, under conditions of continuou~
scientific and technological progress, new po-;sibilit1e,
arise for using the results of this progress 1101 onlv t,,r
peaceful but also for military purposes,
Convinced that the prohibition of action tn intluent
the environment and climate for military a11d oth:
43 lhid., Twenty-third Senion. agenda item 96. dou•n,:
A/7277 and Corr.I and 2, para. 17.
H Rc,olution 2373 (XXIJ). annex.

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth SeHion

hostile purposes, which are incompatible with the maintenance of international security, human well-being and
health, would serve the cause of strengthening peace
and averting the threat of war,
Taking into account the profound interest of States
and peoples in the adoption of measures to preserve
and improve the environment and to modify or moderate the climate solely for peaceful purposes for the
benefit of present and future generations,
1. Considers it necessary to adopt, through the conclusion of an appropriate international convention, effective measures to prohibit action to influence the environment. and climate for military and other hostile
purposes, which are incompatible with the maintenance
of international security, human well-being and health;
2. Takes note of the draft international convention
on the prohibition of action to influence the environment and climate for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international sebirity, human well-being and health, submitted to the
General Assembly by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 411 as well as other points of view and suggestions put forward during the discussion of this question;
3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to proceed as soon as possible to achieving agreement on the text of such a convention and to
submit a report on the results achieved for consideration by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament all documents relating to the discussion by the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session of the item entitled "Prohibition of action to influence the environment and
cl!mate for !"ilitary and _other purposes incompatible
with the maintenance of mtemational security human
well-being and health";
'
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirtieth session an item entitled "Prohibition of action
to influence the environment and climate for military
and other hostile purposes, which are incompatible
with th~ maintenance of international security, human
well-bemg and health".
2309th plenary meeting
9 December 1974
ANNEX
Union of Soviet Soeiali11t Republics: draft convention on
the prohibition of aetion to inftuenee the environment
and elimale for military and other purposes incompatible
with the maintenance of international security, human
well-being and health

The States Parties lo this Convention,
Guided by the interests of consolidating peace and wishing
to contribute to the cause of saving mankind from the danger
of using new means of wai-fare, limiting the arms race and
brin,ging about disarmament,
Taking into account that. under conditions of continuous
scientific and technological progress, new possibilities arise for
using the results of this progress not only for peaceful but
also for military puI1>0Ses,
Considering that action to influence the environment and
climate for military purposes may represent an exceptional
danger lo universal peace and security as well as to human
well•being and health,
Expressinf? the profound interest of States and peoples in
the adoption of measures to preserve and improve the environment for the benefit of present and future generations,
4 5 See the

annex to the present resolution.

Desiring to contribute to the deepening of confidence amoog
peoples and to the further improvement of the international
situation,
Striving to co-operate in implementing the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Have agreed on the following:
ARTICLE I

Each of the Parties to this Convention undertakes not to
develop meteorological, geophysical or any other scientific or
technological means of influencing the environment, including
the weather and climate, for military and other purposes incompatible with the maintenance of international security,
human weld.-being and health, and, furthermore, never under
any circumstMJces to resort to such means of influencing the
environment and climate or to carry out preparations for
their use.
ARTICLE II

I. For the purposes of this Convention, the activities referred to in article I consist of those active influences on the
surface of the land, the sea-bed and the ocean floor, the depths
of the earth, the marine environment, the atmosphere or on
any other elements of the environment that may cause damage
by the following means:
(a) Introduction into the cloud systems (air masses) of
chemical reagents for the purpose of causing precipitation
(formation of clouds) and other means of bringing about a
redistribution of water resources;
(b) Modification of the elements of the weather, dirnate
and the hydrological system on land in any part of the surface of the earth;
(c) Direct or indirect action to influence the electrical pr~
cesses in the atmosphere;
(d) Direct or indirect disturbance of the elements of the
energy and water balance of meteorological phenomena (cyclones, anticyclones, cloud front systems);
(e) Direct or indirect modifications of the physical and
chemical parameters of the seas and oceans, the seashore, seabed and ocean floor that may lead to a change in the hydr~
logical system, water interchange process and ecology of the
biological resources of the seas and oceans;
(/) Direct or indirect stimulation of seismic waves by any
methods or means that may produce earthquakes and accompanying processes and phenomena, or destructive ocean waves,
including tsunami;
(g) Direct or indirect action on the surface of all area of
water that may lead to a disturbance of the thermal and
ga<;eous interchange between the hydrosphere and the atmosphere;
( h) The creation of artificial continuous electromagnetic
and acoustic fields in the oceans a,nd seas;
(i) Modification of the natural state of the rivers, lakes,
swamps and other aqueous elements of the land by any methods or means, leading to reduction in the water-level, drying
up, flooding, inundation, destruction of hydrotechnical installations or having other harmful consequences:
(j) Disturbance of the natural state of the lithosphere,
including the land surface, by mechanical, physical or other
means, causing erosion, a change in the mechanical structure,
desiccation or flooding of the soil, or interference with irrigation or land improvement systems:
( k) The burning of vegetation and other actions leading to
a disturbance of the ecology of the vegetable and animal
kingdom:
( /) Direct or indirect action to influence the ionized or ozone
layers in the atmosphere, the introduction of heat and radiant
energy ahsorhing agents in the atmosphere and the contiguous
layer. or other action that might lead to disturbances of the
thermal and radiation equilihrium of the earth-atmospheresun sy~tem.
2. Subsequently, in accordance with the provisions of this
Convention, the list of actions enumerated in paragraph I of
this article may be supplemented or amended de,pending upon
the progress of scientific and technological re~earch.

29

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ARTICLE III
Each of the Parties to this Convention undertakes to refrain from assisting, encouraging or inducing any State, group
of States or international organizations whatsoever to carry
out activities that violate the provisions of the Convention,
as well as to refrain from participating either directly or indirectly in such activities carried out by other States or international organizations.
ARTICLE IV
Each Party to this Convention undertakes, in accordance
with its own constitutional procedures, to adopt the necessary
measures to prohibit and prevent any activity carried out in
violation of the provisions of the Convention anywhere whatsoever within its jurisdiction or under its control.
ARTICLE V
Nothing in this Convention shall impede the economic or
scientific and technological development of the Parties to the
Convention or international economic and scientific co-operntion in the utilization, preservation and improvement of the
environment for peaceful purposes.
ARTICLE VI

I. Any Party to this Convention that learns that any other

Party to the Convention is acting in violation of the obligations flowing from the provisions of the Convention may lodge
a complaint with the Security Council of the United Nations.
Such a complaint shall contain all possible evidence to support the grounds for the complaint, together with a request that
it be considered by the Security Council.

2. Each Party to this Convention undertakes to co-operate
in carrying out any investigations that the Security Council
may undertake in accordance. with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations on the basis of the complaint
received by the Council. The Security Council shall inform
the States Parties to the Convention of the results of such
investigations.

ARTICLE X
I. This Convention shall be of a permanent nature.

2. Each Party to this Conventio•n shaH have the right,
within the context of the realization of its own State sovereignty. to withdraw from the Convention, if it decides that
exceptiona•l circumstances connected with the content of the
Convention have threatened the supreme interests of its country. It sha-11 notify all other States Parties to the Convention
and the Security Council of the United Nations three months
prior to its withdrawal. The notification shall contain an
account of the exceptional circumstances which, in the view
of that Party, have threatened its SUP£eme interests.
ARTICLE XI
I. This Convention shaH be open to all States for signature. Any State that does not sign the Convention before its
entry into force ;n accordance with paragraph 3 of this article
may accede to it at any time.
2. This Convention shall be subject to ratification by
signatory States. Instruments of ratification and accession
shall be deposited with the Governments of . . . , which are
hereby designated the depositary Governments.
3. This Convention shall enter into force after the deposit
of the instruments of ratification by
Governments,
including Governments designated the depositary Governments
of the Convention.
4. For States whose instruments of ratification or accession
are deposited after the entry into force of this Convention,
it shall enter into force on the da-te of the deposit of their
instruments of ratification or accession.
5. The depositary Governments shaM promptly notify a-11
States that sign or accede to this Convention of the date of
each signature, the date of de,posit of each instrument of ratification or accession, the date of the entry into force of the
Convention and the receipt by them of other information.
6. This Convention shall be registered by the depositary
Governments in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations.
ARTICLE XII

ARTICLE VII
Each Party to this Convention undertakes to furnish or
support assistance provided in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations to any Party to the Convention that
may make such a request, in the event that the Security
Council adopts a decision to the effect that that Party h36
been subjected to danger as a ,result of the violation of the
Convention.
ARTICLE VIII

I. Any Party may propose an amendment to this Convention. Each proposed amendment shall be submitted to the
de,positary Governments and shall be transmitted by them to
all Parties to the Convention, which shall inform the depositary
Governments of the adoption or rejection of the amendment
at the earliest possible date after receiving it.
2. The amendment shaH enter into force for each Party
accepting it after its adoption by the majority of Parties to
the Convention, including the depositary Governments, and
subsequently for each remaining Party on the day on which
it adopts that amendment.
ARTICLE IX
Five years after the entry into force of this Convention, or
before that date, if the majority of Parties to the Convention
so request by submitting a proposal for that purpose to the
depositary Governments, a conference of States Parties to the
Conve,ntion shaU be convened in . .
for the purpose
of considering the operation of the Convention, in order to
ensure that its provisions are being implemented. During such
consideration, account shall be take,n of al•l new scientific and
technological achievements that may relate to the Convt'.ntion.

- - - - - - ~ - - - - - - - -------

This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russian and Spanish texts are equaHy authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the depositary Governments. Duly
certified copies of the Convention shaU be forwarded by the
depositary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
or acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly furnished with
full powers, have signed this Convention.
DONE in
. day
copies at
on the
of

3265 (XXIX). Declaration and establishment of
a nuclear-free zone in South Asia

A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1378 (XIV) of 20 November 1959, which established the goal of general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control,
Convinced that the 'highest priority should be accorded to measures in the field of nuclear disarmament,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November I 961 entitled "Consideration of Africa as a denuclearized zone", 1911 (XVIII) of 27 November 1963
entitled "Denuclearization of Latin America", 2033
(XX) of 3 December 1965 entitled "Declaration on
the denuclearization of Africa" and 2286 (XXII) of
