30

General All!!embly-Twentieth Session

2091 (XX). Transfer of technology to developing
countries

·

The General Assembly,
~ecalling its resolution 1713 (XVI) of 19 December
1961 on the role of patents in the transfer of technology
to the developing countries,
Having considered the recommendations contained in
annex A.IV.26 of the Final Act of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development,31
Noting with appreciation the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the role of patents in the transfer of technology to developing countries 38 and on enterprise-to-enterprise arrangements for the supply of financial.
managerial and technological needs of developing
countries,39
Noting the request rn;ide by the Economic and Social
Council in resolution 1013 (XXXVII) of 27 July 1964
for appropriate action in the light of the recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development,
Reaffirming that access to p;itented :rnd unpatente<l
technological and manageri;il know-how is essential to
the economic development and ;ndnstrialization of developing countries,
Considering that the existing internation;il agreements
;ind practices may not deal adequately with the problems arising in connexion with the transfer of technological know-how,
Considering further that such transfer should he encouraged by ;ippropriate me;isnres on tlw part of <le.
veloped and developing countries,
1. Endorses the rccommen<lations cont;iined in annex A.IV.26 of the Fiml Act of the United N;itions
Conference on Tr;i<le and Development ;in<l in Economic ancl Social Council resol11tion 1013 (XXXVTT):
2. Welcomes the initiative taken hy the Advisory
Committee on the Applic-ation of Science and Teclinology to Development in including in its work programme the suhiect "Arrangements between enterprises
( public and private) for the transfer of patented and
unpatented technology" :
3. Requests the Serretary-General, keeping in mind
the work of the Advisory Committee on the Applic;ition
of Science and Technology to Development. the Committee for Tnd11strial Development. the Committee on
Invisibles and Financing related to Trade of the Trade
and Development Board, and in consultation with interested regional and international organizations. to
contintte his studies of:
(a) The adequacy of existing national and intermtional practices for the transfer of patented and unpatented technology to developing countries and the
possible development of improver] practices. inclttding
model clauses:
( b) National and international action and instittttional arrangements, including the systematic collection
and dissemination of scientific and technological data
and materials, so as to promote the expeditious and
effective transfer of technology, especi;illv from private
ST See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 57.
38United Nations publication. Sales No.: 65.II.Rl.
39 Official Records of the Economic an<l Social Council
Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda item 8, document~
E/4038 and Add.1.

a~d public ~ndustr~al enterprises in the developed countnes, . to mdustnal enterprises in the developing
countnes;
( c) The problems encountered, especially by developing countries, in obtaining technical know-how;
(d) Other measures for specific technical and financi;il as<:istance to developing countries in their efforts
to secure an increased inflow of technological and
managerial know-how and to adapt it to their individual needs;
4. Requests that the competent international bodies.
inclttding United Nations bodies and the Burcmt of the
International Union for the Protection of Indttstri;il
Property, give particular attention to requests from
Governments of developing countries for technic;il assistance in the field of indttstrial property legishtion
and administration ;
5. Further requests the Secretary-GePernl to take
the necess;iry steps in order to ensure effective coordination and co-operation in the work to he undertaken by the United Nations bodies and other international organizations referred to above for the purpose
of implementing the tasks outlined in paragraphs 3 and
4 of the present resolution;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the Economic and Social Council at its forty-second
session and to other rompetent lTnited Nations ho<lies
at their 1967 sessions a progress report on the activitif's
assigned to him unrlPr paragraphs 3 and 4 ahovP.
140-1 th plenary meetiny,
20 DecembM 1965.

2092 (XX). Conversion to peaceful needs of the
resour<>es released hv disarmament

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1837 (XVII) of 18 December 1962 ;ind 1931 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963
on the conversion to peaceful needs of the resources
released by disarmament,
Taking into arcount its resolution 1710 (XVI) of
10 December 1961 on the United Nations Development
Decade, which calls for proposals relating, inter alfo.
to the utilization of resonrces released by disarmament
for the purpose of economic and social development.
in particular that of the developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution
982 (XXXVI) of 2 August 1963 on the economic
and social consequences of disarmament, concerning.
inter alia, the advant;iges which disarmament could have
on the economic and soda! programmes throughout
the world, and Council resolution 1087 (XXXIX) of
30 July 1965.
.
Bearing in 111ind the recommendation confained in
annex A.VI.JO of the Final Act of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development. 40 which pointed
to the necessitv of paying due attention to the trade
aspects of the economic programme of disarmament
in considering studies and working out proposals within
the framework of the United Nations on the economic
and social consequences of clisarmament as provided
by the relevant resolutions of the General Assemblv,
Having considered the report of the Secret~rvGeneral on conversion to pe;i,efol needs of the resm1rc~s
40 See Proceedings of the Un.ited Nations Conference 011
Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 65.
