UNITEDNATIONS

SECURITY

COUNCIL
RECORDS

OFFICIAL
TWENTY-NINTH

th
1766

y;’

MEETING: 15 APRIL 1974

NEW

;I “I--\ 1

J;,Jj
28*IL%1

YEAR

?!

(j&j! J’ -.“,?-.. :’/* , .*1 _

YORK

_
/
CONTE /

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1766) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Page
1

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Ismael Taylor-Kamara, Permanent Representative
of Sierra Leone to the United Nations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . T . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l1264).............................................

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIjiTY-SIXTH

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Talib ELSHIBIB

15 April

MEETING

1974, at 3.30 pm.

sentative of Lebanon to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/l 1264)

(Iraq),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Cameroon and United States of America.

2. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Lebanon
requesting that Lebanon be invited to participate in the
Council’s discussion, without the right to vote. Accordingly, if I hear no objections I propose, in accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure and with the
usual practice of the Council, to invite the representative of
Lebanon, under the relevant Article of the Charter to
participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion of
the item on the agenda.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1766)
1. Adoption of the agenda..

At the invitation of the President, Mr. F. Naffah (Lebanon) took a place at the Council table.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 13 April 1974 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1264).

3. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter from the
representative of Israel requesting to be allowed to participate in the Council’s discussion, without the right to vote.
If I hear no objections, I propose, in accordance with rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure and with the usual
practice of the Council, to invite the representative of
Israel, under the relevant Article of the Charter, to
participate, without the right to vote, in the discussion of
the item on the agenda.

l’he meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of Mr. Ismael Taylor-Kamara,
Permanent Representative of Sierra Leone to the United
Nations

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel)
took a place at the Council table.

I. The PRESIDENT: Before we proceed with the business
of this meeting, I have the sad duty to inform members of
the Council that a former President of the Security Council
who occupied this Chair at an important moment in the
Council’s history, that is, in December 1972, Ambassador
Taylor-Kamara of Sierra Leone, has passed away. The
Council will remember that while he was President of the
Security Council he had to deal with the armed conflict
between India and Pakistan, with African questions and
with the election of the Secretary-General, as well as other
important questions. Members of the Council will remember his unfailing courtesy, personal warmth and kindness
which he demonstrated during his term of oftice. On behalf
of the Council I wish to express sincere condolences to the
Government of Sierra Leone, to the members of the
Permanent Mission, to the African groups and to the
bereaved family.

4. The PRESIDENT: Furthermore, I should like to inform
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Arab Republic of
Egypt, asking to be invited under the relevant Article of the
Charter, to participate in our discussion, without the right
to vote. If I hear no objection, I propose, in accordance
with rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure and with
the established practice of the Security Council, to invite
the representatives mentioned to participate, without the
right to vote, in the discussion.
5. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I would request the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Arab Republic of Egypt to
take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited to
take a place at the Council table when it is their turn to
speak.

Adoption of the age&
The agenda was adopted.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. H. Kekmi (Syrian
Arab Republic) and Mr. I. Fahmy (Egypt) took the piaces
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter &ted 13 April 1974 from the Permanent Repre1

13. On the night of 1.2-13 April, armed elements of the
regular armed, forces of Israel; violating the tibanese
frontier at a number of points, attacked six frontier villages
inhabited solely by civilians. The results .of.that raid were
two dead-one
woman and one little girl-and
two
wounded. The Israeli soldiers kidnapped 13 persons and
dynamited 3 1 homes,

6. The PRESIDENT: This meeting has been convened at
the request of the representative of Lebanon, in his letter of
13 April 1974/S/11264].
7. The first speaker inscribed on my list to speak at this
meeting is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I now
call.
8. .Mr. NAFFAH (Lebanon) (interpretation from French):
May I be allowed, Mr. President, to express my warm
appreciation to you for having called this emergency
meeting of the Security Council at the request of Lebanon,
and also to thank the members of the Council for having
acceded to the request,, We trust that under your wise
presidency and with the participation of the member
States, the debates of the Council will lead to positive and
effective results and thereby contribute to the strengthening of peace and security in the region of the Middle East
and ensure greater respect for the Charter of the United
Nations.

14. On 13 April, the Israeli Minister of Defence specified
that that raid should be understood as only a warning.
Israel, he added, “will not limit itself to attacking the
terrorists wherever they may be. Israel intended to disorganize civilian life in Lebanon completely.” He went on
to add that that raid was more of a political nature than of
a truly military nature. He added, in order to clarify his
views, that Israel could turn the south of Lebanon as a
whole into a desert.

9. Once again Lebanon is appealing to the Security
Council” As usual, we do so in self-defence.

16. First, with regard to the attack on Khyat Shmona, I
am in no way embarrassed to state that Lebanon deplores
and considers reprehensible any acts of violence wherever
they may occur. Immediately after the Lad attack the
President of the Lebanese Republic stated:

15. I should like to draw the attention of the Council to
the following facts.

10. In the present circumstances, at a time when the
General Assembly is holding a special session to carry out a
historic debate in order to introduce more justice and
equity in international relations, at a time when the forces
of peace are redoubling their efforts to defuse the dramatic
crisis in the Middle East, our dearest hope would have been
to have heard in these precincts only appeals to concord, to
understanding and to cooperation among peace-loving and
justice-loving nations, Unfortunately, we have been obliged
to come here to complain, to denounce to the Council a
new aggression of which our country and our people, once
again, have been the innocent victims.

“Lebanon reproves and condemns acts of violence, and,
as in the past, we condemn the barbaric acts committed
by Zionism in the King David Hotel, for one, in Deir
Yassin and Bahr El Bakar, as well as in Lebanon
itself-and to list all the attacks would be too lengthy. So
it is only natural that today Lebanon, consistent with its
own stand, also condemns the attack against the airfield
of Lod which caused a large number of innocent civilians
to be wounded or killed.”
I reiterate and reaffirm that declaration today.

11. I do not need to list the facts in detail. They have
already been put before the Council to a large extent in the
letter of 13 April 1974. I ‘shah limit myself only to raising
certain questions that I believe warrant the Council’s
attention.

17. Secondly, I should like to point out to the Council
that when the Kiryat Shmona drama was taking place, and
despite the careful and prudent statements of the Minister
of Police, the Prime Minister of Israel and its representative
in the United Nations, without any investigation being
carried out or feigned, already considered that the case was
clear and already pointed to the guilty party: the Government and people of Lebanon. The very next day-still
without having carried out any investigation or inquiriesthe Israeli Army attacked innocent civilians.

12. On 11 April, the very day of the attack on Kiryat
Shmona, the lsraeh Minister of Police stated that, he was
not in a position to say whether the assailants had come
from inside the territories controlled by Israel, or from
outside. That statement recalled another that had been
made by the same Minister of Police of Israel three days
earlier, in which he said that he assessed at 250 the number
of Palestinian fedayeen living and operating within territories controlled by Israel. Despite those declarations and
those revelations, the representative of Israel, acting on
instructions
from his Government, did not hesitate to
affirm categorically, in a letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral on that same 11 April, that the assailants had come
from Lebanon” The representative of Israel also informed
the Council that a communique had been published in
Beirut by a Palestinian organization that claimed responsibility for the attack. And he concluded by again echoing
the declarations and the threats of the Prime Minister of
Israel that the Government and the people of Lebanon
must bear full responsibility for that situation,,

18. I must recall that the Israeli Government has behaved
in an identical fashion in the past, immediately after the
events that took place in Athens, in Munich, at Lod and
elsewhere-cases that Lebanon had nothing whatever to do
with. The Council did not refrain from condemning Israel
formally on each and every one of those aggressions.
19. Thirdly, it is false to assert that a communique was
published in Beirut on the day when the Kiryat Shmona
attack occurred. Two communiquCs had been published on
that date, one in a capital of Western Europe and one in a
capital of the Middle East, but no communiqud was
published in Lebanon. Even if that so-called communiquC
had been circulated from there, what would it mean and
2

:

what responsibility could be derived from it? Can the two
countries, one Western and one Middle Eastern, where the
two communiquCs were published be held responsible by
Israel for that publication? The press and information
media enjoy an atmosphere of total freedom in Lebanon,
that is why Beirut has become a centre of dissemination of
information. Lebanon, like all countries that adopt a liberal
regime, is not responsible for what is published on its soil..

,

,

‘..<,:”

road that it can follow: to recognize the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, as set forth in
international law and defined, confirmed and proclaimed
time and time again by the appropriate resolutions of the
United Nations.
The President of the Republic of Lebanon stated:
;it is not Lebanon that can be held responsible for the
presence on its territory of more than 300,000 Palestinian
refugees, for they are in our land only because Israel
evicted them from their own homes and prohibits them
from returning to them.

20. Fourthly, it has not in any way been established that
those responsible for the Kiryat Shrnona attack left from
Lebanon. The Lebanese authorities, and also the United
Nations observers, found no traces of infiltration across the
border. The Lebanese Government does everything in its
power, with the agreement and the assistance of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, to stop such infiltration,
so that the expansionist aims of Israel will not be given any
pretext for interference.

“It is not Lebanon but the international community
that can and must find for these refugees the sole valid
solution, namely, peace based on justice.
“Apart from that peace based on justice, any reprisals
committed by Israel against the Palestinian resistance and
the countries that are open to Palestinian refugees for
asylum can only aggravate the problem and make even
more inhuman the drama through which we are living”.

21. If, however, it occurred that isolated elements escaped
our surveillance and, despite all the technical equipment
and electronic apparatus set up by Israel along the border,
did manage to infiltrate-well,
Israel can blame no one but
itself. It’is not up to Lebanon to guard the Israeli border.

25. At the end of this debate the Council will be called
upon to defme its stand. I should like to refer to many of
the past experiences, to recall that the decisions that have
carried condemnations of Israel have had no effect whatever on its behaviour. Therefore, without too much fear of
making a mistake, we can foresee that a new condemnation
will be taken with the same indifference, with the same
contempt, by the Israeli authorities.

22. If the infiltrations took place, how can they involve
Lebanon? Acts of violence cannot be linked or tied in the
same measure to the responsibility of States. Israel itself
organizes terror and it orders its regular forces to commit
acts of violence. Its responsibility is complete. Lebanon, on
the other hand, prohibits acts of violence, It uses all means
at its disposal to prevent them. How can Lebanon, then, be
held responsible for acts committed beyond its borders by
elements that are completely outside Lebanon’s control?

26. Therefore it might be useful to remind the Council
that certain condemnations it has already adopted against
Israel contained a clear threat. I should like to quote, as an
example, resolution 280 (1970) adopted on 19 May 1970,
paragraph 3 of which reads:

23. Fifthly, from all the foregoing it is obvious that in
attacking six Lebanese villages on 12 and 13 April Israel has
committed a premeditated and obvious act of aggression”
Being party to the conflict in the Middle East, Israel claims
the right to set itself up as judge and jury. International law
exists, however, and must be respected in all circumstances.
There is also the highest authority, the United Nations, and
it is to the United Nations that disputes of this nature must
be submitted: that is, to the Security Council. If Israel
suspected that Lebanon was Involved in the affair of Kiryat
Shmona, why did Israel not seize the Council of the
question? That question was asked by newspapermen of
the representative of Israel. If we are to believe the
dispatches of the newspapers, the representative of Israel
answered that the Security Council was not a body that
inspired confidence in him. Then it is the law of the jungle
that prevails,, Israel, which owes its existence to violence
and terror, can live only through violence and terror.

“Declares that such armed attacks can no longer be
tolerated and repeats its solemn’ warning to Israel that if
they were to be repeated the Security Council would, in
accordance with resolution 262 (1968) and the present
resolution, consider taking adequate and effective steps or
measures in accordance with the relevant Articles of the
Charter to implement its resolutions”.
Israel has in fact repeated these acts; it has taken no note of
the Council’s warning; its aggression continues. Not only
has it organized a raid on six frontier villages, but its
artillery is bombing the south of Lebanon and its military
planes constantly, day and night, violate Lebanese air space.
27. Lebanon expects that you-all
peace-loving and
justice-loving nations, dedicated to the ideals of the United
Nations and its prestige will take “appropriate and effective
measures” to ensure implementation of the Council’s
resolutions These measures are dictated in the “relevant
Articles of the Charter”.

24. Sixthly, Lebanon rejects all threats and efforts to
intimidate us made against us by the Israeli leaders. These
leaders ask us to do no more than liquidate the Palestinian
resistance-in
other words, to become the cat’s-paw of
Israel’s policies of aggression against the Palestinian
people-to support what they should like to be able to do
themselves and which they will never succeed in doing. It’is
a law of history that the national liberation movements
cannot be put down by force. If the Israeli authorities truly
wish to put an end to acts of violence, there is only one

28. My country and Government expect that the Security
Council will adopt the necessary measures to ensure their
application,
3

-./--

29, The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel, on whom I now call.

squad, members of the Jibril gang, which had crossed into
Israel from Lebanese territory and fired at a civilian car
travelling between Banias and kibbutz Dan.

30. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The story of Arab terrorism is
well known. It is a record of slaughter of innocent men,
women and children. It is murder for murder’s sake. It is
the assassination of children on school buses, the blowing
up of civil aircraft in flight, the massacre of defenceless
passengers at air terminals, the slaying of athletes at
Olympic Games. It is bloodlust directed against the weakest
and the most vulnerable. It gloats over cruelty. If glorifies
inhumanity and cowardice. It is a crime under any civilized
law, national and international alike.

37. On 12 February, terrorists on Lebanese territory
directed mortar fire against the town of Metulla.
38. On 2 April, bazooka and small-arms fire was opened
from Lebanese territory at an Israel border-police patrol in
the area of Zarit in Upper Galilee.
39. This, then, is the Lebanon whose Minister for Foreign
Affairs described today as “peace-loving”.
40. Peaceful Lebanon where savage massacres of guiltless
civilians are planned and organized. Innocent Lebanon from
which murderers freely set out to all parts of the globe to
bomb and to blow up, to kill and to maim. Law-abiding
Lebanon which has signed formal agreements with the
terror organizations granting them freedom to carry on
their criminal activities. Virtuous Lebanon which does not
address itself to the Security Council when its sovereignty is
violated by the introduction
of terrorist groups into
Lebanon from abroad and by turning Lebanese territory
into a base for armed attacks against Israel. Helpless
Lebanon which does not draw the Security Council’s
attention to the fact that Beirut is being used as a nest for
international gangsterism and assassination. Chaste Lebanon
which has never complained to the Security Council when
terrorist organizations, inspired from abroad, attacked and
clashed in battle with Lebanese forces. Pure Lebanon which
turns to the Security Council only in one situation: when
Israel, no longer ready to bear the bloody assaults on its
citizens launched from Lebanese soil, reacts in self-defence.

31. Its criminality is compounded by its objectives. Arab
terrorism, the premeditated killing of innocent civilians,
openly aims at undermining the life, independence and
self-determination of an entire people-the Jewish people.
Its appetite unsatiated by the existence of 20 sovereign
Arab States, Arab terrorism strives to destroy Israel and to
replace it by one more Arab State. The Arab nation should
be sovereign in its ancestral homeland and in all the
territories it has conquered, through the centuries, in the
Middle East and in North Africa, but the region’s oldest
nation, the Jewish people, should be deprived of its right to
freedom and equality in its historic motherland. Arab
terrorism thus seeks the annihilation of a people by means
of the physical destruction of its individual members.
32. The story of Lebanon’s role in Arab terrorism is
equally welJ known. Unlike other Arab States, Lebanon for
a long time stayed out of this despicable form of
bloodshed. Then in recent years it became a principal
centre for Arab terrorist operations. Beirut was turned into
the seat of the headquarters, information bureaux and
recruitment offices of the terrorist groupings. Training
camps and attack bases were established on Lebanese
territory. The terrorist organizations pursue their activities
in Lebanon in the open, publish their communiques in
Beirut and allow reporters to interview their leaders and to
visit their bases.

41.. It is only then that Lebanon’s alleged sense of loyalty
to the United Nations and to its Charter is awakened, but
even then only enough to make it rush to the Council with
the usual hackneyed pretexts for pursuing its irresponsible
policy of collaboration with the terrorist organizations. It is
then that the presence of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon,
which during more than 20 years had not caused any
tension along the border with Israel, is used as an excuse to
cover up for the operation of terrorists, most of whom had
infdtrated into Lebanon from abroad. It is then that
terrorism which has been directed against Israel for decades
is claimed to be the result of recent developments.

33. During the Yom Kippur War-up
to 24 October
1973-the terrorists carried out 104 acts of aggression from
and through Lebanese territory, including 41 cases of
artillery bombardment of civilian villages. These attacks
resulted in the death of three Israeli soldiers and one
civilian and in the wounding of 16 civilians and three
soldiers.

42. Early in the morning of 11 April a group of terrorists
crossed the Israel-Lebanese frontier. An Israeli patrol
discovered that the barbed wire fence along the border had
been cut at a certain point between Metulla and Misgav Am. Contrary to the allegations that we heard in the
statement of the preceding speaker, the barbed wire fence is
not electrified. The border patrol found the tracks of three
men who had crossed into Israel. The patrol followed the
tracks to the townlet of Kiryat Shmona. When it arrived
there the terrorists
were already on their sanguinary
rampage. At first they made their way into the town’s
school-building. The school is named after Janusz Korczak,
the world famous Jewish educator in Warsaw who, when
the Nazis carried off the pupils studying in his institute to
their death, rejected a Nazi offer to save himself and went
to his death together with the children” Finding the school

34. Terror attacks have continued since the beginning of
this year. For instance, on 1 January 1974 bazooka and
small-arms fire was directed by terrorists from Lebanese
territory at an Israeli patrol. On the same day, bazooka fire
was opened from Lebanon against the area between Manara
and Margaliyot.
35. On 6 February, an Israeli soldier was killed north of
kibbutz Dan when a routine border-police patrol clashed
with a terrorist squad which had penetrated into Israel from
Lebanese territory near the village of Adassiyah.
36. On 9 February, a young Israeli woman was killed and
a soldier wounded by bazooka shells fired by a terrorist
4

empty because of the Passover vacation, the terrorists
seized an apartment building and systematically massacred
18 of its inhabitants, including eight children and five
women, and wounded 15 other persons. In bestial bloodthirst the murderers hurled children to their death from
windows in the upper floors of the building. Then they
barricaded themselves in the top floor apartment and were
killed by the Israeli Defence Forces which stormed the
building. It is to be observed that an immediate investigation established that the shoes of the three murderers fully
matched the footprints crossing the border.

up on’ 21 February 1970 of a Swissair plane in flight,
causing the death of 47 passengers and crew. On the same
day an explosion damaged an Austrian airliner in mid-air,
but it landed safely. In August and September 1971 and in
August 1972 Jibril’s organization based in Beirut was also
responsible for handing suitcases filled with explosives and
time-bombs to foreign passengers who were unaware of the
contents of the suitcases and who were about to board El
Al planes in Rome. Letter-bombs sent to Israel from various
cities abroad have also been traced to the Jibril organization
whose headquarters are located in Lebanon’s capital.

43. As usual, representatives of Lebanon tried to confuse
these incontrovertible
facts. I regret that the Foreign
Minister of Lebanon found it necessary to resort to
distortion in a vain attempt to deny that the Kiryat
Shmona killers came from his country. Thus he distorted
both the content of Israeli Police Minister Hillel’s statement
and its date. On 11 April while on his way to a Cabinet
meeting held immediately-15 minutes-after
the massacre,
the Minister replied to reporters’ questions by saying simply
that he had no information about the attack. On 12 April
the Minister stated during the funeral in Kiryat Shmona:
“We now know with certainty that the murderers came
from Lebanon and we demand of Lebanon to do all to
ensure that the terrorist bases and command headquarters
cease to exist on its soil.”

47. This is the nature and these are the doings of the
murder organization which the Lebanese Government
harbours on its territory and shelters in Beirut, along with
other terrorist groups.
48. In its inhumanity the Kiryat Shmona blood-bath is
reminiscent of the Lod Airport massacre of 30 May 1972 in
which 26 people were killed by agents of an Arab terrorist
organization trained on Lebanese soil, the murder of 11
Israeli athletes during the Munich Olympic Games on
5 September 1972 and the frequent sanguinary attacks
against civil aircraft and their passengers. The barbaric
cruelty with which women and little children were deliberately shot down or hurled to death from windows in
Kiryat Shmona evoked memories of the murder of Jewish
children, women and men by the Nazis.

44. Those killed in Kiryat Shmona were: Fanny Shitreet
aged 30 and three of her children-Yocheved,
11, Aaron, 8,
and Motti, 4; Shimon Bitton, 33 years old; Avi, five, and his
two-and-ahalf-year-old
sister Miriam; Yacov Guetta and
Miriam Guetta, each 30 years old; Hadassah Stern, 27, and
her daughter Rachel, 8; Esther Cohen, 49, her son David,
16, and her daughter Shulamit, 14. Also killed were Esther
Yazada, 60 years old, and Shmuel Ben Abu, 58; and two
soldiers, Mordechai Geridi and Abahad el Sauhil.

49. The civilized world was shocked. The SecretaryGeneral, Pope Paul and Governments everywhere condemned this savage attack. At the same time, in Beirut and
some other Arab capitals the atrocious murder of innocent
women and children was hailed as an act of heroism. The
Arab press and other media of information applauded it.
50. In an interview published in the Beirut Englishlanguage Lebanese newspaper Daily Star of 12 April, Zuheir
Mohsen, whose headquarters are in Beirut and who is a
leader of the Saiqa terrorist group and a member of the
Executive Committee of the so-called Palestine Liberation
Organization, an umbrella association of all the terrorist
groupings, called the Kiryat Shmona massacre “heroic”. He
added: “We promise to undertake more such operations as
they express the real sacrifice and represent the start of a
new stage in the development of commando operations,
both in size and level .”

4.5. The first statement claiming responsibility for this
horrendous atrocity was issued on 11 April in Beirut by the
Popular Front-General Command. It was also there in
Beirut that the photograph of the three murderers was
released. The communique and the photograph were cabled
from Beirut by all international press agencies. At the same
time, on 11 April the Popular Front-General Command also
published in Beirut the following identifications and details
on the three terrorists. One of them, Monir Moghrabi, 20,
code-named Abu Khaled, was a Palestinian born in Damascus. He joined the Popular Front shortly after graduating from a Syrian secondary school in 1971. The second,
Ahmed el-She&h Mahmoud, code-named Abu Shaker, was a
Syrian who joined the Front in 1972. And the third
terrorist, Yassin Mousa el-Mouzani, 27, code-named AbuHadi, was an Iraqi construction worker who served in the
Iraqi army before joining the Front in 1972.

51. This is a statement not on behalf of the Popular Front
which carried out the Kiryat Shmona murders but on
behalf of the over-all terrorist organization, the so-called
Palestine Liberation Organization which has signed a formal
agreement with the Government of Lebanon and of which
the Lebanese representative, in his letter to the SecretaryGeneral a few days ago, spoke in such laudatory terms.

46. The headquarters of the Popular Front-General Command are located in Beirut. The organization is headed by
Abmed Jibril. Among the outrages for which it has claimed
responsibility are: The ambush on 22 May 1970 of a school
bus travelling near the Lebanese border in the Avivim area
resulting in the killing of seven children, two teachers and
the bus driver and the wounding of 23 children. Then, as
this time, the terrorists came from Lebanon. The blowing

52. Lebanon’s involvement in and responsibility for the
continuation of terrorist operations from its territory is
again highlighted in an interview in Beirut with another
terrorist leader. The interview was published in Ihe New
York Times of I3 April. On the morrow of the Kiryat
Shmona pssacre, Abu Abbas, a spokesman of the Popular
Front, met in the Lebanese capital with representatives of
the press. Virtually confirming that the three terrorists had
5

come from Lebanon, the spokesman declared: “We refuse
to be bound by any agreement preventing crossing into
occupied territory for carrying out operations.” As is welI
known, all the Arab terrorist organizations consider all of
Israel as occupied territory. According to the Arab Middle
East News Agency, he added: “We shall continue to use
Lebanese territory to strike at the Israeli enemy.”

the issue before it. No one has any illusions on this score.
All are aware of the fact that since Israel’s independence in
1948 the Council has not been able to adopt a single
resolution condemning the murder of Israeli citizens in
incursions by Arab military forces or by terrorist squads.
All know of the inherent parliamentary imbalance which
prevails in the Council and in other organs of the United
Nations in discussions regarding the Middle East situation.

53. In the night of 12-13 April units of the Israel defence
forces entered several Lebanese border villages and dynamited 20 houses after having evacuated their inhabitants.
Four houses were demolished in the village of Dahira; two
in Muhebab; one in Yaroun; two in Aitaroun; one in Blida;
and 10 in Ett Taibe, a village nearest to Kiryat Shmona.
International news agencies dispatches from Beirut confirm
the nature of this action. For instance, quoting villagers,
Reuters reported on 13 April:

58. We have come to the Security Council to pay a tribute
to the innocent victims of Arab terrorism. Their blood is
our blood. Their blood is the blood of every Israeli, of
every Jew, of every decent human being. We shall not
forget them. We shall see to it that the world does not
forget them. Their memory will be a tragic reminder that
Israel’s struggle remains the struggle for the right of Jewish
men, women and children to life and for the right of the
people of Israel to exist in freedom and equality with all
nations.

“The pattern was set to be the same at each place. The
Israeli troops turned the inhabitants out of their homes
and then demolished the houses with explosives, villagers
said .”

59. We have come before the Security Council to point
again an accusing finger at the Government of Lebanon and
all others which harbour, assist and co-operate with Arab
terrorist organizations and to emphasize that they will not
be absolved of their obligation to prevent armed attacks
against Israel, whether by regular forces or by irregular
terrorist bands.

54. It is to be noted that the Israeli action was directed
not against terrorist bases on Lebanese soil but against the
houses of known terrorist collaborators, including homes of
villagers in which the murderers had stopped over on their
way to Kiryat Shmona. The Israeli forces have detained for
questioning some 10 such collaborators and one policeman.

60. We have come here also with an admonition not to
misjudge Israel’s present attitude and mood. After 25 years
of persistent Arab aggression, the people of Israel are in no
doubt that the dangers surrounding it remain grave. The
introspection which characterizes Israel’s political life today
springs from a search for the most effective way to cope
with these dangers and with the challenges of the times.
Behind this introspection there is a fundamental unity of
purpose and a profound national resolve. The people of
Israel are one in their desire and hope for peace. Israel has
sought peace with its neighbours since independence. It is
happy that now negotiations with the Arab States and the
conclusion of agreements with them are no longer distant
aspirations It looks forward to a joint constructive process
of peace making with the Arab States. But the Government
and people of Israel remain united as ever in their
determination to thwart the use of force and violence
against them, to defend Israel’s rights and protect its
citizens.

55. In a press conference held on 13 April, Israel’s
Minister of Defence described the Israeli action as follows:
“It was not revenge. There can be no revenge for what
took place in Kiryat Shmona. We did not try to match
that disaster, not by the scale nor by the methods . . .
“Our objective this time was political, not military . . .
We were trying to explain that we are not the police of
Lebanon . . . Each Government is responsible for what is
taking place inside its territory. We have no doubt that
the Government of Lebanon knows that the three
murderers who killed the Israelis in Kiryat Shmona came
from the headquarters of the Jibril group in Beirut . . .
The Government of Lebanon knows where to find him
and his group of murderers and it is their job to do it.
“We made all the villagers aware that . . . it is their
business to go to their Government and tell them that
they have to take care that no terrorists cross the border
into Israel. That was the message.”

61. Those who really know and understand the people of
Israel will not make any mistake about it. We may be on
the eve of a new era but not of the kind the terrorist leaders
are longing for and speaking of in Beirut. This will be an era
in which the prospects of replacing hostility in the Middle
East by understanding, mistrust by mutual confidence, war
by peace will be greater than in the past. However, whether
this occurs in the near future or at a later stage, the
forthcoming era will find the people of Israel hardened even
further by recent developments, edified by the lessons of
the new tests through which we have passed, and reinforced
by the vigour and vitality that come ‘when youth of body
and spirit and thought combine with the discernment and
maturity of experience. This will be an era in which the
people of Israel will be steadfast in the defence of its
achievements and will continue to improve on them, to

56. It is up to Lebanon to prevent the use of its territory
for attacks against Israel. If the Lebanese Government
permits Lebanon to become a lawless gangland, it is obvious
that its neighbours wiIl treat it accordingly. If Lebanon
tramples all law into dust, it cannot invoke the protection
of law. If Lebanon discards its obligations of proper
international conduct, it cannot expect considerate conduct
towards it by others.
57. The Israel delegation has asked to participate in this
debate not in the expectation that the Security Council
would adopt an equitable attitude based on the merits of
6

.
build and to create and to work for. peace, knowing that
difficulties are always transitory and surmountable, and
that the euphorias of Israel’s opponents are, as in the past,
temporary, while the .values for which Israel stands and
struggles remain solid and indestructible and meritorious.

Nations resolutions on the rights of the Palestinian people,
like that of any other people, to self-determination, or on
the return of refugees to their homeland, on the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force, or on the
return of displaced persons to their territory.

62. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Kuwait in which he requests to be invited, under the
relevant Article of the Charter, to participate in our
discussion without the right to vote. In accordance with
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure and the
established practice of the Security Council, I propose, with
the Council’s consent, to invite the representative of
Kuwait to participate, without the right to vote, in the
discussion. In view of the limited number of seats available
at the Council table, I would request the representative of
Kuwait to take the seat reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber, on the understanding that he will be
invited to take a place at the Council table at the
appropriate moment.

68. The tragedy which has afflicted the Palestinian people
and which has spread to neighbouring Arab countries
because of the racist neocolonialist forces who worship
force and proclaim aloud their policy of terror and fait
accompli-all this is passed over in silence.
69. It would take too long here to go through the
interminable list of resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly and the Security Council following the Israeli
aggression of June 1967. They bear essentially on Israel’s
refusal to recognize the fundamental rights of the Palestinian people-rights
proclaimed in the Charter and in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
70. More recently, the General Assembly, in resolution
3089 B (XXVIII),
of 7 December 1973 “‘Notes with deep
regret that repatriation or compensation of the refugees as
provided for in paragraph 11 of General Assembly resolution 194 (III) has not been effected”. In part D of the same
resolution, the General Assembly:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Al-Sabah
(Kuwait) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
63. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on my list of
speakers is that of the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic, whom I now invite to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

“1. Reaffirms that the people of Palestine is entitled
to equal rights and self-determination, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations;
“2. Expresses once more its grave concern that the
people of Palestine has been prevented by Israel from
enjoying its inalienable rights and from exercising its right
to self-determination;

64. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation
from French): May I thank the members of the Council, for
having agreed to the participation of my delegation in the
discussion of the item before you. May I also express to
you, Mr. President my most sincere congratulations upon
your assumption of the presidency of this Council, and
repeat the tributes paid to your country, a fraternal
country, and to you yourself.

“3. Declares that full respect for and realization of the
inalienable rights of the people of Palestine, particularly
its right to self-determination, are indispensable for the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, and that the enjoyment by the Palestine Arab
refugees of their right to return to their homes and
property, recognized by the General Assembly in resolution 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, which has been
repeatedly reaffirmed by the Assembly since that date, is
indispensable for the achievement of a just settlement of
the refugee problem and for the exercise by the people of
Palestine of its right to self-determination.”

65. The Foreign Minister of Lebanon has described the
escalation of terrorist activities undertaken by the Zionist
authorities and of the declarations of their intention to
intensify their campaign against Lebanon. Their purpose is
declared, and no torrents of propaganda can disguise it: it is
genocide, pure and simple, against the Palestinian people,
the stitling of its voice and the elimination of its personality.

71. The true question now before the Security Council is
the State terrorism practised by Israel as a doctrine, faith
and religious profession. The details of its latest crime are
nothing but the consequences of the application of that
doctrine, and the leaders of Israel, intoxicated by blood,
say so aloud, proclaiming that so long as the Lebanese
Government does not control the Arab terrorists, as they
are called by General Dayan, Israel will continue its
punitive raids until the south of Lebanon is completely
abandoned and that they will do everything in their power
to see to it that daily life there becomes impossible, that
they will completely destroy houses so that that part of the
country becomes completely deserted. That is State terrorism, which is fundamentally distinct from acts of
individual violence, which are expressions of despair. That

66. All of you, a short while ago, heard the Israeli
representative describe Palestinians in terms more worthy
of him: as murderers and barbarians. His purpose was to
make us forget that the Palestinian Arabs are a people with
its own identity and inalienable rights, a people driven from
its country by a foreign racist and colonialist conquest.
Since then, the most abominable conditions have been
inflicted on that martyred people.
67. The Israeli representative expatiates on the deeds of a
few young Palest&m
gnawed by frustration and despair,
but passes over in silence the conduct of his own authorities
towards the Palestinian people, which is pursued even in its
very camps of exile. There is not a word in his speech about
the attitude of his colonialist authorities towards United
7

is what the Council should consider, and particularly .its
flagrant manifestations of violation of the sovereignty of
Member States as well as violations of their territorial
integrity.

80. The incidents that have occurred in the last few days
are but a renewed convulsion of a suppressed longing for
justice, freedom and dignity. It is ‘a manifestation of
nothing less than despair and shattered hopes. The onus of
perturbing the chances of obtaining peace in the area could
not fall upon a distressed, deprived and exiled people. The
blame must remain with the intimidating machinery of
Israel directed by Zionism and its boundless ambitions. The
Palestinians, on whom the Israeli representative would like
to put the blame, would not forget the many untold
injustices inflicted upon their people, property, land, towns
and their sense of belonging. If the Israeli representative
would like us to respect these things for his country, then
he has to accept and abide by the same rule for the
Palestinians. Nor would they forget the denial of their very
existence when Prime Minister Golda Meir reminded them
of her extremist view that there is no such people as the
Palestinian people-thus engendering increasing bitterness
and forging an iron will within this people to see that their
rights are widely recognized and upheld.

72. In that regard, in its resolution 332 (1973) of 21 April
1973 the Council condemned the repeated military attacks
conducted by Israel against Lebanon and Israel’s violation
of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon in
contravention of the Charter, of the Israel-Lebanon Arm&
stice Agreement, and of Council cease-fire resolutions and
called upon Israel to desist forthwith from all military
attacks on Lebanon.
73. Israel has once again violated that resolution of the
Security Council. In its new act of aggression, Israel
considered Lebanon responsible. Now the Foreign Minister
of Lebanon has adduced all the clear arguments necessary
to refute that allegation.
74. On 12 April, Israeli armed forces violated the territorial integrity of Lebanon. They attacked six villages in the
south of Lebanon. They killed two innocent civilians,
kidnapped 13 persons and demolished several houses. Those
are the criminal acts just committed by Israel against
Lebanon in flagrant violation of the principles of the
Charter, the resolutions of the Security Council, the Geneva
Conventions and the fundamental principles of intemational law and human rights.

8 1. The representative of Israel, as usual, had the audacity
to speak about what he called Arab terrorists. The Council
may recall that the memory of the Palestinian nation is still
haunted by horrendous atrocities to which they as well as
their homeland have been so systematically subjected ever
since 1948. Was it not upon the debris of their homes, upon
the maimed and mutilated bodies of their men, women and
children that Israel was erected? The incidents which take
place should not be viewed in isolation from the Palestinian
diaspora or from the early massacres which marked the
birth of Israel.

75. The most dangerous aspect of all these acts is that
Israel recognizes its crime and persists in it. In the light of
that fact, the Security Council should condemn those acts
and take the measures necessary to prevent a repetition of
them.

82. General Glubb reported that in December 1947-I just
mention this and other examples to remind the representative of Israel that he should once and for all not speak
about terrorists-after
the United Nations decided on the
partition of Palestine, a British officer wondered what
troubles such a division might cause. “That will be fxed”, a
Jewish officer answered him, “a few calculated massacres
will get rid of the Arabs”. This alone is sufficient to prove
to the world how and since when terrorism and massacres
were introduced in our area, in our lives, and even outside
our area. The Israelis kept their word, and in January 1948
Zionists dynamited and killed 22 Palestinians and wounded
many more in the public square at Jaffa. The next day
Zionists blew up the Semiramis Hotel at Jerusalem and 22
more Arabs died. There were many other such attacks. The
worst was at Deir Yassin. The whole village-I repeat, the
whole village-was blown up while its inhabitants slept. All
257 men, women and children were killed. And here the
representative of Israel speaks about humanity and sufferings. This blood-bath at Deir Yassin was, to quote the
distinguished historian Arnold Toynbee, a despicable deed
of the Irgun terrorists, whose then leader, by the way, is the
present leader of the Likud Party in the Israeli Parliament.
This is only a background to show and to prove to the
Council how humane decisions are taken by a responsible
Government in Israel.

76. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on my list of
speakers is that of the representative of Egypt, whom I now
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
77. Mr. FAHMY (Egypt): I should like to thank the
Council for granting our request to be invited to take part
in the present debate.
78. The Israeli assault on peaceful and unprotected
Lebanese villages forcefully reminds us all that Israel has
once again resorted to such vicious and barbaric methods,
clearly indicating that its policy of expansionism and its
dreams and aggressive designs still form an integral part of
the basic policy of Israel towards the Arab countries and
their peoples. It is to be regretted that the political
leadership of Israel has still not understood the meaning
and lessons of October 1973, nor has it grasped the depth
of Arab determination to see their legitimate rights upheld
and safeguarded.
79. The Security Council, shouldering its responsibilities,
has on many occasions condemned specific acts of aggression perpetrated by Israel against Lebanon. Yet it seems the
Israeli establishment is still clinging to the method of use of
force and threats against Lebanon, thus seriously endangering the present chances of peace in the Middle East.

83. By citing the tragic saga of 1948, I am only putting
the sad events of Kiryat Shmona into their proper
perspective. Against that background of misery, uprootedness and nostalgia, forced upon them by the Israelis, and by
8

\

the Israelis only, the Palestinians strove to assert their
denied identity. It will be remiss on the part of any
judicious judgement if the acts of the Palestinian movement
are to be evaluated in isolation from their plight.

respect by Israel of the Charter, its adherence to its
principles and its compliance with the many resolutions
adopted either by the Council or by the Assembly. But
Israel alone refuses all this.

84. Let us not forget that more than 25 years have elapsed
without the restoration of the legitimate rights to the
Palestinians. And only yesterday, Defense Minister Dayan,
in a statement reminiscent of pre-6 October, had this to tell
the inhabitants of southern Lebanon: “The people will find
it impossible to live there. Their homes will be destroyed
and the whole area will be a desert.”

91. In previous similar cases, the Council clearly upheld
the sanctity and territorial integrity of Lebanon. The
Council further repeatedly warned Israel against infringing
upon Lebanese territory. I need not recite the long list of
resolutions starting with resolution 262 (1968) and r~olution 280 (1970), and ending with resolution 332 (1973).
92. What we witness today in the Lebanese-Israeli sector is
but an abhorring repetition of the Israeli practices.

85. It would amount to naiivert! if one should anticipate
the ushering of peace into the area while arrogant voices are
roaring and while armexationist designs are not abandoned.
This is the true fact of the situation.

93. The community of nations has not yet forgotten the
implications of the Israeli acts of terrorism committed in
violation of international law and in a challenge of the
principles of the Charter. In the long history of the
customary Israeli violations of the principles and purposes
of the Charter, some recent acts of State terrorism are alive
in one’s memory, such as the following-and I will cite just
a few because apparently the representative of Israel would
lie us here in this hall and outside this hall to forget about
who really introduced terrorism and who is practising
terrorism as a governmental policy.

86. Throughout the last few weeks, there was an endless
flow of statements made by Israeli officials to the effect
that the Syrian Golan Heights is a part of Israel-I am not
talking now about Lebanon, about terrorists-that the
Syrian Golan Heights, a hundred per cent Syrian territory,
is a part of Israel, and that the Israeli occupiers are there to
stay. Is this serious? Are these responsible statements from
a responsible Government? Such statements only reflect
the pathetic alienation in which the Israeli establishment
still finds itself. They mean that Israel did not give up its
political or sociological misconceptions that lie at the roots
of the upheavals in the region. If Israel has failed, as it
ostensibly did throughout a quarter of a century, to secure
peaceful conditions around it, it is because Israel insisted on
denying recognition and acknowledgement of the inalienable rights of the Palestinians. It is equally so because it
systematically endeavoured to apply a policy of brute force
against its neighbours to bring about their capitulation-and
this will not happen.

94. To begin with, the infamous Deir Yassin massacre on
9 April 1948-which I mentioned to the Council before.
That was not from Lebanon, it was in Palestine.
95. The mass execution of civilians in Kafr Kassem and
Qibya. That was not from Lebanon.
96. The heinous premeditated bombardment of Abu
Zaabal factory near Cairo. Also the notorious bombardment of Bahr El Bakar school, where only children were the
victims. That again was not in Lebanon or in any other part
of the world, except in my own country-only civilians.
The only reaction which the Council heard from Israel
simply came from Dayan when he said that he was sorry, it
was a mistake. And now the representative of Israel speaks
here about terrorism, about bloodshed, about the sufferings
of women and children.

87. Let Israel indicate a genuine will to recognize the
Palestinians, to restore their legitimate rights. Let it
announce here its intention to abandon the occupied Arab
territories, be they in Sinai, in Gaza, the Golan Heights or
the West Bank. Let it favour a policy of justice and equity.
Then, and only then, would there be no Kiryat Shmona and
no bloodshed.

97. The abduction on 10 August 1973 of the Middle East
Airways airliner over Lebanese air space, hence jeopardiiing
the lives of over 80 passengers and disrupting the continuity
and safety of international civil aviation. That act has been
condemned by the Council in resolution 337 (1973) and by
both the Council and Assembly of the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) in August 1973. Here again,
the representative of Israel speaks about airplanes and
incidents.

88. It is unfortunate that the Israeli officials seek to
conceal their blunders from their people by committing
further blunders. It is to be regretted that because of their
obstinacy and shortsightedness, any lesson goes unheeded
in Israel.
89. After the historic uprising of the Arabs on 6 October
1973, has not the time come for Israel to pause and ponder
for a while on how to achieve genuine and lasting peace?
The persistence of the classic and indeed outmoded policies
of Israel can only lead to more grievances and more sorrow.
Military adventurism does not and cannot produce peace.
By threatening Lebanon, Israei shall not reap any advantage
and the prospects for peace in the Middle East would be
further dimmed.

98. On 10 April 1973, Israel, with the assistance of its
agents who entered Lebanon-not agents who came from
Lebanon, but agents who entered Lebanon-by means of
falsified Belgian, British and German passports, launched a
raid on Beirut. This raid was not on Kiryat Shmona, but on
Beirut itself, and Israel thus committed State terrorism,
violating Lebanon’s sovereignty and assassinating Italians,
Lebanese and Palestinians, including three Palestinian
leaders who were sleeping in their homes during the night.

90. One is entitled to ask: But where does the solution to
this problem lie? The answer is not difficult. It lies in
9

99. The massacre in cold blood of 108 passengers on the
Libyan airliner which was shot down on 21 February 1971
by Israeli super-fighters when that airliner strayed over the
Egyptian territory of Sinai. Again, the ICAO Assembly
condemned that act by a resolution of 28 February 1973.

106. The PRESIDENT:
I invite the representative of
Kuwait to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
107. Mr. AL-SABAH (Kuwait):r Mr. President, it gives me
great pleasure to speak in this important international
forum on behalf of the Arab Group, which my country has
the honour of presiding over during this month. I should
like, at the outset, to thank you for the care which you give
to important international questions while presiding over
the proceedings of this body for this month. I feel
confident that your ability and long experience will
contribute immensely to the work of the Council during
the present month.

100. The attack by the military air forces of Israel on 28
becember 1.968 against the Beirut International Airport
which resulted in the destruction of 13 civilian and
commercial aircraft: That Israeli act of aggression was also
-condemned by the Council. And then he complains about
the Council.
101. The infamous Lavon affair-as far back as 1954
-where terrorist activities were executed in Egypt by Israeli
agents. They did not come from Beirut. They did not come
from any Arab country. They were not Palestinians. They
were Israeli agents.

108. This is not the first time this Council has been
convened to consider an Israeli aggression against the
territories of the neighbouring Arab States or the violation
by Israeli troops of international frontiers or the killing and
abduction by Israel of innocent civilians and the destruction of their houses. The annals of the Security Council
profusely reflect these barbaric Israeli acts of aggression
which the Council has repeatedly considered and for which
it has repeatedly condemned Israel. There is no need for me
to remind the Council of the successiveand repeated Israeli
acts of aggression throughout the past 25 years or its
condemnation of Israel 15 times during that period.

102. The letter bombs and parcels which the Israelis used
to send to the German experts in my own country-they
did not come from Beirut or from the Palestinians, they
came from Israel-to kill, not Palestinians, but German
citizens. They have the same right to live as the Israelis do.
103. Whatever the representative of Israel is trying to say
here, the war of annihilation waged by Israel is a national
policy of State terrorism against the Palestinian people by
murdering their national leaders and Intellectuals and all
those who inspire them to struggle for their nationhood by
the exercise of self-determination and hence resist the
aggressive policy of Israel. The Israeli acts of terrorism
committed against individuals living in foreign countries
include the assassination of Ghassan Kanafani in Beirut,
Mahrnoud Hamshari, and other Palestinians, Moroccans and
others from the Arab countries in Paris, Rome, Oslo and
elsewhere. That is State terrorism.

109. The recent Israeli aggression against six Lebanese
villages constitutes a violation of the national soil of a
sovereign State Member of the United Nations and consequently constitutes a violation of the principle of territorial
integrity which is one of the pillars of the Charter. It also
constitutes a violation of the principle of protecting
civilians and safeguarding their lives and property, which is
one of the principles of civilized conduct imposed by
membership in the world Organization. The new Israeli
aggression also constitutes a flagrant violation of the general
armistice agreement and a disregard for successive resolutions of the Security Council and its repeated warnings to
Israel. In view of Israel’s flouting of these principles and
resolutions, the Council is called upon now to implement
its previous warnings to Israel by taking the appropriate
steps and measures provided for in the Charter should Israel
persist in violating the frontiers of neighbouring countries
and violating their territories, killing their citizens and
destroying their property.

104. It is for Israel to decide-wisely, I hope-its future
course. One thii,
however, is certain. Should Israel
continue to persist in applying its worn-out policies of the
days before 6 October, then this will have adverse consequences on the chances of peace in the Middle East. The
responsibility for escalating military operations remains
with Israel, and so does that for the prospects for a peaceful
settlement of the Middle East problem.

110. The pretext that the violation by Israeli troops of the
Lebanese frontiers, destroying the houses and villages of
Lebanese, killing women and children in their homes and
abducting men from their lands; the pretext that these
aggressive, barbaric acts were reprisals for acts which took
place in Israel is merely an effort to invoke a principle
which has already been rejected by the Council.

105. Let me say the following to the Government of
Israel. The persistence of the Israeli aggression against
Lebanon would have direct adverse consequences on the
chances of peace in the Middle East. Furthermore, Egypt
‘.halds Israel responsible- for the escalation of its military
operations on the Syrian front. I should like to add, before
this body, that this escalation will have far-reaching
consequences on the chances of peace in the area and on
the prospects of a peaceful settlement. Israel before anyone
else must choose between war and peace. If Israel chooses
the latter, then it must stop forthwith all irresponsible
actions, which; I repeat, will no doubt stifle all efforts to
achieve a durable and just peace in the area. Let me be
more specific. The chances of a new era, to which the
representative of Israel referred repeatedly, of a peaceful
solution within the framework of Geneva, would be nil.
h

111. The Lebanese Renublic is not obliged to urevent the
occurrence of disorder; or disturbancesin territories occupied by Israel or under its control. Likewise, the
Lebanese Republic is not obliged to protect Israel from the
inevitable consequences resulting from its policy and its
1 The representative
of Kuwait
spoke in Arabic.
of the statement was furnished
by the delegation.

10

The English

text

._

then continued to refer to the assassins as “the heroes who
carried out the Kiryat Shmona operation”.
r.

conduct towards the ‘Palestinian people in rendering them
homeless and denying their right to self-determination,
occupying their lands, usurping their wealth and committing heinous crimes against their sons and treating them
as if they were a subhuman race.devoid of the national and
human rights recognized to all nations without exception.

119. It is a matter of general knowledge that Syria and its
capital are centres of other terrorist organizations as well.
120. If any additional proof were required that Lebanon’s
complaint today is unfounded, the fact that Syria, has
hastened to Lebanon’s support-Syria,
which in the past
few weeks has been carrying on a campaign of daily
aggression in defiance of the Security Council cease-fuesupplies that proof. Indeed, there could be no greater
stigma for the Lebanese case than to have the representative
of a Government such as the Syrian Government join it at
this table.

112. The refusal of the Palestinian people to accept this
lot which Israel seeks to impose on them and their
resistance to Israeli policy and conduct is a fundamental
right. The General Assembly has clearly recognized this
right in more than one resolution and at every one of its
previous sessions.
113. Consequently, it is not possible to hold Lebanon or
any other Arab country responsible for the consequences of
depriving the Palestinian people of their right to resist,
especially as the General Assembly has also recognized this
right. The responsibility falls on the shoulders of Israel
alone because it incited and still incites the Palestinian
people to struggle to regain their fundamental rights
usurped by Israel.

121. As for the statement made by the Foreign Minister of
Egypt, I can only express shock that he has come here all
the way from Cairo in order to explain away and to defend
those who committed the barbaric massacre at Kiryat
Shmona. This is reminiscent of the praise heaped by the
then Prime Minister of Egypt on the terrorists who
murdered the innocent passengers at Lod terminal; this is
reminiscent of the refusal by the Egyptian Government to
co-operate with the West German Government in a lastminute attempt to save the lives of the Israeli athletes at the
Olympic Games at Munich. It is regrettable that the Foreign
Minister of Egypt, a country with whom Israel has only
recently signed the first agreement since the October war,
should have chosen this moment to make this kind -of
pronouncement.

114. Finally, I must say that the recent events must impel
the Council, in addition to condemning Israel and rejecting
the Israeli pretext for justifying international crimes, to
implement the warnings already issued by the Council. The
Council is called upon to reaffirm its determination to
establish peace based on justice in the Middle East,
according to which the Arab countries will regain their
occupied territories and the Palestinian people will regain
their fundamental rights, which Israel has prevented them
from exercising and enjoying for the past quarter of a
century.
115. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative

.

122. Distortion has never helped to buttress one’s case,
not even in the Security Council. The Foreign Minister of
Egypt referred to the history of terrorism in Palestine.
Indeed terrorism goes way back: terrorism against Jews and
Arabs alike was first used in Palestine in the 1920s by the
notorious Nazi collaborator and war criminal Haj Amin
El-Husseini as a weapon for the perpetuation of his power.
After Israel’s emergence to independence, terror squads
were organized by certain Arab Governments, Egypt
foremost among them. The Arab Governments, having
failed to stifle the Jewish State at birth by military
invasion, decided to pursue warfare against it by terrorist
incursions that would sow bloodshed and destruction in the
midst of Israel’s civilian population.

of

116. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): There is an old Talmudic
saying: “The world rests on three things: truth, law and
peace.” I am afraid that in the statements of the last three
speakers there was neither truth, nor law, nor peace. I shall
refer only to a number of points raised by the representatives who have just spoken.
117. First of all, it is not surprising that Syria should have
chosen to join this afternoon’s debate. No matter how one
would have tried to avoid involving Syria in the atrocity at
Kiryat Shmona, the facts are too striking not to become
clearly visible. Indeed, the terrorist organization responsible
for the Kiryat Shmona massacre is in a sense a para-military
adjunct of the Syrian Baathist regime and the Syrian Army.
The Syrian Government has provided it with money and
arms since the end of 1971. In addition to its bases and
headquarters in Lebanon, it maintains centres, headquarters
and training camps in Syria, one of them at Ain Soukhna
north of Damascus, against which the Israeli air force took
action on 30 October 1972.

123. It was then, more than two decades ago, that the first
fedayeen units were established, trained by regular army
officers, equipped by the Egyptian and other Arab Govemments and dispatched on their macabre missions against
school-children in classrooms, travellers on highways and
peaceful villagers asleep in their homes. This had nothing to
do with the problem of Palestinian refugees; it had a great
deal to do with the refusal to recognize that the Jewish
people, like the Palestinian Arabs, also has a right to life in
independence and sovereignty.
124. As I pointed out in my first statement today, Arab
terrorism is rooted in an unsatiated appetite which is not
satisfied with the fact that there are already 20 Arab
sovereign States expressing the desire for self-determination, for sovereignty and for independence of the Arab

118. The Syrian reaction to the Kiryat Shmona massacre
was given on the morrow of the savage atrocity when the
Syrian government radio, commenting on what had happened in the Israeli townlet, stated: “The brave and daring
fedayeen operation in Kiryat Shmona is praiseworthy”
and
11

nation, and among these 20 Arab sovereign States there is
also an independent Arab Palestinian State-Jordan.
125. The Foreign Minister of Egypt found it appropriate
to say here that Israel should choose between war and
peace. Israel chose peace 26 years ago, when it called for
peace with its Arab neighbours, even while Egypt was
leading an invasion of Israel to try to prevent the people of
Israel from reemerging into the status of liberty which is
due to all nations of the globe.
126. Israel chose peace in 1948 while Egypt continued to
wage war. And it is certainly not by the kind of attitudes
that were reflected in the statement made now by the
Foreign Minister of Egypt that peace is built. He asked:
“Where does the solution lie? ” It is clear that it does not
lie in intemperate language of the kind to which he treated
this Security Council. It does not lie in distortion, which he
found it appropriate to include in his statement. It does not
lie in hackneyed acrimony and polemics. It does lie in a
joint constructive Israeli-Arab effort to build peace together
in a process of peace-making through quiet diplomacy, and
not through acrimony, vilification and vituperation.
127. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that I have just received a letter from the
representative of Saudi Arabia requesting to be invited,
under the pertinent Article of the Charter, to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote. If I hear no
objection I propose, in accordance with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure and the established practice
of the Security Council, to invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to participate, without the right to vote, in
the Council’s discussion.
At the invitation of the Resident, Mr. J. Baroody (Saudi
Arabia) took a place at the Council table.
128. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I had decided to be
content with having the Chairman of the Arab Group, none
other than the Emir of Kuwait, speak on behalf of all of us.
When I say “on behalf of all of us” I mean the members of
the Arab League. But I could not help but be impelled to
speak by the so-called right of reply by none other than
Mr. Tekoah. After all, any one of you members might say
that Mr. Tekoah did not allude to Saudi Arabia. Therefore,
why do I exercise my right of reply? It has been
Mr. Tekoah’s wont to call anyone who has been defending a
certain cause in the area an Arab terrorist. I happen to
represent an Arab State. Time and again he has tried to
indoctrinate, so to speak, the people of the host country,
where the mass media are to a large extent controlled by
Zionist interests, that it is the Arabs who are perpetrating
terrorism in the Middle East. This is an accusation that
cannot go unanswered.

whole town would rise up and take issue, even with the
Turkish Government, about what had happened and about
where the security was. And Mr. Tekoah has the temerity
to call us Arab terrorists. Would he have called the French
who fought the Nazi terrorists-the
map&-or
were they
liberators? By what yardstick does he dare to call the
Arabs terrorists?
130. I hardly need repeat what the Arab renresentatives
stated here this afternoon as to who began terrorism in
Palestine. I visited Palestine ln 1925 and none other than
Haj Amin El-Husseini, whom Mr. Tekoah referred to as
being the fomenter of terrorism, told me: “We have no
problem with our Jews”-meaning
the Oriental Jews-“but
with those Jews who are coming from beyond the seas, who
are not of our area and who want to dispossess us. We
would rather live in peace with them, if they do not come
with a flag.”
131. When I was on speaking terms with the Zionists ln
London in the 1930s~and even in 1944 in Town Hall on
43rd Street here in New York City-I remonstrated with
them and said: “If you would like to go to Palestine and
live in peace, motivated by religious sentiments, the
Palestinians will receive you with open arms.” But they
wanted a State in Palestine and a flag in Palestine, and they
got a flag in Palestine through the partition of that unhappy
land in 1947. Members of the Council know the reasons for
that. I am glad you are here, Mr. Ivor Richard-I knew your
Mr. Bevan. He was a Weishman like you are. He knew that
there would be no peace in Palestine if a new people were
injected into the area.
132. I want to remind the Zionists that many of the
indigenous people of Palestine originally had been Jews
who subsequently embraced Christianity and later some of
them embraced Islam. When they talk about the Jewish
people-there is no such thing as a Christian people, a
Jewish people, a Moslem people, a Buddhist people, a
Hindu people. There are cultures, languages, traditions. And
you wonder why the Arab world is in turmoil? It is not
dissimilar to the turbulence of the era of the Crusades,
because there is a new element-not because of religion-in
the body politic and body social of the Arab world that has
caused an abscess and a high fever.
133. I need not recapitulate what Theodor Herzl wrote in
his manifesto about the ingathering of all the Jews of the
world-whether
they like it or not they should come to
Palestine and Judaism is a nationality. They want to swing
back the pendulum of history. I knew French Jews who
were as French as any other Frenchmen, whether from
Normandy or Marseilles. I know American Jews who are
committed to Americanism. But the Zionists will not leave
them alone. They want to ingather them in Palestine and
we the Arab States should be meek and accept that new
traditions, new customs and new ways of developing our
area should be introduced in our midst. We should be docile
and consider Israel as a God-sent conglomeration of
financiers, industrialists and bankers who would benignly
develop our lands and make them prosperous.

129. Mr. Tekoah, I am told, came from Russia by way of
Shanghai. I happen to be an Arab of the area who was born
there 68 years ago. Not only before the First World War but
even during the First World War the Arabs of the Fertile
Crescent, as well as the Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula,
were known to be a very peaceful people. I remember how
aroused we were-whether
in Lebanon, Syria or any other
country-when
one person was killed by a criminal. ‘Ibe

134. Zionism has used a noble religion-Judaism-as
a
motivation for a political and economic end. And do not
12

think you can fool anybody here. The more I look at ‘this
problem, of which I have been seized for 50 years, the more
I fmd that most of the leadership-in
fairness to the
leadership of the Zionists-is secular and not religious. And
this leadership has played on the susceptibilities and the
sensibilities of Jews all over the world, indoctrinating them
by repeating that “God gave you Palestine”, “This is our
land”, “You are our people”. How many times, when
Mr. Eban was debating the question years ago and since,
have I asked: Since when has God been in the real estate
business to partition land in order to give it to one people
and deny it to another? But have you forgotten what King
David said in one of the psalms? “The earth is the Lord’s
and the fullness thereof ‘.

a psychosis? And put one psychosis against another
psychosis,and then you will seewonders.
139. Have you not learned anything from history? Do
you want to create anarchy in Lebanon, in Syria, in
Egypt-from the Atlantic, starting from the confines of
Morocco, to Iran? The Arab world is growing, leamingand advancingtechnologically and industrially. Why do you
not peer into the future and say: “What will happen to us if
we want to live amongstthe so-calledArabs?” ThoseArabs
are human beings.You call them liars. Good Lord, God has
chastised you time and again. Our own people were
chastisedwhen they lied, and He will chastiseyou when
you lie. And who are you to be judge and jury, as one of
my colleaguesmentioned before me?

135. It was a mistake to flock into Palestine from the four
corners of the earth. Your leadership is of Khazar origin
and not of Sephardic origin. The Jews of our area were
Arabs. They distinguished themselves in Arab culture. And
you come here and call those ethnologically Semitic people
of Palestine Arab terrorists. They occupied the Saudi
Arabian Embassy in Khartoum. As I was passing through
Paris last September I found them occupying our Embassy.
I wanted to go and talk to the Palestinians, but I was
detained by friends saying that I might endanger my life. I
did not care. You do not know the tenor and the temper of
the Palestinian people.

140. And now what will happen? Lebanon, for the tenth
or twentieth time-1 have lost count, perhaps for the
twelfth time-has been suffering. Lebanon, which hasnever
aggressedagainst its neighbours since the days of the
ancient Phoenicians, as they were called by the Greeks.
Whenever the land could not sustainthem they took to the
sea;they did not go and fight their neighbours.
141. And you come, you Khazars, originally from the
northern tier of Asia, outskirting the Caspian, settling in
what today is southern Russiain the first century-pagan
tribes, hardy tribes that were converted to Judaismin the
eighth century A.D. You come and claim “God gave us
Palestine”. That is fiction.

136. What do you want the Arab States to do, including
Lebanon which has 300,000 Palestinians and can hardly
boast of a population of 3 million? Do you want the
Lebanese to suppress them and fight them? They would
dissolve the Lebanese State. More than half the Lebanese
would rise up in arms against any Government that would
crush the Palestinians.

142. You want to live; you have suffered ashuman beings.
We commiseratewith you. You want to live amongstus?
Come and live amongst us-but not with that exclusivity
that smacksof racialism, that setsyou apart asif you were
the chosen people of God. Supposesome people do not
believe in God. I believe in God, but I do not believe God
discriminatesbetween one people and another. All right, I
am a Semite. I would not want to say I am one of the
chosenpeopleof God. It is unthinkable. But now you come
here to the Council and, instead of saying that you really
want peace you begin with a catalogue of incidents and
events. My colleagueswho spokebefore me alsobring their
catalogue of murderous incidents and events. With what
result? As I have said in previous speeches,this is only one
link in a long chain of events. And what will happen?
There will be another round, and another round. And, of
course, our friends the Americans and the Russiansdo not
want to have a confrontation. If they have a confrontation,
the whole world will blow up. Each one has 15.times
over-kill capacity in its arsenals.What do you want them to
do: champion you? And someof us Arabs-do you want
the Russiansto champion us? Do you want to pit those
super-Powersagainst each other so that the whole world
will blow up for the sake of the Zionist flag? Why do you
not comeand live ashuman beingsin our midst?

137. We in Saudi Arabia have them in responsible positions all over the land. But do you think they are sitting
quietly there? They want their country to be liberated.
They would rather not be officials or merchants in Saudi
Arabia, or Kuwait, or Morocco, or Libya, or Egypt or
wherever they may be; they would rather have their rights
restored to them. Do you Zionists want to create anarchy
in the Arab world? Have you not learned anything from
history? Since Alexander the Great-I shall not go back to
Nebuchadnezzar; these were Babylonians, Semites like us
the Greeks, the Seleucids-the Romans, the Saracens, the
Byzantines, the Seljuks, the Mongols, the Ottomans and, in
my lifetime, the British and the French all came. And now
it is your turn, it seems, from Central and Eastern
Europe-using
Judaism as a motivation for your movement-to come to occupy that land. And where are those
conquerers? They came, and some of them left traces, but
they are gone.
138. Why do you not as human beings forget that ism of
Zionism and live in humanism instead of setting yourselves
apart in every country? The Jews would like to identify
themselves with their country of birth or adoption, but you
do not leave them alone. You are creating a world problem,
and I feel sorry for every humanbeing-whether he be Jew
or Gentile-that is hurt, leave aside killed. When will you
wake up? Hasit becomea psychosiswith you? If you have
developeda psychosis,why should the Palestiniansnot have

143. Now one seriousword to the major Powers-because
I have been addressingmyself here to this Council since
1947 or 1948, and it is the same old story: condemnation-not only of Israel; I do not want to mention other
States that were condemnedin this Council. It seemsthere
is no will on the part of world powers to see that
resolutions of the Council are implemented. They are not
13

---

.

worth the paper on which they are written. The attitude is:
“Never mind; let those Arabs, or let those Jews, or, rather,
those Israelis get it off their chests”-and I am now
addressing the major Powers. ‘Well, what can we do? We
have to have detente to gain time”. I have been hearing this
thing for the last 26 years-“gain time, .gain time”-and
innocent people perish.
144. Do you’ think anybody is happy because .those
innocent Jews died across the border from Lebanon? Do
you think we are happy, either, that those three young men
who perpetrated the tragedy perished? They had mothers;
they had fathers; they were young. Where is the human
worth and dignity about which we talk?
145. I was amongst those who elaborated the Universal
1 Declaration of Human Rights when we were at the PaIais de
Chaillot in Paris. Human dignity, human worth, life,
security, liberty: these are becoming mere empty words.
And what are you major Powers going to do in the Council:
have another resolution by which you “deplore*’ or
“condemn”, or whatever other epithet you want, to resolve
the issue only to find that, perhaps a month from now, two
weeks from now, or six months from now another incident
will happen-as I said, another link in the long chain?
146. Why do you not stop making the Middle East the
chequerboard of your power politics? Of course, the
Middle East is not very far from the frontiers of the Soviet
Union; and the Soviet Union, because the detente seems to
be always in flwr, thinks-and the United States on its part,
also-that it has a special interest in the area. Why should
we be the victims? Both sides partitioned Palestine. I was
sitting at Lake Success when Palestine was partitioned, and
both the Americans and the Russians vied with each other
in order to partition Palestine, I will not go into it; I spoke
my head off about the pressure that was brought to bear by
international Zionism for the partioning of Palestine. That is
your baby, and it has grown into something with claws-I
will not say “a monster” because -they are human beings,
and because they could call me a monster too. I am not in
the habit of calling people names, except when they call me
names. Then I can call them bad names.

its policy of expansion, from its chauvinistic discrimination
and setting itself apart in the world.
. -_
,,‘..r
_‘.
149. Good Lord,,1 read in none other than .Thc Times that
there is a kosher aspirin. Have you ever heard of kosher
aspirin? That you should, in ‘other words, buy kosher
aspirin. I looked into the article. It seems they have some
rabbi-I like the cleanliness of the rabbis-to wash the
machinery before another batch of acetyl salicylate-or, by
its other name, aspirin-is made. And if you are good at
koshering, why do you not have your scientists-we all
respect and admire them-try and create a kosher political
atmosphere? Clean the atmosphere of New York; make it
kosher, because of the pollution. For heaven’s sake-setting
yourself apart. “I am a Jew”-so what? We have nothing
against the Jews. In fact, their old prophets are our own
prophets, whether we be Christians or Moslems. And you
come and talk of revenge.
150. I do not know where Moshe Dayan was born. But
what did Micah say? Do you remember? Where is
Mr. Tekoah? He left because he knows. Micah asked,
“Shall I come before the Lord with burnt offerings? ”
“No”, he said-1 am paraphrasing-“Come before thy Lord
not so much with burnt offerings.” And he means the
ritual-the ritual of any religion, not only of Judaism. “I
will tell you how you can gain favour with your Lord. Love
mercy, love justice and, walk humbly with thy Lord.”
151. Do you love mercy? Somebody mentioned Deir
Yassin. No oriental Jew would have perpetrated the Deir
Yassin tragedy, because he would have had mercy in his
heart. Do you love justice? Some of those people who were
massacred by you were originally Jews, as I have said. Do
you walk humbly with your Lord when you do the things
that have come under consideration?
152. I shall have occasion to speak again. I shall refrain
from speaking until after Mr. Tekoah has spoken; he has
not benefited from what I have said because he has
absented himself, but I am sure his colleagues will tell him.
We need peace, and there can be no peace unless there is
humanity and love. And remember what was said by one of
your co-religionists whose books I read when I was young.
He was born in Vienna, and was a friend of Theodor Herzl:
Stefen Zweig, the famous biographer. The late Herzl, who
was a journalist, asked him whether he would join the
Zionist movement, whether he would become a Zionist.
The humanitarian answered, “There are too many isms in
the world, and Zionism is one of them. What we need is
humanism.” That is the religion all of us should espouse.

147. Can you not tell Israel: ‘Content yourself with the
partition lines”-although
most of the Arabs think that
partition was unjust-“and we will guarantee your frontiers”?
148. And, a propos of guaranteeing the frontiers, there
were massacres in 1860 in Lebanon perpetrated not by the
United States but by the Western Powers. In 1860
thousands perished in Lebanon; they set brother against
brother. And then Lebanon gained special status guaranteed
by seven European Powers. I am not talking of larger
Lebanon, the Lebanon that emerged after the Second
World War or under the French Mandate. It is within the
power of the United States and Russia, which seem to think
that this is a vital area for them-and perhaps rightly so to
resolve this question. I am not taking issue now and
digressing into international arrangements among States,
whether in the past or in our present time. But lest all you
say here become an exercise in futility, we appeal to you,
the United States and the Soviet Union, to stop Israel from

153. I thank the Council for having been patient with me
in my exercise of my right of reply on what has been
termed “Arab terrorism”.
154. The PRESIDENT: The representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic wishes to speak in exercise of his right of
reply. I now invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make a statement.
155. Mr. KELANI (Syrian Arab Republic) (inrerpreration
from French): The representative of Israel used his right of
reply to reiterate, as usual, his allegations and his false14

.

hoods. In the annals of the Security Council, there are
thousands of pages containing obvious- arguments refuting
his falsehoods and allegations. But I shall limit myself to a
single point raised by the representative of Israel.
156. He accused my country of carrying
out daib
aggressions against Isiael. Since the Council-adopted its
resolutions 338 (1973) and 339 (1973) concerning the
cease-fue and calling for an immediate cessation of all
military activities and for the forces of both sides to be
returned to the positions they occupied when the cease-fire
came into effect, not a single day has elapsed without Israel
constantly and flagrantly violating that cease-fire.
157. The Israeli leaders obstinately violate the principles
of the Charter and the decisions of the Council and thus
continue jeopardizing peace and security in the region and
internationally.
The pretexts adduced are the so-called
concept of secure geographical boundaries, which is just
another subterfuge to force acceptance and justification for
Israeli expansionism and its annexation of the occupied
Syrian territory of the Golan Heights. But that theory tlies
in the face of the basic principles of the Charter, of justice
and of international law. The latest proof of that expansionist policy lies in a statement made by the Premier of
Israel, Mrs. Golda Meir, who merely twenty-odd days ago
reaffied
that Israel would not yield a single square inch
of territory on the occupied Golan Heights taken in 1967.
158. It is a fact that Israel has followed this policy of
intimidation and aggression with the use of force in order
to compel the Syrian Government to accede to its point of
view concerning the disengagement of the armed forceson
the Golan Heights in order to set the stage for the first step
in sanctioning the final annexation of the Golan Heights by
Israel.

.,

”

:.d,

159. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
Israel, who wishes to speak in exercise of his right of reply.
16$ Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I shall answer the statement
Fj ;he Syrian representative with a quotation from an
announcement made by his Foreign Minister and Deputy
Prime Minister, Mr.~Abdel Halim Khaddam. On 3 February
1974, at about the time when the daily Syrian aggressions
against Israel began, the Foreign Minister of Syria said,
’
“Syria is waging a war of attrition against Israel in order
to force her to continue and maintain her reserves and
paralyse her economy.”
Need I go further? I think the hour is late. Further proof
of Syria’s responsibility for the present situation of tension
along the Israeli-Syrian cease-fire line is to be found in the
reports by United Nations military observers.
161. The PRESIDENT: I call upon the representative of
Lebanon, who wishes to speak in exercise .of his right of
reply.
162. Mr. NAFFAH (Lebanon): In deference to you,
Mr. President, and to members of the Security Council, and
because of the late hour, I shall not use my right of reply at
this stage. I wish only to say that the statements made this
afternoon by the representative of Israel are full of
calumnies and slanders against my country, Lebanon, and
full of distortions of fact.
163. I reserve my right to speak in exercise of my right of
reply at a later stage.
The meeting roSe tit 6.50 p.mL

- ---- -.

--

-~_- -.

., ._ _. __^.. -..- -..- --

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

Unite1
Nations
publications
throughout
the world.
Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your
bookstore

or

LES PUBLICATIONS

from
bookstores
and distributors
write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
a : Nations
Unies, Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAIC

HOAYWiTb

HSAAHHR

OPI-AHZi

3A9HH

UNIES
et les agences
ou adressez-vous

Olj’6EASiHEHHhIX

HAI~HH

Hsnanm
Ooranmaqtw
CHYbenwnemblx
Hasun
16oxno
~ynn-rb
B I(HA~KKHLIX Idaraamiax
H arenrcraax
80 acex paRonax
rdapa. Haeonnre
cnpaanu
06 ns~amiax
a
aamen minmno~
uarasnne
mm nnmnre
no anpecy:
Opraxaaauria
O6%eAHHeHIibIx
Ham&
Cercuas no nponaxe
HaaarinR.
Hbro-Hopx
HJ-IH Xezieaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes
de1 mundo.
Consulte
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

NACIONES

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones

SU.S. 2.00
