S/PV.8875

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8875th meeting

Wednesday, 6 October 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Lipand
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Ms. Evstigneeva
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-27636 (E)
*2127636*

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

related deaths. And in locations where screening has
been possible, we are seeing acute malnutrition rates
that remind us of the onset of the 2011 Somalia famine.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ethiopia to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this opportunity
to brief the Security Council concerning the situation
in Ethiopia.
In August, I warned the Council that a humanitarian
catastrophe was unfolding before our eyes in Ethiopia
(see S/PV.8843). Since then, the crisis has worsened.
Up to 7 million people in Tigray, Amhara and Afar are
now in need of food assistance and other emergency
support. That includes more than 5 million people in
Tigray, where an estimated 400,000 people are living
in famine-like conditions.
Humanitarian aid is still not reaching the area
at anywhere close to the levels needed. The only
option for road transportation into Tigray is along the
Afar corridor, where movements are being severely
restricted by official and unofficial checkpoints,
insecurity and other obstacles and challenges. Some
minor improvements — which are welcome — did not
change the fundamental nature of the problem.
Vital fuel supplies continue to be blocked, as are
essential medicines and equipment. Humanitarian
organizations continue to lack the cash they need to
operate and to pay their staff. Access to electricity
remains precarious. Millions of people are cut off from
communications networks and vital services, such as
health care. And fighting in Amhara is another serious
impediment to humanitarian access. As a result of all
those facts, life-saving humanitarian operations are
being crippled.
Our colleagues on the ground are sharing
increasingly alarming eyewitness testimony of the
suffering, including growing accounts of hunger2/17

06/10/2021

We are also seeing deeply worrisome reports of
violations and human rights abuses perpetrated by
all sides. I am particularly concerned about chilling
accounts of violence against women and children,
including sexual and gender-based violence.
The United Nations is also actively engaged in
humanitarian support to other regions of Ethiopia with
pressing needs. The country is facing an immense
humanitarian crisis that demands immediate attention.
All efforts should be squarely focused on
saving lives and avoiding a massive human tragedy.
That makes last Thursday’s announcement by the
Government of Ethiopia to expel seven senior United
Nations officials — most of them humanitarian
staff — particularly disturbing. That unprecedented
expulsion should be a matter of deep concern for us all,
as it relates to the core of relations between the United
Nations and Member States.
As expressed in the note verbale to the Mission of
Ethiopia from the Office of Legal Affairs, which was
shared with the Council a few days ago:
“A declaration by a State that an official of the
United Nations is persona non grata accompanied
by a request or demand that the Secretary-General
consequently relocate that official out of its territory
is not consistent with the Charter obligation and is
inconsistent with the fundamental principles of the
international civil service enshrined in the Charter.”
The procedure on such matters is clear. As the note
verbale states, if the Government has any specific issues
concerning any individuals, the relevant information
should be brought to the attention of the United Nations
to enable the Secretary-General to make a decision as
to whether any appropriate actions should be taken. In
other words, there is a proper, formal procedure — and
that procedure was not followed.
The United Nations will continue to play its
mandated role and work with the Government of Ethiopia
and with local and international partners to support
millions of people in need of humanitarian assistance
in Tigray, Amhara and Afar and across the country, in
full accordance with the Charter of the United Nations
and General Assembly resolution 46/182.
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

I now call on the Ethiopian authorities to allow us
to do that without hindrance and to facilitate and enable
our work with the urgency that the situation demands.
That means ensuring that visas for incoming personnel
from United Nations entities and from our partners are
issued quickly so that we can augment our capacity.
The delays we have witnessed in the recent past are
another obstacle to effective humanitarian aid. It also
means that personnel inside the country be treated with
dignity and respect as they carry out their vital work.
Our focus remains on ensuring humanitarian
assistance to every Ethiopian who needs it. We must
save lives and restore livelihoods. I urge the Government
to allow the unrestricted movement of desperately
needed fuel, cash, communications equipment and
humanitarian supplies into all regions in need. I appeal
to all members of the Security Council to do all they can
to support those calls and to unify behind the efforts of
the United Nations and its partners in Ethiopia.

S/PV. 8875

emphasizing the need for harmony, national unity,
development and peace. I urge all sides to grasp the
peace initiative from the African Union and its High
Representative for the Horn of Africa, His Excellency
Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo.
Without peace, the challenges facing Ethiopia will
intensify and further destabilize the broader Horn of
Africa region and beyond. We have an obligation to
avoid such a dire outcome at all costs. Dialogue is the
foundation for peace, and peace is the foundation for
a stable and prosperous future. Let us all work to help
secure that future for all Ethiopians and the peoples of
the region.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.

In August, here in the Council, I called for action
on several fronts. As I said then,

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his important and timely
briefing today.

“all parties must immediately end hostilities
without preconditions and seize the opportunity to
negotiate a lasting ceasefire; foreign forces should
leave the country; unrestricted humanitarian
access to all areas in need must be guaranteed;
humanitarian workers must be respected and public
services must be re-established.” (S/PV.8843, p. 3).

Ireland joined others in calling for this meeting
because we believe that the recent expulsion of United
Nations leadership from Ethiopia should be addressed
publicly by the Security Council. That expulsion is
particularly egregious in the context of the continuing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in northern
Ethiopia, which cannot be excused or ignored.

That appeal is even more pressing today. Any further
escalation of the conflict would only make the situation
more tragic.

In a closed meeting on Friday, Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths told us that 5.2 million people
require humanitarian assistance and 400,000 are living
in famine-like conditions in Tigray. Eighty per cent of
pregnant and lactating women are acutely malnourished.
Perhaps most worrisome, child malnutrition rates are
similar to those recorded at the onset of the Somalia
famine in 2011.

Important political events have taken place in
Ethiopia since my most recent Security Council briefing
in August. Just two days ago, a new Government of
Ethiopia, led by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, was
inaugurated. The mandate conferred by the election
carries a responsibility to unite all Ethiopians, to focus
on the future and to return Ethiopia to its place as a
strong, unified, stable leader among the nations of the
world. I encourage the newly inaugurated Government to
use that mandate and work with renewed determination
to be a Government for all.
I welcome the Prime Minister’s inauguration
remarks prioritizing an inclusive political dialogue
involving all segments of the community to resolve
the ongoing challenges facing the country. I also
note the many messages from African Heads of State

Let us be clear about what that means. Ethiopian
children are starving. People are dying because they
cannot access food, water or basic health care. That is
not a situation caused by natural disaster. It is caused
by those who continue to choose the path of war.
The ongoing effective blockade of Tigray, including
systematic efforts to prevent medicines and medical
supplies from reaching the region, is costing lives. As
the conflict spills over into the neighbouring Amhara
and Afar regions, the humanitarian crisis is spreading.
In those circumstances, we need a fully operational,
unimpeded and proportionate humanitarian response

21-276363/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

that reaches all those in need of assistance and
protection in northern Ethiopia and across the country.
The decision of the Ethiopian Government to
expel senior United Nations staff undermines its
working relationship with the United Nations when
it needs it most. As outlined by the European Union
High Representative on Monday, it risks the further
weakening of efforts to bring relief to millions of
Ethiopians in need at a moment when aid organizations
already face serious impediments in carrying out
their mandates.
Unfounded allegations and consistent targeting of
humanitarian workers put all humanitarian work in
the country at risk and are unacceptable. Safeguarding
the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence ensures that aid can
arrive where and when it is needed the most. As
other members of the Council have previously done,
I call on all parties to the conflict to depoliticize
humanitarian aid.
The Secretary-General made it clear to us when we
last met (see S/PV.8843) and in his recent letter to the
Council that the conflict in Ethiopia is spiralling out of
control. We were warned of that months ago. Ireland,
a long-standing friend of Ethiopia, has been drawing
attention to the situation and its inevitable consequences
for the people of Ethiopia since we joined the Council.
We ended our last meeting with the Secretary-General
in agreement that quiet diplomacy should be given a
chance. Despite such efforts, we continue to receive
reports of inflammatory and dehumanizing language.
As the Secretary-General said today, any further
escalation of the conflict would only make the situation
more tragic.
We continue to receive reports of conflict-related
sexual violence and atrocities, denial of access to
humanitarian aid and attacks on humanitarian workers,
which may amount to war crimes. Those who commit
such violations must be held accountable. Before we see
the tragedy worsen even further and see more young
people needlessly lose their lives to the war, all sides
must accept that there can be no military solution to
the crisis.
Let me reiterate the three key asks of many of us
here in the Council.
First, we are asking all parties to the conflict
to immediately ensure full, unimpeded and safe
4/17

06/10/2021

humanitarian access, as required in accordance with
international humanitarian law. The blockade on Tigray
must end now, and basic services must be restored.
Food, medicines and fuel cannot be restricted to just
a fraction of what is required. Without immediate
and scaled-up action, the horror of mass mortality
caused by political decisions will once again tragically
overwhelm parts of Ethiopia.
Secondly, we all want to see an immediate cessation
of hostilities between all parties to the conflict, and for
them to come to the table to negotiate a lasting ceasefire.
Eritrean forces also need to withdraw from Ethiopia.
Thirdly, we need a political solution to the crisis in
Tigray, as well as an Ethiopian-led inclusive national
dialogue that promotes the unity of Ethiopia.
The African Union (AU) has a crucial role to play
in engaging with all sides, supporting mediation efforts
and ultimately assisting Ethiopia in finding a solution
to the crisis. Ireland looks forward to hearing an update
from the AU High Representative for the Horn of
Africa, Mr. Obasanjo, at the next available opportunity.
In conclusion, Ethiopia’s Government has a historic
opportunity, and indeed a new mandate, to turn the
tide towards peace and steer the country back onto the
hopeful path of just a few years ago. We are approaching
the one-year anniversary of the conflict. It must end. It
is time for Ethiopia’s leaders to deliver the peace, unity
and prosperity that all Ethiopian people deserve. The
alternative is a catastrophic, prolonged and expanding
conflict that threatens to destroy Ethiopia’s ambition
for a prosperous and peaceful future. We simply cannot
afford to miss this opportunity.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I thank Secretary-General
Guterres for his briefing. We wholeheartedly support
the statements he made today and last Thursday
(SG/SM/20944) and the letter he sent to the Security
Council on this matter.
Estonia strongly condemns the decision by
the Government of Ethiopia to expel seven United
Nations officials, including humanitarian and human
rights officials. Those personnel members were
responsible for the invaluable and difficult work of
delivering life-saving aid to Ethiopia and helping the
Ethiopian people to cope with the unfolding man-made
humanitarian catastrophe. It is essential that United
Nations humanitarian operations be immediately
allowed to resume in full capacity in Ethiopia.
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

United Nations humanitarian operations are guided
by the principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality
and independence, and they have our full confidence.
Any accusations against United Nations workers and
humanitarian personnel of breaches of those principles
should be accompanied by clear evidence. There is a
process for handling any such concerns, and that has
not been followed. The expulsion of the United Nations
officials from Ethiopia undermines the efforts to
alleviate the dire humanitarian situation and further
endangers the work of humanitarian aid workers in
northern Ethiopia, where they are already facing
violence and harassment.
All parties to the conflict have an obligation to
facilitate safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all
areas affected by the conflict and ensure the protection
of humanitarian workers, in line with international
humanitarian law. We urge the Government of Ethiopia
to take further steps to ensure sustained access for aid
convoys to Tigray, restore public services in the region
and allow fuel, food and medical supplies to enter.
Only 11 per cent of needed aid entering the region
is unacceptable.
At the same time, we call on the Tigray forces
to stop their offensive in the neighbouring Amhara
and Afar regions and facilitate humanitarian
assistance to hundreds of thousands of displaced
people. Furthermore, we underline the importance of
concluding the joint investigation into the allegations
of human rights violations and abuses, in particular
against human rights workers. The continued reports of
such violations and abuse of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law are deeply
worrisome, and accountability for such violations must
be ensured.
Lastly, I reiterate that there is no military solution
in Tigray. The newly appointed Cabinet in Ethiopia
has a mandate from the people and an obligation
to bring about a prompt and peaceful solution to the
conflict and also ensure that the people of Ethiopia
do not die of hunger. I urge the parties to immediately
cease hostilities, ensure the protection of civilians
and minimize the humanitarian consequences of
the ongoing conflict. That should be followed by an
inclusive and credible political process, with the aim
of national reconciliation. In that context, we also
reiterate the role of the African Union and encourage
its continued engagement in this crisis.

S/PV. 8875

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I thank the Secretary-General for his presence
among us today and his briefing. I commend the
commitment of the United Nations personnel deployed
in Ethiopia.
In view of the humanitarian emergency, France
expects that the Ethiopian authorities will cooperate
fully with the United Nations and all international
partners. France condemns the Ethiopian Government’s
decision to declare seven United Nations officials as
personae non gratae France and the European Union
will continue to support the civilian populations that
have been hard hit by the conflict, as attested to by their
financial contributions to the humanitarian response in
the north of the country as well as the Humanitarian Air
Bridge, set up by the European Union, France and Italy.
Such support means that United Nations and all
humanitarian personnel will be able to work in complete
safety while compliance with humanitarian principles
and international humanitarian law is fully respected.
France calls on the Ethiopian authorities to ensure full
humanitarian access for all humanitarian personnel and
uphold their own commitments. We will not tolerate any
form of intimidation or violence against humanitarian
personnel. Lifting the current blockade is a prerequisite
for any resolution to the conflict under way.
In this case as in others, only a political solution
will allow the crisis to end. France fully supports the
three points recalled today by the Secretary-General.
A ceasefire is crucial to responding to the emergency
and creating the necessary conditions for a settlement.
France calls once again for the verifiable and controlled
withdrawal of Eritrean forces from Ethiopian territory,
in particular from western Tigray. In return, we call
on the Tigrayan forces to make goodwill gestures and
withdraw to within the regional boundaries of Tigray. A
compromise must finally be reached with the Amhara
forces on the border dispute between the two regions
within the framework of the Constitution.
Reconciliation cannot be achieved without
combating impunity. France is looking forward to
the report of the joint investigation by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission,
scheduled for publication on 1 November. We take note
of the Ethiopian Government’s pledge to identify and
prosecute the perpetrators of human rights violations.

21-276365/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

Lastly, France will support all efforts for dialogue
aimed at preserving the unity and territorial integrity
of Ethiopia. France takes note of the commitment by
the Prime Minister to organize an inclusive national
dialogue, and we call on him to initiate it as soon as
possible. France also supports the efforts of President
Obasanjo, who will be received tomorrow in Paris. We
encourage all international actors, beginning with the
United Nations, to provide all the support necessary for
his success.
Ms. Juul (Norway): On Friday, we were shocked by
Ethiopia’s expulsion of seven United Nations officials,
and we are profoundly dismayed today by Ethiopia’s
failure to reverse that untenable decision. The manmade humanitarian crisis in Ethiopia is getting worse
by the day, and famine most probably has already taken
hold. In that context, the expulsion of essential United
Nations officials — key humanitarian leaders — is
deeply disturbing.
It is unacceptable that Ethiopia chooses to obstruct the
important work of crucial United Nations organizations.
The United Nations is delivering life-saving aid to
people in desperate need — impartially and in all parts
of Ethiopia. The United Nations is not a party to the
conflict in Ethiopia. On the contrary, Norway firmly
believes in the impartiality and professionalism of the
United Nations and its personnel. We are steadfast
in our support of the United Nations, and we wish to
reiterate our request that Ethiopia immediately reverse
the expulsion of the seven staff members.
To end the catastrophic humanitarian situation in
Tigray, the Federal Ethiopian authorities, the Tigray
People’s Liberation Front and other armed actors
must ensure the rapid, safe and unimpeded access
of humanitarian aid to the region. They must do
their utmost to facilitate the work of humanitarian
organizations and their personnel and fully respect
international humanitarian law by providing security
for humanitarian workers.
We deplore the ongoing vilifying comments made
regarding humanitarian actors. Such hateful rhetoric is
dangerous and is putting lives at risk. Such a situation
hits those who are already vulnerable the hardest,
including those facing famine, the displaced and, more
often than not, women and children. Indeed, the denial
of humanitarian access during conflict is one of the
six grave violations against children. There must be a
response to that.
6/17

06/10/2021

Norway also condemns in the strongest terms the
reported killings of civilians and the widespread and
systematic use of sexual and gender-based violence. All
alleged atrocities and violations by all sides must be
documented and investigated. Accountability for such
acts is critical to prevention, deterrence and justice for
victims and survivors.
Norway strongly supports the appointment of
former President Obasanjo as the African Union High
Representative for the Horn of Africa, and we ask the
parties to actively engage with the High Representative.
At a bare minimum, the Security Council should be clear
in support of his endeavours and unified in its support
for the United Nations, its humanitarian agencies and
its staff. If we cannot do that, we have failed.
We must urgently, and with one voice, speak out in
support of that, together with an immediate ceasefire,
a political dialogue, unimpeded humanitarian access
to all those in need and an immediate reversal of the
expulsion of the seven United Nations officials.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
I start by paying tribute to the United Nations
staff around the world who work tirelessly to deliver
humanitarian aid, assessing and addressing needs on
a neutral, impartial basis. I think that we all agree that
their life-saving activities should not be politicized and
that Member States should make every effort to support
and facilitate their work.
That is why the United Kingdom, like many of
Ethiopia’s partners, was deeply disappointed by the
Government of Ethiopia’s decision to expel seven
United Nations officials. The strength of international
concern over that is apparent in the fact that more than
40 countries quickly joined a joint statement delivered
by the United Kingdom at the Human Rights Council in
Geneva on 4 October.
As we have heard and seen, the humanitarian
situation in Ethiopia is critical. The United Nations
personnel who were expelled were dealing with
the increasingly acute needs of those in the north of
Ethiopia. The United Kingdom Special Envoy for
Famine Prevention and Humanitarian Affairs visited
Tigray and Amhara last week and saw first-hand the
United Nations efforts to respond to that emergency.
The removal of key United Nations personnel will
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

have a direct impact on the ability of the international
community to deliver vital humanitarian assistance.
Unfortunately, that is not the only obstacle to
delivering aid in northern Ethiopia. I want to reiterate
our urgent call for the Tigray People’s Liberation Front to
cease its military campaign and act in the best interests
of ordinary people in Tigray. Likewise, I reiterate our
call on the Federal Government to work with the United
Nations and other international partners to eliminate all
barriers to humanitarian access.
As we have heard before, that needs to include
urgent action to restore telecommunications and
banking services in Tigray, enable deliveries of food and
fuel and expedite the issuing of visas for humanitarian
response staff. Time is of the essence. Thousands of
truckloads of food and medicine and millions of litres
of fuel need to move into Tigray in order to avert deaths
on a catastrophic scale before the end of this year.
Finally, we know that there will be no military
solution to this conflict. It is past time to stop fighting
and, as the Secretary-General urged, it is time to start
talking. We welcomed the African Union’s decision to
appoint former President His Excellency Mr. Obasanjo
as an envoy in August. I reiterate our full support for
him, the African Union and the United Nations as
they work to end this tragic conflict and to help those
in need.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing to us this afternoon.
First and foremost, I want to offer solidarity and
support to the United Nations during this trying time
as they work to save lives. We called for this urgent
meeting today given the events that have transpired
over the past week. The Ethiopian Government’s
reckless expulsion of seven key United Nations
officials, including the Head of UNICEF, the Head
of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and a senior official from the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, is an affront to the Security Council,
the United Nations and all Member States, as well as
our shared humanitarian principles.
There is no justification for the Government
of Ethiopia’s action — none at all. Neither did the
Government of Ethiopia follow the proper process
for calling attention to its concerns, as we heard

S/PV. 8875

from the Secretary-General today. What could be the
justification for expelling the United Nations focal point
responsible for ensuring that food and humanitarian
assistance reach those who need it? What could be
the justification for expelling the United Nations focal
point for the well-being of children in Ethiopia? There
is none. As the Secretary-General made clear, United
Nations personnel cannot be declared personae non
gratae.
The United Nations is impartial. The United Nations
is neutral. In Ethiopia, it is delivering life-saving
aid, including food, medicine, water and sanitation
supplies, to all those in desperate need. It is conducting
important human rights investigations, in conjunction
with the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. The
United Nations personnel barred from Ethiopia must be
allowed to return immediately. Their work is urgent,
and some of those dedicated public servants are trying
to stop a famine before it is too late.
The unprecedented expulsion of those United
Nations officials follows a pattern of escalating
obstruction. In July, an Inter-Agency Standing
Committee Emergency Directors Group from
Headquarters was detained while trying to conduct an
assessment mission in Tigray. Three non-governmental
organizations were suspended shortly thereafter.
Those actions are calculated to intimidate and silence.
However, they do not accomplish that goal; instead,
they push starving people to the brink. The conditions
in Ethiopia today rival those in Somalia in 2011 during
the onset of the famine. We remember that famine
with horror. More than 250,000 people died despite
the warnings. That did not have to happen. Starvation
should never happen, and the famine does not have
to happen.
The Government of Ethiopia can choose to
reverse its course on the expulsion of the United
Nations personnel, and all parties to the conflict can
immediately facilitate the full and unimpeded access of
humanitarian aid.
If these calls for humanitarian access continue
to go unheard, then the Security Council must act.
We can ensure that the United Nations is allowed to
deliver impartially. We should immediately consider
all tools at our disposal, including a Security Council
resolution, to facilitate this — to save lives and promote
international peace and security.

21-276367/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

Our concerns about the situation in Ethiopia go
beyond this immediate humanitarian crisis. Three
years ago, we were talking about Ethiopia as one of
the fastest growing countries in Africa, full of promise
and on the cusp of a major economic and political
transformation. Less than one year ago, the current
situation was going to be a two-week law-enforcement
action. Now we are hearing countless horrific accounts
of rape being used as a weapon of war, of violence
against civilians, of hunger being used as a tool of war,
of famine looming and of United Nations staff being
expelled, with Ethiopians killing Ethiopians by the
thousands by the day.
The conflict is spilling over into the Amhara
and Afar regions, creating even more instability and
humanitarian need. As the Secretary-General said in
his letter to us this week, this conflict is spiralling
out of control. This is a path Ethiopia’s leaders are
choosing: to join the club of the most isolated countries
in the international community and to let their own
people down.
The United States has repeatedly called for
the Ethiopian Government and the Tigray People’s
Liberation Front — as well as associated regional
militias — to end the fighting now, allow humanitarian
access and move towards a negotiated ceasefire
immediately and without preconditions. The Council
should fully support these efforts too.
There is still hope. It is not too late to stop this
descent. The United States believes that there must be
a political solution to this conflict. We are investing
heavily in diplomatic efforts, in partnership with the
African Union and the region, to address this crisis and
end the carnage. We also believe that there will be no
lasting peace in Ethiopia — and the country’s broader
project of democratic and economic renewal will not
be realized — until there is a wider dialogue, one that
includes all Ethiopians, on the future of their State.
Today’s meeting therefore represents an important
step towards addressing the immediate and wider crisis
in Ethiopia, but it cannot be the last. Make no mistake:
the Security Council’s credibility is at stake in this
regard. We must take appropriate actions — we must
take all appropriate actions — to keep civilians safe,
promote accountability for human rights violations and
abuses and deliver humanitarian relief to Ethiopians
in dire need. We must all call on the Government of
Ethiopia to reverse the expulsion immediately.
8/17

06/10/2021

Time is of the essence. Lives are on the line. If ever
there was a moment to step up and do our duty, it is now.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I speak on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — Kenya, the
Niger and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1) on this important crisis in Africa.
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia.
We meet today in response to the decision by the
Federal Government of Ethiopia to declare seven United
Nations officials working in Ethiopia as personae non
gratae. In the light of the previous concerns, we have
expressed in calling for maximum access to enable
humanitarian aid to reach Ethiopians in need, we
noted the personae non gratae notice with concern. We
say this with the full understanding of the duties and
obligations that all humanitarian actors must respect in
the conduct of their work.
Nevertheless, the risks of a large-scale famine,
which, to a great extent, is being prevented by the aid
delivered by the organizations to which the expelled
individuals belong, raises serious concerns. Even
within their sovereign rights, Governments should
observe their domestic and international humanitarian
law obligations. The rights of the Ethiopian people to
receive aid in this dire emergency are of the highest
moral and legal character.
We strongly urge the Government and the United
Nations to undertake every effort to resolve any
differences and get back to ensuring that aid is delivered
to Ethiopians in desperate need. Concerns regarding the
expelled individuals should be thoroughly considered
on the basis of substantiated evidence and within a
frank and genuine dialogue between the Ethiopian
Government and the United Nations. Discussing these
issues publicly may not be constructive in the current
circumstances, nor will it alleviate the suffering of the
populations affected by the conflict in northern Ethiopia.
The efforts of quiet diplomacy, undertaken through
constructive dialogue between the United Nations and
Ethiopia, are our best option for addressing this issue.
In the meantime, we believe that priority must be given
to the continuity of unfettered humanitarian assistance
to needy people in northern Ethiopia. We welcome the
renewed commitments of both sides in this regard.
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

With a newly established Government in Ethiopia,
we reiterate that peaceful dialogue and democracy
are the best mechanisms for the resolution of serious
political differences. Today, we cannot help but return
to this position, noticing, with pain as fellow Africans,
the suffering of our Ethiopian brothers and sisters in
Tigray and elsewhere in the country.
The highest priority at this stage, therefore, is to
declare an immediate ceasefire to allow for unrestricted
humanitarian access to the affected population and for
the re-establishment of public services in all the conflict
areas. We recognize and welcome the Government’s
extensive efforts deployed since the beginning of
the conflict to deliver humanitarian aid and enhance
humanitarian access. We emphasize the need to
continue efforts towards the unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance and strongly encourage the
Ethiopian authorities to fulfil all their commitments in
ensuring humanitarian outreach to the people in need.
The A3+1 recognizes the important role of United
Nations humanitarian agencies and all humanitarian
actors, which should be supported. In this context,
we call on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. They should also
ensure the respect and protection of all humanitarian
personnel and United Nations and associated personnel,
as reiterated in resolutions 1502 (2003) and 2175 (2014).
At the same time, we underline the obligation of all
humanitarian personnel, United Nations personnel and
associated personnel to observe and respect the laws of
the country in which they are operating, in accordance
with international law, including the principle of
non-interference. Further, we stress the importance
of humanitarian organizations upholding the core
principles of neutrality, impartiality and humanity
in their humanitarian activities, in full respect of the
sovereignty, political independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of the host State, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations.
The humanitarian situation in northern Ethiopia
is part of a much bigger and complex crisis that is
unfolding, with a potential regional spillover effect
that may threaten peace and security in Ethiopia and
beyond. With the hostilities expanding to the Amhara
and Afar regions, it is clear that there could be no
military solution to this crisis and that taking up guns
will only protract the conflict.

S/PV. 8875

The A3+1 therefore calls on all Ethiopian parties to
cease hostilities and engage in discussion with a view to
concluding a comprehensive and permanent ceasefire
that would pave the way for an inclusive Ethiopian-led
dialogue and to national reconciliation.
We also strongly call for the withdrawal of all
non-Ethiopian forces from Tigray and the standing
down of all militias from neighbouring federal states.
The African Union has a major role to play to help
Ethiopians in their reconciliation efforts so that they
can protect their unity and territorial integrity and
recover Ethiopia’s status as an anchor of regional peace
and stability.
In that regard, we support the active engagement of
His Excellency President Obasanjo, African Union High
Representative for the Horn of Africa, in promoting peace
and security in the region through political dialogue,
particularly in Ethiopia. We call on all stakeholders and
international partners to extend every possible support
to the High Representative and to allow the continent
the necessary space to resolve its challenges with the
support of the international community.
In conclusion, we, the A3+1, reaffirm our respect
for, and commitment to, the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Ethiopia.
We stand in solidarity with our sister nation at this
trying moment in its pursuit of peace and stability.
We hope that the new Government effectively lays the
foundations of a new beginning, especially by carrying
forward the robust national dialogue on peace, cohesion,
development and unity in diversity.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Ethiopia, Ambassador Taye Atskeselassie Amde, at
today’s meeting.
At present, the humanitarian needs in the
Tigray region continue to grow. Food insecurity and
displacement remain acute problems. United Nations
humanitarian workers have overcome various challenges
and delivered much-needed humanitarian supplies to
many Ethiopians. China appreciates those efforts.
The United Nations and other international
humanitarian agencies should follow humanitarian
relief guidelines, help Ethiopia increase its humanitarian
response capabilities, expand the scale of relief efforts
and prevent the deterioration of the situation. We call

21-276369/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

on the international community to provide a steady
stream of resources to the Ethiopian Government in
order to fill the humanitarian gap as soon as possible
and ensure that aid reaches all people in need.
The armed conflict poses enormous challenges
to humanitarian operations. We have noticed that
the Ethiopian Government is earnestly assuming the
primary responsibility for humanitarian assistance and
has proactively launched its own relief operations. The
Government is also actively responding to the concerns
of international humanitarian agencies. Tremendous
efforts have been made in that regard. At the request
of humanitarian agencies, the Ethiopian Government
simplified administrative procedures on multiple
occasions, reduced the number of checkpoints, scaled
up land and air transportation and allowed humanitarian
agencies to bring communication equipment into
conflict areas. Those measures have contributed to
expanding humanitarian access and ensuring the
delivery of relief supplies, and those efforts should
be acknowledged.
China regrets the disagreements regarding the
seven United Nations humanitarian personnel and
noted the respective positions and concerns expressed
by the Ethiopian Government and the United Nations.
We believe that a solution can be found only through
dialogue and consultation. The priority now is to engage
in quiet diplomacy in order to prevent a deadlock.
We encourage both sides to maintain contact, fully
exchange information, work together to seek a solution
and avoid undermining mutual trust and cooperation.
The international community should create a favourable
atmosphere for a settlement through dialogue.
A new Government has just been inaugurated in
Ethiopia. China expresses its welcome and support to
the Ethiopian Government in its continued efforts to
achieve and safeguard national unity, promote political
dialogue and work collectively to build a brighter
future for the country. The international community
should continue to provide assistance to Ethiopia while
respecting the country’s sovereignty and ownership.
China supports African solutions to African
problems and welcomes the good offices of former
President Obasanjo, in his capacity as the African
Union High Representative for the Horn of Africa. The
United Nations and the African Union should strengthen
collaboration and jointly play a constructive role in
promoting peace and reconciliation across Ethiopia.
10/17

06/10/2021

I also wish to point out that the unilateral sanctions
imposed against Ethiopia and Eritrea by certain
countries are in breach of international law and the
basic norms governing international relations and
will serve only to disrupt a political settlement. Such
sanctions should therefore be lifted as soon as possible.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres for his briefing and for sharing his
assessment on the humanitarian situation in Ethiopia.
I also welcome the Permanent Representative of
Ethiopia, Ambassador Taye Atskeselassie Amde, to
today’s briefing.
The humanitarian situation in northern Ethiopia
has been adversely impacted by the continuing conflict
that began in November 2020. Despite the unilateral
ceasefire declared by the Ethiopian Government to
facilitate humanitarian aid to the affected population,
during recent months the fighting has continued and
expanded to the neighbouring regions of Tigray. The
Ethiopian population, particularly women, children and
the elderly, continue to suffer from the ongoing conflict.
In this difficult situation, the efforts of humanitarian
agencies, led by the United Nations, have provided
relief to the population. The northern part of Ethiopia
will continue to need a steady stream of supplies for
humanitarian relief in the coming months.
In that regard, we note with appreciation the
work of humanitarian workers and agencies. The
unfortunate expulsion of senior United Nations officials
coordinating the humanitarian assistance, however,
could adversely impact the humanitarian situation. It is
therefore important to de-escalate the situation through
engagement and dialogue.
While we are not aware of the circumstances
that led to the recent developments, we are of the
view that the founding principles of humanitarian
assistance — humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence — should always guide humanitarian
action. Humanitarian assistance and humanitarian
workers should also be sensitive to the situation on the
ground and adhere to those principles, especially when
the host State is facing a complex politico-military
situation internally.
We have noted the reports of diversion of
humanitarian assistance by armed groups and others.
Such incidents need to be investigated and corrective
measures taken. It is imperative that the United Nations
and its agencies continue to work closely with the
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Government of Ethiopia to ensure that aid reaches the
needy in a timely and satisfactory manner. They cannot
work at cross-purposes. We hope that both the United
Nations and the Ethiopian Government will make
purposeful efforts to resolve expeditiously all issues
in the interest of the affected population. We should
eschew the politicization of the matter.
India has consistently underscored the importance
of mutual trust, engagement, dialogue and reconciliation
in addressing all issues related to the ongoing conflict
in northern Ethiopia. In that context, we welcome
the formation on 4 October of a new Government in
Ethiopia, led by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed, and
his announcement of an inclusive national dialogue.
We urge all sides to exercise restraint and support the
Ethiopian Government’s call for opening channels of
communication to build trust among themselves. We
also welcome the voice of support for the Ethiopian
Government by the African leaders who attended the
swearing-in ceremony of Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed
on 4 October. Work on the restoration of normalcy in the
lives of the people in the affected regions must begin.
To that end, we reiterate our call to find an amicable
political solution in a manner that serves the interests
of all the people of Ethiopia, in line with the provisions
of its Constitution.
In conclusion, the political and economic stability
of Ethiopia is paramount not only to the Horn of
Africa but also to the entire African continent. The
international community and the African Union
need to support all efforts that are directed towards
humanitarian assistance and an early resolution of
the conflict. India reiterates its strong commitment
to the unity, sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Ethiopia.
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his insightful briefing. I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to our meeting today.
We are all concerned about the deteriorated
humanitarian situation in Tigray, especially its
consequences for, and adverse impacts on, the daily
lives of millions of people. As responding to such
humanitarian needs in Ethiopia is the most urgent task
that requires the international community’s support, we
emphasize the critical role of United Nations agencies,
including UNICEF and the United Nations Office for

S/PV. 8875

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and other
international partners in that regard.
We therefore regret the recent decision taken
by the Government of Ethiopia to declare seven
United Nations officials personae non gratae. We are
concerned that the decision will affect the humanitarian
operations in the country. In that context, we call for
dialogue, trust-building and cooperation among the
Government of Ethiopia, the United Nations and other
parties to overcome those differences so as to restore
humanitarian assistance.
We welcome some progress in the practical
activities carried out by the United Nations, as well
as humanitarian organizations and international and
regional partners, for tens of thousands of Ethiopians,
including people in Tigray, over the past few months.
The first round of food distribution to people in the
Afar and Amhara regions was recently completed by
the World Food Programme.
However, we understand that access to, and the
distribution of, humanitarian assistance still remains
far from satisfying the needs of urgent assistance in
many parts of Tigray. The conflict has resulted in other
systemic issues that may lead to further deterioration.
As Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths said,
5.2 million people are in need of food aid, including
400,000 people living in famine-like conditions.
In the face of such dangers, we call on all parties to
fulfil their obligations under international humanitarian
law to prevent a famine from occurring. It is crucial to
ensure the safe, effective and efficient delivery of, and
access to, humanitarian assistance in the Tigray region
and the bordering areas.
We also share the concerns of the international
community, including those expressed by the SecretaryGeneral, about the alarming levels of violence against,
and killings of, civilians, including women, children
and humanitarian workers, as well as the destruction of
infrastructure indispensable to the civilian population
in Tigray. Those acts of violence are unacceptable and
run counter to international humanitarian law. We call
for an immediate cessation of hostilities, upholding
responsibilities under international humanitarian law
and ensuring the protection of civilians, especially
women and children.
The crisis in Tigray stems from complicated
political, historical and ethnic reasons. That

21-2763611/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

background requires the relevant parties to engage in
dialogue and reconciliation rather than further hatred,
thereby creating favourable conditions for starting an
Ethiopian-led political dialogue.
It is high time for a compromise to be reached
towards a comprehensive solution for the sustained
stability and development of Ethiopia, based on the
basic principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
We call on the Ethiopian authorities and all
other parties concerned to give the highest priority
to the interests of their people. In that process, the
international community, including the Security
Council, should support all efforts to that end, in full
respect for the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity of Ethiopia.
The conflict and the situation in Tigray have had
certain impacts on the region that require the relevant
parties to exercise self-restraint. In that connection, we
support the constructive engagement of neighbouring
countries and regional organizations for peace, security,
national reconciliation, national unity and development
in Ethiopia.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his briefing. We also welcome the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia among us.
We note with concern the Ethiopian Government’s
claims that led to the expulsion of the United Nations
officials. We also heard the very clear and comprehensive
position of the Secretary-General.
Before addressing the arguments put forward
by the two sides, the first thing to note is that the
Ethiopian Government’s decision has a direct impact
on the humanitarian work on the ground. We are a
month away from marking a year of conflict that has
already resulted in thousands of deaths and millions
of displaced persons, in addition to the more than
5 million people in need of food assistance. The work
of the Organization’s agencies, funds and programmes
can mean the difference between life and death for
thousands of people.
In addition to the impediments to humanitarian
work, we are concerned about the impact that the
expulsion of a staff member of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights may
have on the joint investigation being carried out with
12/17

06/10/2021

the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission, including on
the planned 1 November deadline for the delivery of the
final report.
Mexico remains firmly committed to the United
Nations and is convinced that its humanitarian
operations are at all times guided by the principles of
humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence
set out in General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 1991,
which remains the framework defining the terms under
which humanitarian assistance can be provided.
However, when a State or a party to a conflict
consents and agrees to the provision of certain
humanitarian assistance, the latter cannot be subject to
discretionary decisions. On the basis of that consent,
the parties concerned must allow and facilitate
unrestricted access for humanitarian assistance. It
should not be forgotten that it is the protection of the
civilian population that is at stake.
The International Court of Justice, in its famous
judgment on the Nicaragua case of 27 June 1986, found
that the provision of strict humanitarian assistance
in another country cannot be considered as undue
intervention or in any way contrary to international law
as long as it complies with the principles of the Red Cross,
inter alia, that it be provided without discrimination.
It is worth recalling that, in discharging those
humanitarian duties, United Nations agencies and their
officials enjoy immunities under the 1946 Convention
on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations,
to which Ethiopia is a State party, precisely so that such
officials can carry out their work without interruption
and for the benefit of those most in need.
We therefore stress that any accusation against
the Organization or its staff, under the Convention I
have cited, must be supported by concrete facts and
be followed by consultations with the Organization, as
well as by an investigation that respects due process,
including, inter alia, the presumption of innocence,
which is a general principle of law.
Humanitarian access in Tigray is a necessity for
millions of people, and the provision of humanitarian
assistance must not be politicized. That is why we call
on all parties in Ethiopia to ensure the unrestricted
flow of food, medicine, fuel and other goods necessary
to protecting civilians and meeting their basic needs.
We support the call for a humanitarian ceasefire
and the withdrawal of actors outside Tigray and
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

neighbouring regions to ensure that humanitarian
assistance reaches all those in desperate conditions. It is
time to put an end to the suffering of millions of people.
We also support regional efforts to seek a solution to the
conflict, and, in that regard, any progress on mediation,
whether by the newly appointed African Union High
Representative for the Horn of Africa or by some other
actor, is particularly welcome.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Secretary-General
António Guterres for the information he has provided
on developments in Ethiopia. We also welcome the
participation in today’s meeting of the Permanent
Representative of Ethiopia to the United Nations,
Mr. Taye Atskeselassie Amde.
First and foremost, we would like to congratulate
all Ethiopians on forming a new Government on
4 October. The conclusion of the electoral process is
confirmation that the Ethiopian political forces are
ready for dialogue with a view to finding solutions
to problems that the whole population of the country
is facing, developing the State and promoting peace
and well-being. The Russian Federation will continue
to support the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence of friendly Ethiopia.
We continue to follow very closely the development
of the military and political situation in the north of the
country. We still believe that the Tigray dossier is an
internal Ethiopian affair and that the national capacity
for reconciliation has not been exhausted. We also
believe that it is within the power of Addis Ababa to
solve its own problems with the support of international
community, first and foremost, representatives of the
region. In this regard, we support efforts by the recently
appointed African Union High Representative for the
Horn of Africa, Mr. Olusegun Obasanjo, to find a
resolution. We know that he has already assumed his
duties and has established initial contacts with the
Ethiopian capital. We are looking forward to concrete
results from this work.
At the same time, we believe that deliberately
ratcheting up international rhetoric as regards a
situation in the north of the country and spiralling
politicization of the humanitarian file only hinder
pan-African organizations’ mediation efforts. Bearing
in mind the seriousness of the dispute and the
complex historical context, this will not be a speedy
process. Indeed, only coordinated efforts and diligent

S/PV. 8875

diplomatic work, including through bilateral channels,
can bear fruit. We are certain that pressure involving
the Security Council, threats regarding the adoption
of resolutions, the imposition of unlawful unilateral
sanctions and the creation of a toxic atmosphere in the
media is counterproductive.
With regard to the humanitarian situation in the
north of Ethiopia, we fully share the concerns relating
to the growing humanitarian needs there. The region,
which was food insecure even before the crisis, is
currently in particularly dire straits. The ongoing
violence in Tigray and in the neighbouring regions
of Amhara and Afar are seriously compounding the
broader situation and provoking new flows of internally
displaced persons and refugees.
There are also specific problems that require an
urgent response and which, as we believe, can and
must be resolved immediately. First and foremost,
we refer to the situation surrounding the World Food
Programme trucks stranded in Tigray. We believe it is
unacceptable to block transport vehicles from United
Nations humanitarian organizations, let alone use them
for other purposes.
We have said on many occasions at the Security
Council and in other forums that the media focusing
exclusively on the humanitarian situation in Tigray
leads to the politicization of this issue and creates
further divides within Ethiopian society. We cannot
diminish the hardships of people living in the Afar
and Amhara regions who are affected by conflict and
have not been suffering any less than those in Tigray,
and neither can we ignore problems in other regions of
the country.
Russia has always supported United Nations
humanitarian efforts. We express our gratitude to
humanitarian and medical workers who, in difficult
and often dangerous conditions, provide urgent
humanitarian assistance to all those who need it, in
the most remote corners of the planet, including in
Ethiopia. Every year we make financial contributions
to the work of a host of related programmes and funds.
We intend to continue that assistance and rely on our
experience and expertise of the humanitarian wing of
the United Nations.
We regret the decision made last week by Addis
Ababa to expel United Nations officials. Of course, such
action will not help resolve the severe humanitarian
crisis in the country. At the same time, we would call

21-2763613/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

for not over-dramatizing what happened. We believe
that through mutually respectful dialogue, Addis Ababa
and the Secretariat will be able to re-establish trust and
amicably solve the disagreement that has arisen, in the
interests of the people who need assistance.
In that regard, there remain many questions,
particularly with regard to steps that were or were not
taken to prevent a negative turn of events. Accordingly,
it is particularly important to tread carefully and learn
from this incident, so similar incidents do not occur
in future.
We insist, just as we do for other situations around
the world, that humanitarian assistance be provided fully
in line with General Assembly resolution 46/182 and
the United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian
assistance, as well as international law and national
legislation. We must once again state the vital need for
credible and constructive dialogue and close cooperation
with the sovereign Ethiopian authorities, who continue
to cover the lion’s share of all humanitarian needs in
Tigray and in neighbouring regions.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm Russia’s
readiness to continue to support the normalization of
the situation in Ethiopia and in the Horn of Africa as
a whole.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I congratulate Kenya on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. Mr. President, I would like to
convey Ethiopia’s best wishes to you in the discharge
of your responsibilities. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General.
I do not want to hide my surprise at the convening
of today’s Security Council meeting. We find it
incomprehensible that this body would be discussing
the decision of a sovereign State, which was exercised
within the domain of international law and its sovereign
prerogative. There have been several instances where
Governments had expelled United Nations staff and
other diplomatic envoys for so many disclosed and
undisclosed reasons. Did the Council ever meet to
challenge such a decision? To the best of our recollection,
I think not. We truly hoped Council members would
have the insight to leave this matter to the Government
of Ethiopia and the United Nations.
14/17

06/10/2021

At the outset, I would like to register our position
that the Government of Ethiopia is not under any legal
obligation to provide justifications or explanations for
its decisions.
We are obliged to make reference to the basic norms
of the United Nations and its humanitarian operations.
The General Assembly resolution on the guiding
principles for humanitarian assistance provides that,
“[t]he sovereignty, territorial integrity and
national unity of States must be fully respected
in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.” (General Assembly resolution 46/182,
annex, para. 3)
The most fundamental element of the sovereignty of
States has to do with their prerogative to determine
who enters, remains in and exits their territory. When
we appeal for support from, or to work with, the United
Nations or other humanitarian operators, we do not
forgo that fundamental right.
Therefore, the Government will continue exercising
its due right and responsibility on monitoring and
screening all humanitarian operators in Ethiopia. Any
suggestion to the contrary is unacceptable. As to the
legality of the decision, leaving the details aside, the
United Nations itself can be quoted for arguing that
decisions regarding personae non gratae apply to the
United Nations as well.
When it comes to the obligations of United Nations
staff, the rules are unequivocal. Article 101, paragraph 3,
of the Charter provides that all staff members employed
by the United Nations must have the “highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity.” In the context
of humanitarian operations, integrity entails adhering
to the principles of neutrality, impartiality, humanity
and independence. It also requires respect for the laws
and police power of the host State.
Furthermore, they must respect the United Nations
code of conduct, which provides the following, inter alia.
First, United Nations staff shall neither seek nor
accept instructions from any Government or any other
source external to the Organization.
Secondly, staff members shall not use their office
or knowledge gained from their official functions for
private gain, financial or otherwise, or for the private
gain of any third party, including family, friends and
those they favour.
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

Thirdly, staff members shall not communicate to
any Government, entity, person or any other source
any information known to them by reason of their
official position.
Those cardinal principles, for the safeguard of
which United Nations staff enter a solemn oath and
swear on their conscience, mean that, in the presence
of contradicting views, competing interests, political
pressures and all forms of temptation, United Nations
staff will remain neutral. In the presence of deceit,
coercion and vested interest, they will preserve their
independence and, in the existence of considerations
that may appear to be reasonable bases for decisions,
United Nations staff will be guided by humanity only.

S/PV. 8875

The white paper contained unfounded allegations,
including the use of hunger as a weapon, and proffered
the need to apply resolution 2417 (2018). The former
Head of OCHA was made to report to the Council that
152 Ethiopians had died due to the food shortage, while
such an incident had never occurred. They made up
data and went to the extent of disinforming this global
security organ. About two weeks ago, they reported
that 12 individuals had died of hunger in an internally
displaced persons (IDP) camp, while the organization
running the IDP camp — itself an international
organization — came out and stated that the allegations
were simply false.

The United Nations staff that Ethiopia expelled
side-lined their oaths, the rules of professional conduct
and the principles of humanitarian assistance. Let me
cite a few examples, which we selected with great care
and caution from that multitude of transgressions.

They implored United Nations agencies to conduct
investigations outside of their mandate to meet the
instructions of the TPLF to generate exhibits matching
the false allegations released in the media and to
supposedly substantiate a case before the International
Criminal Court.

Needless to say, the misconduct of a few individuals
does not speak to the professional and able United
Nations team in Ethiopia, or anywhere else. Rather, it
speaks to the serious ethical dilemma that has existed
in the humanitarian operation in Ethiopia for the
past eleven months. Those individuals executed the
conspiracy created by the Tigray People’s Liberation
Front (TPLF) and its members to generate an image of
extreme casualty that warrants so-called humanitarian
intervention and rescues the criminal group. To use
their own words, they were looking to create a Darfurlike situation.

They did not even show mercy to victims of genderbased violence. First, in violation of the protection
protocols for safe houses for victims of gender-based
violence, they invited TPLF armed men and militia to
the safe houses. In addition, they exposed the safe house
before international media and invited interviewers and
interrogators to safe houses to intimidate victims and
elicit testimonies. That is happening in a city where
close to 13,000 detainees and prisoners were released
with absolute impunity and thousands of armed
youths are roaming the streets, already creating terror
for residents.

Suddenly and overnight, they created 1 million
victims of a health disaster. While the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in the
country reported that 2.8 million people were in need
of emergency health assistance, the main OCHA office
was made to report 3.8 million, only because that level
of inflation of misery was needed to elevate the crisis
to a level 3.

Those individuals recorded a United Nations staff
meeting and gave a copy to the TPLF for the sake of
providing it with material it could use to back up its
false allegations. Those individuals openly celebrated
and made other United Nations staff cheer for the socalled victory of the TPLF and the withdrawal of the
National Defense Force from Tigray. They openly
conducted activism in support of the TPLF — a group
proscribed as terrorist — and made political statements
to instigate violence and inflame the conscience of
the Ethiopian public. They assisted in the syphoning
of food, medicine, communication equipment and all
other essential supplies and equipment and its transfer
to the TPLF.

They categorized the situation in Tigray under level
5 of the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification,
based on data collected from a region with a population
of 6 million by a single Food and Agriculture
Organization staff member and interpreted by two
United Nations staff members who were Ethiopian and
open TPLF supporters based in Rome. They assisted
in the fabrication of false allegations submitted to the
Security Council as a white paper.

Right before their expulsion, they were facilitating
the deportation of ethnically segregated groups of
Ethiopian migrants from Saudi Arabia and their

21-2763615/17

S/PV.8875

Peace and security in Africa

resettlement in third countries in Africa for training
and preparation before joining the TPLF in combat.
In effect, a parallel United Nations operation that
completely side-lined the United Nations country
office was created. Apart from the selfish interests of
individuals, we have evidence that the entire endeavour
was created by a higher and more sophisticated
motivation that seeks to undermine the Ethiopian
State and rescue the TPLF. Ethiopia deeply resents
that experience.
Expulsion was not our primary course of action.
On multiple occasions, we explained our concerns to
United Nations officials. On 8 July, the Deputy Prime
Minister and the Foreign Minister of Ethiopia wrote
a letter to the Secretariat explaining, in great detail,
the misconduct by United Nations staff that required
corrective measures. We also summoned some of those
individuals and warned them to halt their misconduct.
Nevertheless, the transgressions continued unabated.
We believe that United Nations agencies and
their honourable roles are undermined by those few
individuals. In that connection, we request that, first
and foremost, the United Nations deploy new staff
who are aware of, and will adhere to, their professional
code of conduct. The overwhelming majority of
United Nations staff fulfil that requirement and would
distance themselves from political mercenaryism.
The Government of Ethiopia stands ready to assist the
expeditious deployment of the replacements.
More important, we request the United Nations
to review all the reports, statements and assessments
that were produced with regard to the situation in
Ethiopia in the past year. The reports and the data and
information that they contain must be verified. Such
an audit is necessary for us to build and sustain trust
and advance the exemplary cooperation between the
Ethiopian Government and the United Nations.
The United Nations has been an invaluable
development and humanitarian partner for Ethiopia for
many years. I want to underscore the great value that
we attach to the support of the Organization during this
difficult time. We also believe that the majority of the
United Nations staff with whom we have the privilege
of working have the requisite integrity and decency.
I would like to reassure the Council that the new
Ethiopian Government, established with the popular
will and mandate of the Ethiopian people to herald
16/17

06/10/2021

peace and prosperity, stands ready to work with the
international community to address long-standing and
current challenges. We welcome and value initiatives
by leaders of our region and the African Union and the
support of Secretary-General António Guterres towards
sustaining peace and stability in Ethiopia. We assure
the Council that we will facilitate the visa requests.
No one should doubt the Ethiopian tradition of
hospitality. What we are asking for is respect, dignity,
honesty and open and candid discussion. As we have
in the past, we will always extend our hand to all those
who treat us with dignity and equality. That is the story
of Ethiopian life since the time of the League of Nations.
The President: I once again give the floor to the
Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: If there is anything
that I have cherished during this entire period, it has
been maintaining a very effective and operational
relationship with the Government of Ethiopia and
its Prime Minister — to the extent that I received
much criticism in the global media accusing me of
being biased towards the Ethiopian Government. It is
therefore in a spirit of complete ease that I would like
to ask the representative of Ethiopia as to whether any
written document has been provided by the Ethiopian
Government to any United Nations entity concerning
any of the eight United Nations staff members who
were expelled? I would like to receive a copy of that
document, because I have no knowledge of any. It would
be very useful for me to determine if documents were
provided to the United Nations without my knowledge.
I would then have to investigate what happened within
my Organization.
I therefore ask the representative of Ethiopia to
provide me with the copy of any written documents
by the Government of Ethiopia about any of the eight
who were expelled by Ethiopia. In that regard, I recall
that I told the Prime Minister twice that, if there were
concerns about a lack of impartiality on the part of
the United Nations staff, he should inform me of such
situations so that I could investigate them. I asked
the Prime Minister twice. To date, I have received no
response to that request.
For us, the question is therefore very simple. We
believe that Ethiopia does not have the right to expel
those eight United Nations staff members. We believe
that Ethiopia is violating international law in doing so,
and we are ready to cooperate with the Government
21-27636

06/10/2021

Peace and security in Africa

of Ethiopia concerning any situation in which it feels
that any staff member of the United Nations is not
behaving in total impartiality and independence under
humanitarian law and in accordance with established
humanitarian principles.
I say to the representative of Ethiopia that we want
to cooperate with the Government of Ethiopia because
we have only one agenda in Ethiopia, and that agenda is
the people of Ethiopia — Tigrayans, Amharans, Afaris
and Somalis. The people of Ethiopia are suffering. We
have no other interest but to help stop that suffering.
The President: The representative of Ethiopia has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I now
give him the floor.

S/PV. 8875

Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I hear the Secretary-General
loud and clear. I fully understand and acknowledge
the support that he has given to our people, and my
Government as well. We know where his heart is. He
has approached the issue concerning us with candidness
and candour, and we highly respect that. As to the asks,
I will definitely communicate with the appropriate
authorities, and we will do so, of course, expeditiously.
As I made clear in my statement earlier, this is an issue
that has to be dealt within Ethiopia and the United
Nations. Whatever documents are available will be
submitted to the Office of the Secretary-General.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

21-2763617/17
