UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1884 th

MEETING:

29 JANUARY

1976

JUN 2

9

@I4

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

... .. .. ... .. ... ... . ... .. ... ... .. .. .. .

1

agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The Situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/J 1918). . . . . . . . . . . __. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l884)

Adoptionofthe

S/PV. 1884

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com.bined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Officio1 Records c~f the Security Council.
The -date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are .published in yearly volumes of Resdutions
and
Dcvisions
c~f the Semrity
Corrncil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1884th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 29 January 1976, at 3.30 p.m.
.

Mr. .Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania!.

President:

(Kuwait), Mr. Minikon (Liberia), Mr. Cissh (Mali).
Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius), Mr. Harriman (Nigeria), Mr. Jaroszek (Poland),
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Botha (South
Africa), Mr. Driss (Tunisia) and Mr. Petric? (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved for them at the side
c>f the Council chamber; Mr. Kumanu (President of
the United Nations Council for Namibia)
and the
members of the delegation took places at the Security
Council table.

Present:
The representatives of the following
States: Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan,
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United ,Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The first speaker is the Commissioner for External
Affairs of Nigeria, Mr. Joseph N. Garba. I therefore
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.

agenda (S/Agenda/l884)~,

1. Adoption of the agenda

2. GThe situation in Namibia:
., Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1918)
The meeting

3. Mr. GARBA (Nigeria): Mr. President, may I, on
behalf of the Nigerian Government, express to you
and to the other members of the Security Council,
my gratitude for allowing my delegation to participate
in the present meeting of the Security Council on Namibia. It is a source of particular satisfaction to me
that you are presiding over the Council when it is
engaged in this critical debate on a subject of the
greatest concern to Africa. You represent a country
with which Nigeria enjoys close brotherly relations.
Your own personal devotion to the issues of decolonization is well known. I am, therefore, confident
that with the necessary co-operation from your colleagues on the Security Council progress will be made
on Namibials long and tedious journey to self-determination.

was called to order ut 3.55 p.m.
&!optiap

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The #uation in Naqnibia:
Letter dqted 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Councii (S/11918)

1. .The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions taken previopsly [/88&h-1883rd
meetings],
I invite .the representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh,
Burundi, Cuba, Egypt, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Nigeria, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
South Africa, Tunisia and Yugoslavia to. take the
places ‘reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the usual understanding that they will
be invited to take a place at the Council table whenever they wish to address the Council. I also invite
the President and members of the delegation of the
United Nations Council for Namibia to take their
places at the Council table.

4. The problem of Namibia has been discussed again
and again by the Security Council and the General
Assembly, to the point where the issues involved are
by now very clear. If the problem has not been solved, it is not because the Security Council is unaware
of how it can be solved. In fact a number of resolutions and decisions have been. adopted which, if
implemented, would have caused Namibia to take its
place among the comity of nations; however, these
resolutions have been consistently ignored by South
Africa, confident of course that the Council will be
prevented from taking enforcement action. We are,
today, discussing this problem without any clear indication, except our hope, that at the end of the Council’s deliberation we shall have moved any closer to
achieving the goal that we have all set for Namibia,
which is our joint responsibility. Since 1968 the Secu-

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeriu). Mr. Karim (Bangladesh).
Mr. Mikunugu
(Burundi). Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Camaru (Guinea), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Murpaung
(Indonesia),
Mr; Hall (Jamaica),
‘Mr. Sharqf(Jordan).
Mr. Maina (Kenyu), Mr. Bishara
1
:

rity Council has adopted some 11 resolutions. Some
of the provisions of these resolutions were reaffirmations of previous decisions; others sought to find
alternative means of resolving the problem. All of
them were peaceful in aim and scope. Some of them
were directed towards South Africa specifically,
while others were directed to other Members of the
United Nations, especially those with the capacity
and influence to help in the peaceful transformation
of those decisions into reality. There is very little by
way of concrete results to show for these efforts.

-Thirdly, in paragraph 1 of resolution 283 (1970),
the Council
“Requests all States to refrain from any relations
-diplomatic, consular or otherwise-with South
Africa implying recognition of the authority of the
Government of South Africa over the Territory*‘,

-Fourthly,
the Council,

“Calis’~pon all States to support and promote
the rights of the people of Namibia and to this end
to impI&nent fully the provisions of the, present
resolution”;

5. I have said earlier that South Africa has ignored
all the decisions of the important organs of the United
Nations, thus bringing all of us who are concerned
with the -problem closer and closer to virtually abandoning this peaceful effort. The statement of the
South African representative earlier in this debate
once more disappoints and hurts those who have
already decided that South Africa will never agree to
transfer power peacefully to Namibians. This is a
development which is of extreme concern to my Government, and no doubt the Council has heard over
and over again a number of delegations express the
same concern.

-Fifthly; in paragraph 5 of resolution 310 (l972),
the Council
Yir;1~ upon all States whose nationals and corporations are operating in Namibia notwithstanding
the relevant provisions of Security Council resolution.283 (1970) to use all available means to ensure
that such nationals and corporation conform, in
their policies of hiring Namibian workers, to ‘the _..
basic provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Bights”.

6. ,’ It is equally a source of concern and amazement
to my Government that those States best placed to
assist South Africa in abandoning its more and more
aggressive attitude ,and actions have consistently
failed to demonstrate their expressed commitment to
a peaceful solution of this problem and in some cases
have even worked against the aim. They have consistently pronounced unequivocally on self-determination, only to demur when the issues bear on
Namibia and southern Africa. My delegation notes,
with interest, the statement on behalf of the nine
countries of the European Economic Community by
the delegation of the Netherlands [S/11945]. It is the
fervent hope of the Nigerian Government that, in
addition to the encouraging de’marche they have made
to .the usurpers of Namibia, these countries will
equally direct their attention to the provisions of other
resolutions on Namibia which have called for specific
actions by all Member States.

8. It is if historical interest to note that Namibia
was originally entrusted to the British Government
for that Government to promote to the utmost the
material and moral well-being and the social progress
of the inhabitants of the Territory. This Mandate was
subsequently transferred to the Government of South
Africa ,without the agreement and against the opposition of :Namibians. We understood that this action
was motivated by the desire of the victor nations to
encourage the development of the Namibian people
as a whole. In this respect, Namibia was not the only
Territory so mandated by the United Nations. Cameroon, Tanganyika and Togo were similarly entrusted
to Britain, France and other allied associated Powers.
Namibia is, however, the only Territory still under
colonial bondage, thanks to the collusion of certain
world Powers with the racist regime in Pretoria.
9. South Africa has, systematically and in spite of
the constant opposition of Namibians and of the international community, transported its racist policy and
practice-to Namibia. It has had no difficulty in continuing to flout the resolutions of the United Nations
because of the continued support of its Western allies,
who, for economic reasons, are unwilling to use their
undoubted influence on South Africa in the direction
of achieving self-determination for Namibia. In this
connexion, the Nigerian Government calls on the
United States, Japan and other allies of South Africa
in Europe to assume their responsibility and compel
South Africa to comply with the just demands of the
United Nations on Namibia.

7. j I should like to refer, in particular, to the following
decisions of the Security Council:
-First,
Council

in paragraph 15of resolution 301(197I);

in paragraph 7 of resolution 269 (1969), the

“Culls upon all States to refrain from all dealings
with the Government of South Africa purporting
to act on behalf of the Territory of Namibia”;
-Secondly,
the Council

in paragraph 6 of resolution 282 (1970),
f,
“Culls upon all States to observe... the arms
embargo against South Africa and to assist effectively in the implementation of the present resolution”,

10. In his statement [1881st meeting] the representative of the racist regime of South Africa qualified the
2

.

.

1

1966 International Court of Justice Judgment* as the
only valid decision, because it-was made by eminent
judges elected by the General Assembly. The representative of South Africa, however, refused to accept
the later 1971 advisory opinion of the Court*, which
was adopted by no less qualified jurists, which con. firmed the earlier decisions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council that provided the basis on
which the United Nations terminated the Mandate
of South Africa over the Territory. The inconsistency
and illogicality of such double-talk is obvious.
11. Nigeria, as a member of the United Nations
Council for Namibia, has demonstrated ‘its commitment to the aims and purposes of the Council, and we
will continue to support the work of the;‘Council.
Furthermore, Nigeria has equally clearly expressed
and demonstrated. its support for the struggle of the
Namibian people against South Africa, and this support will continue and will be further diversified for
‘~, as long as South Africa continues illegally ,to occupy
Namibia.
.‘.
12. The attitude of Nigeria to those countries that
continue to support South Africa in the maintenance
of its illegal presence. in Namibia will continue to be
re-examined and our relations with them will become
increasingly dependent on their actions concerning
the problem, not only in Namibia but in southern
Africa as a whole. In this regard, I should like to refer
to Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia3 enacted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia and to deciare that Nigeria accepts
the legality of this Decree and will implement it.
,(I
13. It is my understanding that the currentlseries of
meetings of the Security Council is. deliberately
intended to achieve limited objectives. In giving its
support to this approach, the Nigerian Government
does not wish to be understood as having, in any way,
relented in its determination to support the Namibian
people in their struggle against South Africa for their
total liberation. The Government of South Africa
has, in many of its public statements, denounced the
well-founded claim of the South West Africa People’s
Organization (SWAPO) as the authentic representatives of the people of Namibia and has attempted to
promote tribal dissension through the universally
condemned policy of ,bantustans: Let South Africa
and its supporters accept free elections as the most
efficient method to decide who, in fact, represent the
people;

(6) That South Afn’ca must release all Namibian
political prisoners, including those in prison or detained in connexion with offences under the so-called
internal security laws, where such Namibians have
been charged or tried, or are held without charge, and
whether held in Namibia or South Africa;
(c) That the application in Namibia of all racial,
discriminatory and politically repressive laws and
practices, particularly the creation of bantustans and
homelands, must be abolished. All Namibians currently in exile for political reasons should be unconditionally accorded full facilities for returning to their
country without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation
or imprisonment.
15. The Security Council has been called upon on
a number of occasions to consider the serious threat
that the attitude of South Africa presents to intemational peace and security, particularly in southern
Africa. Some permanent members of the Council
have equally consistently denied, in an obvious
agreement with the Government of South Africa, that
such a threat exists, even when, for instance, the Government of South Africa through its representative
confirmed to the Council only a few days ago .that
South Africa had extended military operations beyond
its own legal territory into neighbouring African
.’ ;
countries.
16. My Government is not in the least surprised by
this admission of aggression by the representative,of
South Africa. We have always been fully aware,of
the criminal strategy of the Pretoria regime aimed at
creating a buffer zone between itself and free Africa.
Did not that regime recently carry -out naked ,agres--sion against Angola, a sovereign and independent
country? Obviously, that is Pretoria’s understanding
of policing areas within its responsibility.
17. There is another dimension to this. Africa is
sick and tired of cooked-up figures about the high
standard of living of Africans in Namibia and of spurious argument about “vital Western interests”
“global defence systems”, “ideological advantages”, “traditional zones of influence’*. These concepts are expounded without the slightest regard for
truly African interests. We do not seem to come into
the consideration of the so-called friends of Africa
who think they know our interests better than we do.
18. Nigeria will no longer accept such presumptuous notions. It is in the interests of the people of
Namibia and of Africa that Namibia should be free
from the clutches of the crpurtheid and oppressive
regime in Pretoria. That is good enough reason to
uphold the decision of the General Assembly’, as
affirmed by the Security Council, terminating the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibia. It is your
duty, as the most important organ of the United
Nations, to see that this objective is achieved without
undue delay. In this effort, let me reiterate that you

14. The President of the United Nations-.Council
for Namibia, and the representative of SWAPO, have
clearly set out before the Security Council the basic
conditions that must be met in order effectively to
determine the wishes of the people. These conditions,
which,my Government wholeheartedly endorses, are:
((1) That South Africa should comply in spirit and
in practice with the provisions of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights;
3

can count on the Federal Government of Nigeria to
discharge fully whatever responsibilities and obligations your decisions may impose on it.

inously adopted should be implemented. Despite
this, South Africa continues to refuse to comply ‘with
the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations in
respect of Namibia; and the same holds true with
regard to the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, which recognized
that Namibia was a nation whose territorial integrity
and unity should be respected by all States of the
world.

19. Mr. BOYD (Panama) [interpret&ion from
Spunish]: The delegation of Panama considers it to be
a most encouraging coincidence, Mr. President, that
it is under your presidency that we should be carrying
out negotiations, as we are, in order to put an end to
one of the most serious hotbeds of tension in Africa
existing as a result of the colonialist policy of South
Africa on its soil and on the Territory of Namibia.

24. In defiance of the Security Council, we have
South Africa’s refusal to comply with resolution 366
(1974), which is quite rightly considered to be the
most complete document which the Council has prepared recently. In the records of the abortive meetings of June 1975, there is an historial account of the
critical analysis by the international community of
the negative attitude of South Africa. Now we must
insist on maintaining Security Council resolution 366
(I”974) in its entirety and, by means of a new; judicious and energetic resolution, try to implement ,the
relevant .resolutions and decisions.,
25. South Africa, in its illegal occupation of Namibia, and in its intention to create bantustans in that
Territory, persists in applying uparrheid, which is
State policy that South Africa is carrying out through
the establishment
of the so-called homelands.
.-,,
26. Within the framework of the co-operation which
has always existed between Latin American countries and the peoples of Africa, we have always
offered our assistance in the search for a solution to
the problems of colonialism, upurtheid and racial
discrimination, which still represent a threat to .the
peace and security, as well as to the stability, of the
African continent. The delegation of Panama,will be
unflinching in condemning any form of racial discrimination and will support measures that will make.
possible the enforcement of that condemnation.
Respect for human beings must be a fundamental rule
of States, and we are enthusiastically in favour of any
effective measure we can adopt to halt abuses, to
raise the dignity of man and establish ethical principles for social coexistence.

20. For many years the United Nations has had
before it, both in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council, the question of Namibia, which
requires a political and a legal solution, since South
Africa has no right to impose its will on the people or
the Territory of Namibia. For almost 30 years, in one
form or another, we have been debating the question
of Namibia. We can go as far back as 1946 when the
Pretoria regime refused to include Namibia under
trusteeship administration as it should have done,
alleging that it had consulted the will of the tribes of
the Territory, and decided to annex the Territory.
Later, under resolution 2145 (XXI), the General
Assembly in 1966 revoked the Mandate of South
Africa over South West Africa, which today is Namibia, and expressed its will that that Territory be
under the direct responsibility of the United Nations.
21. The next year the General Assembly established
the United Nations Council for Namibia5 to administer the Territory until it attained independence, and
indicated that that Council should immediately start
negotiations with the Government of South Africa in
-order to determine the procedure for. the~~transferof
the administration of the Territory. It is known to all
that from that time until the present the Pretoria Government has refused to accept the resolutions of the
international community and persists in its illegal
occupation of Namibia.
22. The last time the Security Council considered
the question of Namibia in 1975 [/829th m~ering] an
interesting debate took place, but the Council could
not adopt a resolution on the item because of the three
negative votes of the permanent members of the
Council, which prevented the adoption of an agreement
which had majority support. From that date until
the present, nothing more has been done in the Security Council, and it is fair to acknowledge that South
Africa has interpreted this silence of the Council as
encouragement for accelerating the alarming developments which tend to consolidate the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa.

27. Panama has always pronounced itself against
the degrading political system based on the segregation of races and known as upnrtheid. We wish to go
beyond mere statements of principle, and therefore
announce that, in agreement with the non-aligned
countries’represented on the Council, we are prepared to propose, concrete action to put an end to the
occupation of that Territory, which should already at
this time be under United Nations administration.
28. We have often heard the threadbare colonialist
argument that the Territory to be liberated is not yet
ready for independence. But South Africa is .mistaken in wishing to maintain the stutus ylro in Namibia,
because the events taking place in that region clearly
prove that the countries of the area are daily more

23. Because of this disquieting situation, the
General Assembly at its recent session adopted resolution 3399 (XXX) on the question of Namibia, in
which it insisted that all the provisions of regolution 366 (1974) which the Security Council had unani4

zealously guarding their independence and are determined to maintain their own sovereignty.

34. south Africals endeavours to create small communities called bantustans in order to divide the
people of Namibia and its intention to organize constitutional
conferences without the representation
of
the most important sectors of the Namibian population cannot but cause us concern, because all of this
contributes increasingly to converting that Territory
into a source of tension which threatens the peace
and security of Africa and which might acquire even
more alarming proportions through its repercussions
on the neighbouring countries.

29. Panama condemns all kinds of colonialism
and
neo-colonialism,
in Africa as well as in America, and
every day we Latin Americans feel more closely
linked with Africans in the Council and in all intemational forums in our condemnation
of colonialism
of
all kinds.
30. I think this is a propitious occasion to state, on
behalf of the Revolutionary
Government
under
General Omar Torrijos,
that Panama has not yet
found a solution to the problem of the colonial enclave, which is known as the Panama Canal Zone,
which divides our territory into two parts. As representatives know, the so-called Panama Canal Zone
is a stretch of land covering five miles on each side of
the inter-oceanic waterway where the United States
of America refuses to respect the effective sovereignty
of Panama, oversteps the jurisdictional
rights granted
by Panama in connexion with the functioning,
maintenance, cleaning and defence of the Panama Canal
and follows a policy, of racial discrimination
which,
while not as extreme as South African apartheid, is
no less offensive and humiliating
to my country.

35. To all that I have said we must add our concern
because of the attempt made by South Africa to militarize Namibia so as to perpetuate its presence, to
maintain an oppressive regime and openly to use the
Territory of Namibia to carry out military incursions
that might threaten the security and sovereignty of
other African countries.
36. We were greatly alarmed at the statement made
two days ago here in the Council by Mr. Garoeb
[1880th meeting],
the Administrative
Secretary of
SWAPO, who denounced South Africa’s intention
to become a nuclear Power, for we all know the danger
which this represents to countries friendly to us on
the subcontinent of southern Africa.

31. This morning we heard Mr. Bishara of Kuwait
say that, basically, one of the objectives of apurtheid
is to make a reality of the inhuman philosophy of
paying low wages for the work of blacks so that white
can live *more comfortably.
In the colonial enclave
known as the Panama Canal Zone, since 1903 we
have been bitten by the same dog with a different
collar. At the outset the wage system established
two categories: one for whites and another for the
nationals of the country. The category for whites was
called the “golden roll” and that of the nationals of
Panama the “silver roll”.
Later the names were
changed: local salary rates as against United States
salary rates. And now the system is “salaries for
security posts” and “non-sensitive
posts”.

37. For the international
community
it is a matter
of permanent disquiet that we cannot compel South
Africa to comply with the decisions we have already
adopted and those we shall shortly approve, since
the very authority of this institution is at stake as well
as the credibility of Member State before the entire
world which, stupefied, sees how South Africa can
continue to make a mockery of the precepts of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the basic resolutions of the United Nations in respect of human
rights, the dignity of the human being and equality of
rights between men and women.
38. Panama hopes in this debate of the Council to
contribute to finding measures which will assist in,the
solution of the question of Namibia by decisively
condemning
South Africa’s illegal occupation
of
Namibia
and emphatically
requesting
that South
Africa abide by the relevant resolutions of the various
United Nations badies. It is our hope that the forthcoming draft resolution-which
will come at the end
to this debate-will
not remain a dead letter in respect
of the most emphatic condemnation
by Panama of
the practice of racial discrimination
and the acts
perpetrated by South Africa in Namibia as well as its
new policy of creating what are called homelands,
which tend to violate the territorial
integrity and
national unity of Namibia.

32. In condemning uparfhPid we must denounce this
sad situation in a country like Panama, which has
internationally
always been against racial discrimination and which has never applied discriminatory
rules to its nationals, yet which is a victim of the discrimination
imposed by a foreign Government within
our own territory.
33. In its resolution 366 (1974), the Security Council
condemned the continued illegal occupation of the
Territory of Namibia by South Africa and demanded
that South Africa take the necessary steps to withdraw its illegal administration
in Namibia.
Furthermore, in 1975 the Council endeavoured to adopt a
draft resolution which was vetoed by three permanent members of the Security Council, a draft resolution which requested refusal to supply South Africa
with weapons, in accordance with Chapter VII of
the Charter.

39. The attempt to miiitarize Namibia and to transform South Africa into a nuclear Power, as well as
the convening of the constitutional
conference of the
Territory, must be condemned by us. We must exercise pressure on South Africa by every means at our
5

disposal so that it will accept the holding of free eiections in Namibia
under United Nations control in
order that the people of Namibia may freely decide
its own future.

44. The persistent, unyielding attention and pressure by the Security Council on the Government
of Pretoria must therefore continue. We are of course
far from believing that we can make quick, spectacular steps forward to the restoration of the rights
of the Namibian
people. Nevertheless,
we do not
want to close our eyes and ears to some moves in the
Territory made by the South African Government.
Though of course basically unacceptable and totally
insufficient,
we detect in these moves a sign, however weak, of some kind of awareness by South
Africa that things cannot simply go on the way they
have been going on so far. Pressure must be maintained, pressure must be increased for things really
to change. As we see it, this is the reason for our
meeting once again in the Council on this topic.

40. We shall always be in favour of South Africa
complying with the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights in that Territory, and we are in favour of proceeding as soon as possible to releasing the political
prisoners both in South Africa and in Namibia. But,
above ail, we must make it perfectly clear in this
debate that South Africa must abolish ail forms of
racial discrimination
and political
repression and
desist from the segregation policy it pursues in the
so-called Bantustans and homelands.
South Africa
must recognize the unity and integrity of Namibia as
a nation and undertake to comply with United Nations
decisions as well as with the advisory opinion of the
International
Court of Justice of 21 June 1971; before
free elections are held in Namibia under United Nations supervision and control, it must grant to ail
those who have been exiled for political reasons the
guaranteq that upon returning to the country they will
not run the risk of being detained again.

45. As stated by the Italian representative
in this
chamber on 4 June 1975 [see 1826th meeting], we do
not think that the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa is exclusively an African problem; on
the contrary, it is the concern of the entire membership of the Organisation.
May I be allowed to recall
that the position of Italy as regards Namibia has been
consistent with the principles and the purposes of the
Charter, which we staunchly uphold. The many statements my delegation has made here in the Council
and elsewhere bear witness to that. Our action has
been equally consistent. Italy, in fact, voted in favour
of resolution
2145 (XXI), by which the General
Assembly decided to put an end to the Mandate
exercised by South Africa over South West Africa.
In 1971 Italy, at that time a member of the Security
Council, voted in favour of resolution 301 (1971), by
which the Council reaffirmed the inalienable right of
the people of Namibia to liberty and independence.

41. As a Latin American country which has always
been in solidarity with the freedom of Africa, we
shall not rest-while
a member of the Security Council-in
complying with the sacred mission of reaffirming the anti-colonialist
principles of the Charter and
of the basic resolutions of the United Nations.
42. Mr. VINCI (Italy): I believe that ail members of
the Council and, truly, ail the Members of the United
Nations except one, namely, South Africa, hold a
basically common and perfectly clear view of the
question of Namibia in ail its aspects-legal,
political,
economic and social. Equally simple and clear to our
minds is the solution required. And, speaking for my
own delegation, I can say that we have been holding
these views for a long, long time, as the official records of the United Nations, to which I shall refer
later on, show in crystal-clear terms.

46. We voted as well in favour of Secuiity Council
resolution 311 (1972), which called upon States to
observe an arms embargo towards South Africa,
taking into consideration the situation prevailing then
in that country and in southern Africa as a whole.
Italy has strictly adhered to that appeal, disregarding any advantage it might have derived from an
expansion of its trade at a &oment when economic
difficulties made it ail the more attractive. This is a
decision for which we deserve, we feel, some merit
since it indicates that my country is also prepared to
sacrifice some of its own interests when basic principles or issues are at stake. May I also recall our support of the various United Nations funds for southern
Africa which are meant to provide assistance to,
among others, refugees and exiles from Namibia. As
has been stated here in the past, Italy has no cdmmerciai, industrial or financial interests in Namibia,
and our policy is to refrain from any initiative in the
Territory.

43. The deliberate,
stubborn refusal of the South
African Government to understand and accept some
plain truths shared by the whole international
community is indeed most disappointing.
And a cursory
look at the long letter of the representative of South
Africa [S/11948 and Add.11 does not, unfortunately,
diminish the strong feeling of disappointment
and
frustration we share with previous speakers. On the
contrary, it increases it. But, since we know that
truth and the future are on our side, we should not
give up our last hopes-at
least for some time. To
paraphrase a century-old saying, there is something
more powerful than guns, tanks and bombs: it is
public opinion. And if this was and is true for mighty
empires, it is the more so for South Africa. That is
why the Italian delegation believes that this debate is
both timely and useful, as the Council can speak with
a stronger voice on behalf of the world public and
the conscience of mankind.

47. The Italian representative in the Security Councii made reference on 4 June 1975 to the d&marches
made at Pretoria by the Italian Government
with
regard to the situation in Namibia. He then informed
6

53. His sugge.stion that we may consider what was
decided upon during the constitutional
conference at
Windhoek has little merit indeed. We have no reason
to believe in the representative
character of that
conference or in the legality of its convening, nor for
that matter, in the contents’of the letter that followed
his statement and which are wide of the point, legally
and politically speaking. I will not take up the time of
my colleagues around the table in-dwelling upon the
statement and the letter.

the Council that we had constantly urged the Government of Pretoria to hasten the process of ensuring
self-determination
in Namibia on the basis of principles contained in the Charter and the resolutions
adopted by the United Nations.
48. I would now like to refer here, as the representatives of the United Kingdom and of France have
already done before me, to the recent and very significant position taken by the nine members of the
European Economic Community.
In this connexion,
may I say that during the six months in which we held
the chairmainship
of the Community,
the Italian
Government,
being particularly
aware of the unfortunate situation existing in Namibia,
urged its eight
partners to lend it their special consideration,
and the
response was most positive.

54. I should simply like to clarify one main point,
which, despite the efforts of my Government and the
Governments of the nine States members of the Community, the South African Government
seems incapable of understanding.
It insists on telling us-and it
has done this once again here and in the various capitals-that
it believes that the process of emancipation
should be carried out without the interference of the
United Nations.

49. The Foreign Minister of Italy, in his capacity as.
President of the European Community,
addressed a
message to the Secretary-General
on the occasion of
Namibia Day on 26 August 1975.6 The letter outlined
the common stand of the nine members of the Community on this issue, namely, that South Africa
should withdraw from. Namibia as soon as possible,
that the inhabitants of Namibia should be given the
opportunity
to exercise their right of self-determination, that they should be enabled to do so by expressing their views on the political and constitutional
future of the Territory
as a whole through a fully
democratic
process under the supervision
of the
United Nations and finally that such a process should
be stated without further delay. The Community
also
underlined its belief that all political groups should
be allowed to enjoy total freedom in carrying out
peaceful activities throughout
the Territory
in the
course of the process of self-determination.

55. We believe that this contention
is absolutely
untenable for the simple reason that any authority
which South Africa may have held in the past over
Namibia has been long since terminated.
It has no
reason whatsoever to be there. On the contrary, it is
the responsibility
of the United Nations to preside
over the decolonization
process of .that Territory.
My delegation has refuted the specious arguments
put forward by the South African Government.
I had
the opportunity to do so myself at the 1584th meeting
of the Council on 27 September 1971, and I have not
heard since then any valid comments or reply to all
the points, political
and legal, that my delegation
made more than four years ago.
56. Speaking as I am of my personal experience,
I should like, with the Council’s permission, to share
with my colleagues some other recollections.
In
1966, when the Assembly took its historic decision to
terminate the Mandate and declared that South West
Africa was henceforth to be under the direct responsibility of the United Nations, the Ad Hoc Committee
for South West Africa, composed of 14 members,4
has been working for nearly one year. Italy was a
member of that Committee from its creation.

50. Following the expression of these firm common
views of the Community
by Minister Rumor to the
Secretary-General,
the Italian
presidency,
in the
course of the consultations the nine members hold to
strengthen their political co-operation,
kept up the
inspiration and momentum leading the Community to
further pressure on the South African Government.
The idea of a joint clPmurchc at Pretoria thus arose in
that context.

57. I may say that, even though the Committee did
not reach a consensus on what would be the most
appropriate action in order to bring the Namibian
people to self-govemement
and independence within
a reasonable time, many interesting ideas were launched which came in part to fruition. What, in a sense,
is more important-and
I will never forget it-is the
spirit of understanding,
of solidarity, of dedication to
a good, human cause which existed between all the
members of the Committee.
We all shared the same
purpose, whichever part of the world we belonged
to-Africa,
Europe, North America, South America,
Asia. It is worth remembering that the United States
was represented on that Committee
by a former
Attorney-General,
William
Rogers, who was afterwards appointed Secretary of State.

5 1. The timing of the d&murche, which took place a
few days ago and which has been reported to the
Secretary-General
by the letter of 26 January 1976
[S//1945], was chosen to coincide with the convening
of the present session of the Security Council.
52. We have heard the statement made by the
representative of South Africa on the instructions of
his Government. Although we did not expect him to,
I must say that, sadly enough, he has failed once
again to answer our basic question: When is South
Africa going to withdraw from Namibia? For this is
what we are waiting for, in the first instance.
7

58. In those long past years, we had in mind the same
purpose we have today. If I am speaking of the common purpose and spirit of solidarity which inspired
us in those years, it is because I am convinced now,
even more than before, in the light of events from last
year on, that it is of paramount importance to keep
the Security Council united. The more we are united
in the Council the greater are the chances of making
an impact on the Government
and people of South
Africa.

regime. South Africa failed to respond to the provisions of that resolution, thus making it necessary for
the Council to take up the matter again in June last
year. Regrettably,
the opportunity
for advancing
United Nations action in the interest of the people of
Namibia was vitiated by the concurrent exercise of
the veto by three permanent members: France, the
United Kingdom and the United States. Since then,
those three countries and more recently the European
Economic Community
have made de’marches
to the
authorities at Pretoria in a effort to test a thesis that
reason might yet visit those authorities.

59. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Mr. President, as
the Security Council one again addresses its attention
to the question of Namibia, allow me to express my
confidence and that of my delegation in the wisdom
and guidance which you, in your capacity as President, will undoubtedly
bring to bear in ensuring a
productive conclusion of our consideration
of this
matter. Your close, personal involvement
with questions of decolonization
has endowed you., Mr. President, with an especial insight into the issue which the
Security Council is at present considering.

63. In the view of my delegation, the answer to that
thesis has now been given in part in the speech made
by the witness for the racist regime who appeared
before this body on Tuesday. His “Alice in Wonderland” description of the situation in Namibia and his
defiant hurling of verbal thunderbolts at all those who
have called into question his regime’s conduct attest
eloquently to the intransigence of those he represents.
But, most importantly,
the recent activities of the
South African regime in Namibia and beyond its borders, more particularly
since June 1975, have served
to confirm its capacity for duplicity and to reinforce
assessment that the situation
in
my delegations’
Namibia is a threat to peace and security in southern
Africa. Indeed, if the South African regime is not
prevailed upon to desist from its aggressive designs
and if the situation in Namibia is allowed to continue
to deteriorate, a serious threat to international
peace
and security would result.

60. The long and tragic history of South Africa’s
illegal occupation of the international
Territory
of
Namibia is well known to the international
community. Accordingly,
my delegation will not recite that
history, but would prefer to focus its attention on the
situation facing the Security Counsil as we strive to
reach conclusions which will assist in prizing the
Territory of Namibia from the oppressor’s grip.
61. The absolute defiance of the authority of the
United Nations by the racist regime installed at Pretoria has been as consistent as it has been persistent.
In the face of pronouncements
by the United Nations
Council for Namibia and resolutions of the General
Assembly -and the Security Council itself, the Vorster
regime has at no time taken any meaningful steps
towards relinquishing
its illegal occupation of the
Territory of Namibia.
It has sought instead to confound the international
community
by a series of
gimmicks and sham proposals, designed to deceive
the world public and further to frustrate the attainment of the legitimate
aspirations of the Namibian
people. The flagrant defiance of the authority of the
United Nations and its organs by the Vorster regime
constitutes a serious threat to the authority which so
many peoples of the world have vested in this international body. That regime has repeatedly flouted
every attempt by the international
community
to
enable the Namibian people to recover their freedom.

64. This is not the time to indulge in rhetoric. In
various forums, inside and outside of the Organization, the illegal acts of the Vorster regime have been
roundly condemned. Time and again the racists in
South Africa -have chosen to ignore such condemnations and the demands of the international
community to withdraw from the Territory of Namibia. The
people of Namibia have for too long been subjected
to the injustices and discriminatory
practices wrought
upon them by the illegal regime.
65. The cause of self-determination
for the people
of Namibia is of universal concern; for the suppression of the right of the Namibian people to self-determination and the negation of their fundamental legal
and political rights, no less than their social, cultural
and economic rights, creates conditions which threaten the fabric of human society. Therefore it is the
unavoidable
responsibility
of the Council to take a
correct stand on this issue, a stand which is
not made subordinate to short-term transient gains.

62. As far as the Security Souncil’s own recent
consideration
of this question is concerned, something of a watershed was reached in December 1974,
with the adoption of resolution 366 (1974). On that
occasion this organ of the United Nations charged
with the maintenance
of international
peace and
security unanimously
expressed itself in unequivocal
terms on the illegality of the South African occupation of Namibia and on the steps to be taken by that

66. The action the Security Council is required to
take on Namibia is of necessity guided by a set of
principles which members of the Council should hold
dear and should regard as the fundamentals for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world at
large. The foremost principle is the inalienable right
of the people of Namibia to self-determination
and
8

independence.
The second, echoed in the 1971 advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice, is
that South Africa has no legal jurisdiction
whatsoever
over the Territory of Namibia. The third is that the
United Nations, through the United Nations Council
for Namibia, has a direct responsibility
for the administration of the Territory of Namibia.
Fourthly, the
Security Council itself has acknowledged
its own
responsibility
to take such initiatives as might be of
assistance in finding a solution to the issue,of South
Africa’s illegal occupation
of Namibia.
These are
principles which have long been espoused by nonaligned and other progressive countries and have been
affirmed by the overwhelming majority of States. Yet
their application has been denied. The reason, quite
simply, is the perceived pre-eminence
of strategic
and economic interests of some States over the interests and rights of the people of Namibia.

proceeds to reaffirm United Nations responsibility
over the Territory and to express the Council’s concern over South Africa’s acts of commission as well
as its acts of omission.
71. Turning to the operative paragraphs, we quite
naturally begin with the clear condemnation
of the
continued illegal occupation of Namibia
by South
Africa, as well as the attempts by the racist regime
to introduce and reinforce its brutal apartheid and
bantustan systems there. The draft resolution also
makes a point of condemning the South African military build-up in Namibia and its utilization
as a fortress from which to launch attacks on neighbouring
countries. We then make reference to resolution 366
(1974) and draw attention to and condemn South
Africa’s failure to comply with its terms. But the
main burden of the draft resolution is the need for the
holding of free elections in Namibia under United
Nations supervision and control in order that the
people of Namibia will be able freely to express their
opinions about their own future. For a meaningful
expression by the Namibians on their future-as
distinct from the sham constitutional
conference choreographed by the racist regime in 1975-it is evident
that such elections must be supervised and controlled
by the United Nations. And the elections must be
arranged in such a way that the people of Namibia as
a whole would be given sufficient time to organize
politically.
South Africa must accept these conditions for it must surely have realized by now that the
international
community
is fully alive to its prevarications and will not be deceived by the constitutional
play acting which it has put on. The approach reflected in the draft resolution is the minimum position the
Council can responsibly
take in the present circumstances.

67. Let us not be under any illusions. In the final
analysis, it is the people of Namibia, with the support
of African and other friends, who will wrest their
freedom and independence from the racist occupiers.
Yet the international,
community
in general and the
Security Council in particular, pursuant to its responsibilities
under the Charter, have a role to play
which would be supportive of the efforts of the Namibian people, led by their authentic representative,
SWAPO.
68. On the basis of the principles I have enumerated,
a number of delegations in the Council have sought to
fashion a draft resolution
which could command
general support. As usual, the process of consultation
has been a protracted one. As usual, too, the final
result is not one that is entirely satisfactory to all the
parties concerned, which include those both within
-and without the membership structure of the Council.

72. Given the experience of the past, it is difficult
to hold a sanguine view of what will emerge from
Pretoria. But the effort is required and is worth
making. For when the Security Council reconvenes
on or before 31 August, in accordance with the final
paragraph of the draft resolution, it will be against
the background of the action that the Council takes
now. The Council will have before it such responses
as the South African regime may care to give, and it
would then be able, in the eyes of the sponsors, to
take without equivocation
such action as is provided
for in the Charter, including the provisions of Chapter VII, as may be necessary to bring to heel the
racists in Pretoria. On behalf of the sponsors I commend to the members of the Council draft resolution S/l 1950.

69. Draft resolution S/11950, which I now have the
honour to introduce on behalf of the delegations of
Benin, the Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama,
Romania, Sweden, the United Republic of Tanzania
and my own delegation, represents, in our view, a
sincere attempt not simply to reiterate decisions previously taken by the Council, but to build on them by
seeking to intensify the pressure on the Pretoria
regime. It, at the same time, indicates with greater
precision the demands of the Council and the responses required in return of the South African regime.
70. The preambular paragraphs of the draft resolution are, as is natural, essentially reiteratory in character. We take note of the statements made by Comrade Garoeb, Administrative
Secretary of SWAPO,
and the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, which is the only legally constituted administering authority of the international
Territory of
Namibia.
We recall the pertinent General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions on this question, as
well as the authoritative
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice. The draft resolution then

73. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): I should
like to begin my intervention by repeating what I said
during the thirtieth session of the General Assembly
on 6 October 1975.’ I said then:
“The United Nations is now approaching
its
fourth decade,inan.atmosphere
mixed with anxiety
9

and hope for the future. Despite the continuity of
the Organization
and its development
amid difliculties, obstacles, conspiracies and the fatal crises
which have hung over it for 30 years, and despite
the Organisation’s
struggle to preserve a minimum
of effectiveness and independence, it has not fulfilled
all our hopes.

United Nations. Consequently
the South African administration
illegal. -

75. The General Assembly also adopted several
resolutions reaffirming the inalienable
rights of the
Namibian people to self-determination
and independence. Those resolutions strongly condemn South
Africa for its persistent refusals to withdraw from
Namibia.

“Colonialism,
exploitation
and oppression have
not disappeared from our earth. Poverty, hunger and
illiteracy are still prevailing characteristics for the
majority of the human race. The cries of those
oppressed, tortured and evicted from their homes
continue to curse the colonialists, the racists, the
exploiters, the Fascists and the warmongers. For
an example of these unjust conditions we can look
at the banners here of the two racist regimes in
South Africa and Palestine, demonstrating
a striking contempt for the lofty principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Those two regimes will
remain as a symbol of hatred and animosity passed
from one generation to another until our lands are
liberated
from racism, Zionism, apartheid
and
colonialism.”

76. In resolution 3399 (XXX), the Assembly sharply
condemns the military build-up by South Africa in
Namibia, and demands the immediate withdrawal by
South Africa of all its forces, and its administration
from Namibia, and it urges the Security Council to
enforce its resolution 366 (1974).
77. Namibia has been the subject of important activities of the Security Council. The Council has attempted to implement
United Nations resolutions
through a dialogue between the Secretary-General
and the Government
of South Africa, but that dialogue was unproductive.

‘6 . . . experience and history teach us that progress
cannot be achieved for humanity as a whole without
the attainment of peace, and that there is no peace
unless justice prevails. The talk about lasting
peace and comprehensive
progress will remain
repetitive
speeches without the elimination
of
exploitation,
colonialism [and] oppression.
“ . . . There is no progress without
is no peace without justice.”

freedom;

the continuation
of
in Namibia became

78. The Security Council adopted its resolution 264
(1969) on 20 March 1969, in which it reaffirmed General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) terminating South
Africa’s Mandate over the Territory of Namibia and
considering illegal any future South African presence
in Namibia.
The Security Council also decided to
remain actively involved in that question and continued to adopt resolutions
condemning
the South
African Policy. It strongly urged all States Members
of the United Nations to exert their influence on the
Government of South Africa in order to obtain South
African compliance
with the provisions. of General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions.

there

I also said:
“ . . . as we [celebrate] the fifteenth anniversary of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples contained in
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, we are
distressed that there are still peoples which are not
yet able to exercise their right to self-determination. It distresses us also that the white minority
regime in South Africa stubbornly
maintains its
unjust control, that the white minority racist regime
in Zimbabwe is still perpetrating injustice against
the African majority, that Namibia is still under a
fascist and racist regime...

79. On 12 August 1969 the Security Council adopted
its resolution 269 (1969) recognizing the legitimate
struggle of the Namibian
people against the illegal
presence of South Africa. That resolution
called
upon that racist Government
immediately
to withdraw its administration
from the Namibian Territory
and to complete that process by 4 October 1969. The
following resolutions were subsequentiy adopted by
the Security Council on this question: 276 (1970), 283
(1970), 301 (1971), 309 (1972), 310 (1972), 319 (1972),
323 (1972) and 342 (1973).

“We call upon the United Nations to take effective measures to liquidate
colonialism
and its
traces, for this is a crucial prerequisite for bringing
about international
peace and security and to building the better world for tomorrow to which we all
aspire.”

80. Resolution 366 (1974) of 17 December 1974, the
latest resolution adopted by the Security Council .on
the question of Namibia, demanded that South Africa
take the necessary steps to effect the ‘withdrawal of
its illegal administration
maintained in Namibia and to
transfer power to the Namibian people with the assistance of the United Nations. The Council also demanded that South Africa, pending the transfer of
power to the Namibians, comply in spirit and in practice with the provisions of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights by abolishing the application of all

74. In 1966, at its twenty-first session, the General
Assembly decided in resolution 2145 (XXI) to terminate South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia,
and
placed the Territory under direct responsibility
of the
10

racially discriminatory
laws, releasing ail Namibian
political prisoners, and allowing repatriation of exiled
Namibians.
The Council also decided to meet on or
before 30 May 1975 to review South Africa’s compliance with the terms of the aforementioned
resoiution and, in the event of non-compliance,
to consider the appropriate measures to be taken under the
Charter.

85. ‘Namibia.
has been split into an arid useless
zone of ,‘rreserves” -homelands-where
the great
majority of the black population
is confined to a
third of the Territory. In dramatic contrast, the whites
reside in a “police”
zone, comprising the major part
of the plateau reserved exclusively for them. That
zone is suitable for agriculture and rich in mineral
resources, including uranium. The blacks are excluded
from the “Territorial
Government”,
which actually
has very limited authority in itself. They are deprived
of freedom of movement and cannot leave their reservation without a pass. They do not have the right
to choose either their employment
or their employer.
When forced to work in the white zone, they have to
leave their wives and children and live separated
from their families.

81. The Security Council met on 30 May 1975
[182&d medng],
as decided, but regrettably failed to
reach an agreement on the measures provided for in
its resolution 366 (1974). The Security Council’s failure to take a decision to deter the racist Government
of South Africa resulted from the collusion between
the imperialist Powers and the racist Pretoria regime.
The draft resolution
[S/11713], vetoed by three
member
States-the
United
States, the United
Kingdom
and France [see 1829th meeting],-demanded of ail States the imposition of a compulsory
ban on the sale of ail kinds of arms to the Government
of South Africa. The draft resolution stipulated that
that ban should remain in force until South Africa’s
withdrawal from Namibia. It also reaffirmed the legal
responsibility
of the. United Nations over Namibia
and declared the necessity of organizing free eiections under the supervision of the United Nations
not later than 1 July 1976, so that the people of Namibia might freely express their opinion on seifdetermination
and independence.

86. The imperialist Powers defy the United Nations
resolutions and world public opinion by supporting
the racist regimes of South Africa and Southern Rhodesia. That imperialist support contributes to the continuation of the suffering and deprivation experienced
by the indigenous Namibian
population.
The intention of those Powers appears clearly to be the protection of their imperialist and colonialist interests in the
territories, along with the interests of the companies
involved in the exploitation
of the natural resources
and of the African manpower in the area.
87. The time has come for the United Nations to
take measures to guarantee to the Namibian people
their legitimate right to self-determination
and independence, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution
1514 (XV). The Security Council must
fulfil the responsibilities
entrusted to it by compelling
South Africa to withdraw from the Namibian Territory where the deteriorating
situation threatens international peace and security. In particular, the permanent members of the Council should bear in mind
these responsibilities
and should not misuse their
absurd privilege of veto in an act directed against the
wishes and ambitions
of the indigenous people of
Namibia.

82. The collusion between the Western Powers and
South Africa encouraged
that racist regime to
continue defying United
Nations
resolutions,
including resolution 2145 (XXI). The South African
Minister of Foreign Affairs, in a letter to the SecretaryGeneral dated 26 September 1969, stated his Govemment’s refusal to recognize the legality of resolution
2145 (XXI), along with ail subsequent United Nations
resolutions, including those of the Security Council.
83. The Government
of South Africa continues its
defiance of the United Nations and of world public
opinion. In addition, the Government of South Africa
maintains its occupation of the Namibian
territory
and continues the imperialist
and racist policy of
“homelands”,
aimed at the destruction of Namibian
unity. The South African Government
has formally
instituted its policy of establishing “homelands”,
as
recommended by the Odendaai Commission.*

88. I should like also to draw the attention of the
Council to the fact that the Council of Minisiers of
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), at its ninth
extraordinary
session in April 1975, denounced the
political manmuvres of the racist minority regime of
Vorster, which continues
to impose the wicked
poiicy,of bantustans in the Namibian Territory.
Foilowing that session, the Dar es Salaam Declaration
reaffirmed
that the only possible solution to the
Namibian question was implementation
of Security
Council resolution 366. (1974). In the same Declaration; the Council Ministers of OUA also declared its
recognition of SWAP0 as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people.

84. As envisaged by that Commission
an aggregate
of 40 per cent of the land, the least desirable and least
developed
part, would be divided into separate
“homelands”
for each of the non-white ethnic groups:
A total of 43 per cent of the land, including areas rich
in chromium resources, along with all cities and seaports, would constitute the white sector. All unsurveyed land and two large diamond areas on the southwestern coast, constituting
17 per cent, would be
incorporated into South Africa proper.
,

89. The Council of Ministers of OUA met again in
July 1975 at Kampala for the twenty-fifth
ordinary
session9 and condemned the so-called constitutional
11

conference through which Vosrster’s Government
seeks to mislead the international
public. The Council demanded that the South African Government:
first, withdraw its illegal administration
from the
Territory of Namibia; secondly, respect the rights of
the Namibian people to self-determination
and national independence;
thirdly, respect Namibia’s
territorial integrity; fourthly, recognize SWAP0 as the
sole representative
of the Namibian
people; and,
fifthly, release all Namibian political prisoners imprisoned both in Namibia and South Africa.

vened by South Africa, the composition
of which have been illegally determined
African Government.

and purpose
by the South

97. Fourthly, South Africa has deliberately violated
the obligations deriving from its Mandate over the
Territory
by refusing to place Namibia
under the
Trusteeship System, in spite of a number of resolutions of the General Assembly requesting it to do so.
The termination
of its Mandate by the General Assembly makes its presence in Namibia illegal.

90. The Conference of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at Lima in August
1975, also demanded in its Lima Programme
for
Mutual Assistance and Solidarityr”
that the South
African racist minority regime implement the United
Nations resolutions with respect to Namibia and end
the policy of bantustanization.

98. Fifthly, the subjugation of the people of Namibia
to the detestable system of upartheid is a deliberate
negation of the most elementary human rights which
has been universally
condemned.
Such a system,
which reduces a whole people to slavery, constitutes
a crime against humanity.
99. Sixthly, maintenance of the occupation of Namibia by South Africa and of the system of apartheid
is a continuing threat to peace and security in southem Africa, the whole of Africa and the world. Consequently, South Africa and its colonialist,
racist and
aggressive policies must be strongly denounced and
vigorously combated by the international
community
AS a whole.

91. The question is clear and requires no further
discussion. A solution to the problem necessitates
the implementation
of effective measures to enforce
the many resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to this question.
92. There is only one alternative before the Council:
to support the rights of the people who have suffered and continue to suffer daily from injustice and
subjugation under the yoke of a Fascist, racist minority regime. The Security Council must issue a
resolution adopting adequate measures to guarantee
the expulsion of the racist regime of South Africa.
Only through this action can the Council successfully
exercise its responsibilities.

100. Seventhly, the South African build-up in Namibia, consolidating
the illegal occupation of that
country and repressing the legitimate
resistance of
the people, has been used as a base for attacks on
neighbouring
countries. It is a flagrant violation of
international
law and aggravates the threat to international peace and security of the African continent.
101. Eighthly, it is regrettable that the triple veto of
the United States, the United Kingdom and France
paralysed the Security Council and prevented it from
applying the sanctions provided for by the Charter.
This attitude has caused and is still causing indignation among all the peoples of the world.

93. I should like to bring to the attention of the
Council the Declaration of .Dakar, adopted- by .the
Dakar International
Conference on Namibia
and
Human Rights, held from 5 to 8 January 1976 [S/l 1939,
nnne.u]. My delegation supports this successful Conference and endorses its declaration and programme
of action and would especially like to stress the following points.

102. The military
and economic
assistance furnished to South Africa by certain States must also be
openly denounced by all,the progressive forces of the
world. Arms sales, nuclear co-operation agreements
and economic activities by multinational
compagnie-s
in South Africa or Namibia constitute acts of sheer
complicity
with the policies of apartheid. And it is
high time for Africans to make it clear to countries
supporting South Africa that they cannot continue to
do so while hypocritically
claiming the friendship of
the African peoples.

94. First, the exercise of the right to self-determination by the people of Namibia is a prerequisite for
its enjoyment of human rights. It involves the liberation.of this people from the yoke of South Africa’s
colonialism
and the restoration of its fundamental
national rights, which are independence, sovereignty,
the right to dispose of its natural resources and the
unity and integrity of its territory.
95. Secondly, any attempt to destroy the national
unity and territorial integrity of Namibia by imposing
the policy of bantustanization
is inconsistent
with
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

103. Ninthly,
all efforts have been incapable of
modifying the policies of South Africa on Namibia.
On the contrary, a large-scale diplomatic
offensive
has lately been launched by- South Africa in the form
of an alleged policy of “overture”
and “dialogue”
towards the African States, an offensive which has
been strongly supported by the pro-imperialist
mass
media attempting to give it great play.

96. Thirdly, it is necessary to denounce and condemn the so-called constitutional
conference con12

104. Ho.weve.r, this policy is a snare because it is
alien to the true interests of the people of Namibia
and is part of a global imperialist,
military and politico-economic
strategy. South Africa has neither in
principle nor in practice abandoned its policies of
annexation and domination
of Namibia.
The policy
of concertation and the so-called detente as regards
the African States, advocated by South Africa, must
be rejected beacause it is aimed at causing confusion
in international
public opinion, undemining
African
unity and sabotaging the struggle for the elimination
of apartheid.

Rights. It must release all Namibian
political
prisoners, including all those imprisoned or detained in
connexion with offences under the so-called internal
security laws, whether such prisoners have been
charged or tried or are held without charge in either
Namibia or South Africa.
110, South African authorities
must abolish the
application
of all racially discriminatory
and politically repressive laws and practices in Namibia.
Namibians who are currently in exile for political reasons
must be unconditionally
accorded full facilities for
return to Namibia without risk of arrest, detention,
intimidation
or imprisonment.

105. Tenthly, South Africa will never willingly end
its illegal occupation of Namibia and will never of its
own accord abandon its policies of oppression and
enslavement
of the peoples of southern Africa. It
must be compelled to do so by all means available to
the international
community.
All possible measures
of compulsion should be taken to oblige South Africa
to comply with the decisions of the United Nations.
However, so long as the international
community
does not use the appropriate means to put an end to
the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa, all
means, including armed struggle, are justified to liberate the country. Consequently, it is necessary to give
SWAP0 all the political, moral and materiel support
it needs. And, finally it is the obligation of those Governments which have not yet done so to recognize
SWAP0 as the only authentic representative of &he
people of Namibia.

111. The Libyan
Arab Republic
strongly condemns the defiant attitude of the South African racist
regime. We also condemn the inhuman and hypocritical policy pursued by those Powers defending the
South African attitudes. This defence prevents the
implementation
of deterrent measures against the
racist Government
in South Africa. My country
regrets the policy of those Powers which still maintain political and economic relations with the Vorster
regime.
112. My delegation appeals to all States to commit
themselves to uphold United Nations resolutions
regarding Namibia.
I would like to stress that my
country, the Libyan Arab Republic,
implemented
those resolutions and imposes a comprehensive
ban
on the racist regimes in South Africa ana Southern
Rhodesia, and we will spare no efforts to ensure for
our brothers in Namibia all the needed assistance to
help them in their struggle to achieve their inalienable
rights and to liberate their country.

106. Eleventhly,
the United
Nations
must condemn attempts by South Africa, including the convening of the so-called constitutional
conference,
calculated to evade the clear demand of the United
Nations for the holding of free elections under United
Nations supervision and control in Namibia.

113. Before I conclude, it gives me great pleasure
to extend the warmest congratulations
and appreciation in the name of my country and delegation to the
United Nations Council for Namibia for the sincere
efforts deployed by it in the discharge of its responsibilites. My appreciation
goes also to the United
Nations Commissioner
for Namibia, Sean MacBride,
an eminent and devoted fighter for human rights and
freedom.

107. In order that the people of Namibia
will be
enabled to freely determine its own future, it is imperative that free elections under the supervision and
control of the United Nations be held for the whole of
Namibia as one political entity. In determining
the
date, timetable
and modalities,
there shall be adequate time provided for the establishment
of the
necessary machinery to supervise and control such
an election, and to enable the Namibian
people to
organize politically for the elections.

114. Mr. RYDBECK
(Sweden): The United Nations
has a very specific and full responsibility for Namibia.
The Security Council and its members are again
facing the duty to measure up to this responsibility.
This means, in our view, that the members of the
Council must reach agreement on’the steps that’are
best designed to further the realization of the rights
of the Namibian people to self-determination,
national independence and the preservation of Namibia’s
unity and territorial integrity. South Africa’s presence
in Namibia is illegal and must be terminated as soon
as possible. No arguments can alter the fact that the
South African presence in Namibia
lacks all legal
basis. South Africa, however, persists in its course
of defiance.

108. South Africa must urgently make a solemn
declaration accepting the holding of free elections in
Namibia
under United
Nations
supervision
and
control, and South Africa must comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations. Finally,
it must recognize the territorial integrity and national
unity of Namibia.
109. Twelfthly, pending the transfer of power;South
Africa must comply fully, in spirit and in practice,
with the provisions of the Charter of the Unitkd
Nations and of the Universal Declaration of Human
13

115. Thus, it has not responded to the demand of
the Security Council for a solemn declaration as set
out in the unanimously adopted resolution 366 (1974).
It has not declared that it will comply with the resolutions and decisions of the United Nations or the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice
of 21 June 1971. It has not recognized the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia as a,nation. It has not
complied with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It has not released Namibian political
prisoners. It has nos abolished the
application in Namibia of all racially discriminatory
and politically
repressive laws and pratices, particularly Bantustans and the so-called homelands. It
has not allowed the return to their country of those
currently in exile for political reasons without risk of
arrest,’ detention, intimidation
or imprisonment.

119. My delegation: appeals to all countries to
observe and to. extend the arms embargo on South
Africa. Such armaments are now used not only to
tighten the policy of apartheid in South Africa itself,
but also to force that policy, as well as the policy
of bantustans and homelands and other similar measures, on Namibia. The homeland system is, in reality,
apartheid
pushed to its ultimate extreme: apnrtheid
not only between white and non-white, but also between different groups within the African population.
120. My Government joins with other members of
the Security Council in constructive efforts to reach
decisions that will make it absolutely clear to the
white minority regime in South Africa that the world
community
at large as represented by the Council
stands united in support of the rights of the people of
Namibia to self-determination,
national independence
and the preservation
of Namibia’s
unity and territorial integrity.

116. In defiance of the resolutions of the Organization and of world opinion, South Africa has instead
stepped up its repression of the population
of Namibia. It has intensified
persecution,
and simple
human decency is constantly violated. Everything
possible has been done to try to destroy the national
unity of Namibia and to fragmentize it by holding
constitutional
conferences, which, in fact, only represent a distortion of what should be a genuine
process of self-determination.

121. It is a matter of urgency that the Security
Council explore all possibilities
to find a peaceful
solution. Status quo is not acceptable. Failure to
seize the opportunity
before us and to act decisively
will have serious consequences. Even the credibility
of the United Nations is at stake, in view of its unique
responsibility
for Namibia.
122. In the search for a solution there are, however,
certain basic principles on which there can be no
compromise:
the illegality
of South Africa’s presence in Namibia and the authority of the United
Nations over the Territory;
the obligation of South
Africa to withdraw; the right of the people of Namibia
to exercise freely their inalienable right to self-determination within a national framework and to accede
to independence
as a unitary State. The process
leading up to this independence must be supervised
and controlled by the United Nations. This is essential.

117. These conferences have been designed to put
the policy of creating bantustans and so-called homelands into a pretended framework of legality. -How
can there be any legality, however, when the leading
political movement in the country,, SWAPO, .which
is mobilizing and articulating the demand of the Namibian people for the departure of the illegal regime
and for the freedom to decide its own future and
which strongly protests the holding of these conferences, is barred from the possibilities of taking part
in the political process? South Africa attempts to
crush organized political opposition, and only representatives of the so-called population
groups, that
is, leaders from the white community, tribal chiefs and
homelands officials, are invited to participate in the
conference.

123. The national conferences which are based on
the homelands system represent the very opposite of a
free choice. The people of Namibia
must instead
finally be given the opportunity
to organize politically and to determine their own future in free elections. Only under the supervision atid control of the
United Nations, which has the full responsibility
for
Namibia, can this be achieved.

118. Instead of giving any sign of a wish to conform
to the decisions of the United Nations, the Vorster
regime digs its heels firmer into the ground by creating
new military strongholds and. by further militarizing
the country. My Government
stated on 5 June last
year that “several circumstances would warrant the
conclusion that Article 39 [of the Charter] is applicable, that is, that the situation in Namibia constitutes
a threat to international
peace and security’* [1828rh
meeting, paru. 1001. We: maintain this view all the
more so since South Africa has since then increased
the militarization
of the’country.
The South African
policies create a situation of dangerous tension in
Africa. It :is therefore imperative
to keep up and
increase international
pressure on the South African
Government.

124. Without an active United Nations presence
South Africa would otherwise be able to exert pressure on the people of Namibia in order to distort the
election process to suit its own purposes. United
Nations supervision and control of elections is, therefore, vital if we are to make it possible for the people
of Namibia in its entirety to express itself freely, in
the true sense of the word, on the type of constitution
and what leaders it wants.
125. Before I conclude, let me express ‘the sincere
hope of my delegation that draft resolution S/11950,
14

introduced
this afternoon by the representative
of
Guyana and sponsored by, inter alia, Sweden, will
meet with the unanimous
support of the Security
Council.

with the advisory opinion of the International
Court
of Justice of 1971, have declared that South Africa’s
presence in Namibia constitutes a flagrant violation
of international
law. Therefore South Africa is occupying Namibia illegally and against the wishes of the
people of Namibia.

126. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Kenya, whom I- invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.

132. On 17 December 1974 the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution ,366 ,( 1974), in which
it demanded that South Africa make a solemn declaration that it would comply with the decisions and
resolutions of the United Nations and the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice in regard
to Namibia and that it recognize the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation. The resolution
also demanded
that South Africa withdraw. from
Namibia. That was a significant resolution, in that it
was adopted unanimously
by all members of the
Council, including those States which associate with
and sustain South Africa in the Organization.
It was
a loud and clear call on South Africa to withdraw
from Namibia.

127. Mr. MAINA
(Kenya): Mr. President, I ,wish
first of all to thank you and the other members of
the Security Council for inviting Kenya to participate
in this debate. I would also express to you the sincere
pleasure and satisfaction of my delegation at seeing
you preside over the Council as this’ body once
more takes up the question of Namibia. It is indeed a
happy coincidence that the United Republic of Tanzania should be presiding over the Council when we
discuss this burning issue of our continent. The commitment of the United Republic of Tanzania to the
cause of the liberation of Africa and your personal
skill and leadership have been and will continue to be
extremely valuable in the current debate on the question of Namibia.

133.. The contemptuous
refusal by South Africa to
comply -with resolution 366 (1974)-is on record and
known to all members of the Council. The Pretoria
regime not only rejected both demands, which the
Security Council unanimously
considered moderate,
but continued its policy of defiance and pushed even
more vigorously its odious policies in Namibia.

128. Once again the Security Council is considering
the question of Namibia.
It is indeed regrettable
that the Pretoria r&gime has constantly chosen not to
comply with the resolutions-of the General Assembly
and Security Council on the question of Namibia.

134. .The President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, Mr. Kamana, told the Security Council
[we 1880rh meeting] that South Africa had decided
to set aside about 40 per cent of the least desirable
land for the separate so-called homelands for each of
the non-white groups. This is a serious adventure by.
South Africa to extend the policy of “divide and rule”
in Namibia.

129. As is well known to all of us, the United Nations has dealt with the question of Namibia since its
inauguration. The problem of Namibia is as old as the
United Nations itself, and the facts have been well
recorded. Therefore it is unnecessary to recall in
detail all the relevant facts, even if we had the time to
do so in the course of this debate. In 1946, by a resolution of the General Assembly, South Africa was
requested to bring Namibia within the United Nations
Trusteeship System. South Africa refused to comply
with this request. Instead South Africa continued to
colonize the Territory under the “spirit of Mandate”.
130. In the vears that have nassed. South Africa has
consistently refused to recognize the United Nations
responsibility
over Namibia. It has brutally continued
to colonize and exploit the Territory. It has extended
criminal policies of crpcwth~id to the Territory.
The
regime is now busy introducing the policy of bantustans, or the so-called homelands, in Namibia. These
policies are clearly aimed at violating the unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia.

135. The General Assembly has repeatedly condemned the policy of bantustans inside South Africa
itself. It is even more deplorable for South Africa to
extend such policies in Namibia,
a Territory which
it illegally occupies. Since the Security Council considered the question of Namibia last year there is no
evidence that South Africa has changed its policies.
The people of Namibia continue to suffer under the
oppressive rule of the illegal regime. The occupying
regime continues to escalate its police brutalities
against Namibians through killing, arrests, detentions
of political leaders and all manner of repressive police
brutalities.

131. In 1966 the General Assembly terminated the
Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and placed
the country under the direct responsibility
of the
United Nations. The responsibility
of administering
that country until it becomes independent was entrusted to the United Nations Council for Namibia.
Resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and the
subsequent decisions of the United Nations, together

136. The report of the United Nations Council for
Namibia covering the beriod of October 1974 to September 1975” clearly’ reports the intensified repression of the Namibian people by South African forces.
This repression
is particularly
directed
against
SWAPO, one of the most effective liberation movements in Namibia.
Several SWAP0
leaders and
Youth League members have been arrested, de15

..

tained or gaoled for such alleged offences as being in
possession of what South Africa describes as “banned literature”.
SWAPO,
a leading political force
which is struggling to liberate Namibia, has become
the most wanted target of South African forces. The
statement by the representative
of SWAP0
in the
Council during the current debate went a long way
towards exposing South Africa’s brutal occupation
of Namibia.

the Council to accept what he called realities of the
situation. In short, he was calling on the Council to
accept what South African dictates and holds by
force. This is of course neither reasonable nor accepable to the United Nations. He constantly referred to
misunderstanding
between the United Nations and
South Africa. This is normal because South Africa
and the United Nations do not speak the same ianguage on the crucial issues of the evil of colonialism
and human rights. South Africa is a delinquent Member of the Organization and until it brings itself back
to the normal human stream there is no reason to
believe that its language and actions will be either
understood or accepted by the United Nations. He
asserted without any sense of shame that South
Africa does not claim an inch of Namibia. The whole
disagreement
and debate over Namibia
has been
about nothing else. It has been on South Africa’s pretensions in Namibia for more than half a century now.
The claim that South Africa stays in Namibia at the
wish of the people of Namibia is too contemptible
to
call for comment.

137. Having refused to comply with the United
Nations resolution calling on it to withdraw from
Namibia, South Africa tried to deceive the world and
the people of Namibia by organizing the so-called
constitutional
conference. This so-called constitu:
tionai conference is no more than an open trick to
deceive the people of Namibia and the United Nations. The so-called talks seek to divide the country,
and encourage the evils of racism and tribalism rather
than national unity. South Africa’s interest is merely
to have a lion’s share of the Territory for the minority
in Namibia and thus further its policies of apartheid.
The- African leaders attending these talks are hired
individuals who have to obey and represent the interests of South Africa. In short, they are puppets and
stooges of South Africa. They represent no one else
but the Pretoria
regime. The representatives
of
SWAP0 were excluded from that conference. These
tricks of ‘South Africa under the cloak of a constitutional conference should be exposed and rejected by
the Council, while it reaffirms once again the inaiienabie right of the Namibian people to seifdetermination and independence.

140. The representative
made repeated assertions
that South Africa was not a colonial Power. It is hard
for anyone not engaged in self-delusion to view South
‘Africa as anything but .the worst colonial Power of
this century. Indeed a suitable description of South
Africa’s form of colonialism
is “slavery”.
It is the
worst type because it is described in deceptive terminology which conceals it from recognition.
South
Africa will be an acceptable African nation when it
rehabilitates itself and joins the normal human stream
to become an acceptabii: Member of the United
Nations.

138. The manner in which the Pretoria rdgime is
conducting these so-called constitutional
talks has
alarmed not only the people of Namibia,
but ihe
whole international
community.- The ‘nine countries
of the European Economic Community,
in their letter
addressed to the Secretary-General
on 26 January
1976, expressed their concern that the constitutional
arrangements being made by South Africa for Namibia are far from adequate. They asked South Africa
to free ail political prisoners and allow them to participate in the process of self-determination.
They
called on South Africa to withdraw from Namibia as
soon as possible. This is a reasonable request which
comes from genuine friends of South Africa. South
Africa would be very foolish to ignore this call from
its only friends.

141. We also heard the statement of the representative of South Africa on the proposed constitutionaf
talks. He told us that South Africa is engaged in
working out a constitution
for Namibia which will
promote and show “respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without discrimination
merely on the basis of race, colour or creed” [188/sr
meeting,

pm-a.

981.

142. Is it possible for the Security Council or anyone
.other than South Africa to believe that the rkgime
would offer the people of Namibia what it has denied
the people inside South Africa? How can we believe
that a regime which continues to apply policies of
oprrrtheid
and practises the worst racial discrimination
through legislation can now be trusted to offer Namibia a constitution
that guarantees fundamental
human rights and freedom from racial discrimination?

139. I should like to make very few remarks arising
from the statement that was made by the representative of Pretoria two days ago. That representative
made a long statement which not only lacked substance, but was irrelevant to the issue before the
Council. The statement did not in any way tell the
Council what South Africa was doing to implement
the resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Council on the question of Namibia. After a lengthy
review of South Africa’s disagreement
with the
United Nations, the Pretoria representative called on

143. We have no illusions about his statement, as
we know too well that South Africa is only trying to
deceive the people of Namibia. How is it that these
fundamental freedoms for all without discrimination
on the basis of race have never been given to the
people of South Africa itself, contrary to the undertakings of that country to abide by the principles of
16

the Charter of the United Nations and countless
resolutions
by the General Assembly each year?
Sugar-costed statements like these cannot deceive the
members of the Council.

150. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): Mr. President, during
the discussion which immediately
preceded the present one, I had the pleasure of extending to you my
respects and compliments
together with sincere
assurances of confidence in your leadership. You will
bring, I am certain, to this debate the same qualities
of wise guidance that you brought to the previous
one on the Middle East and the Palestine question.
There is a strong link between these two questions:
they both involve the national rights of peoples, the
right of self-determination,
a history of betrayed
mandatory trust, an act of illegal occupation by a
foreign Power, the racist policies of the occupying
Power, the need for the application of minimal standards of human rights in the occupied territory, the
responsibility
of the United Nations and the decisive
crossroads between the peaceful and violent alternatives. They are one more instance of the historic
bonds between the African experience and the Arab
experience.

144. As I said earlier, the whole statement made by
the representative of Pretoria contradicts every fact
we know about South Africa. It offered nothing new
as far as Namibia is concerned. I shall therefore not
waste the time of the Council by making any’further
comments on it, but I must mention the irrelevant
introduction
of South Africa’s aggression in Angola
and other irrelevant matters into this debate.
145. We all know why South Africa intervened in
Angola. South Africa was caught almost napping by
the collapse of the Portuguese colonial empire. Its
dreams of a safe buffer colonial zone disappeared
overnight and it has been frantically clinging to a past
gone for ever while trying to erect new defensive
structures. We all know why South Africa would
like to be in Angola. This we knew long before the
collapse of the Portuguese colonial empire in Africa.
South African presence in Namibia has always been
a threat to the neighbouring countries. Indeed that is
what is happening now. The cry from South Africa
about foreign intervention
in Angola is a cover to
conceal its own massive military build-up in northern
Namibia.
South Africa feels that Namibia
offers a
security zone for it in order to proceed to Angola.

151. The history of the problem of Namibia is too
well known to be repeated. The United Nations has
had an early and agonizing relationship with it. What
is now important is the present and the future. What
is important now is to arrest a deteriorating
situation
and open the way to a constructive
future to the
people of Namibia. What is the present situation?
152. First, South Africa now occupies Namibia illegally. In 1966 the General Assembly decided to terminate South Africa’s Mandate and to place the
Territory under the direct responsibility
of the United
Nations. At the special session of May 1967, the
General Assembly established the United Nations
Council for Namibia to carry the responsibilities
on
behalf of the United Nations until independence.’
As South Africa persisted in its illegal occupation, the
International
Court of Justice gave its categorical
opinion in the summer of 1971 that the presence of
South Africa in Namibia was illegal. Both the General Assembly and the Security Council have since
then demanded the termination of the illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa and the transfer of
power to the people of Namibia with the assistance
of the United Nations. This has not yet been realized.

146. It is absurd to listen to the representative
of
that regime trying to put this the other way round.
Free Africa knows its enemies and does not need
South Africa to lecture it on the subject. Indeed,
South Africa is. free Africa’s enemy No. 1. As my
President, Mr. Mzee Jomo Kenyatta has said on many
occasions, Kenya will never feel free as long as one
square inch of Africa remains under colonial yoke.
147. I should like to urge the Security Council not
to stand idly by while South Africa’s racist regime
ruthlessly suppresses the Namibian people by ,undertaking to destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia. I appeal to the Council to show
unanimity
in taking a strong stand against South
Africa for its refusal to comply with Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 366 (1974).

153. Secondly, the South African occupation
authorities have been actively and systematically
dismembering the territorial
unity and integrity of the
land and people under occupation. Since 1968 it has
been implementing
a policy of bantustanization
in
the Territory.
A massive dislocation of population
has taken place in the creation of separate so-called
homelands. The plan envisages the fragmentation
of
the Territory,
the alteration
of its demographic
composition
and the retention by South Africa of a
large so-called “white area” which is rich in mineral
resources and is of special strategic and economic
significance. The largest part of the population
is
subject to exploitation
and lives in conditions
of
suppression and subservience.

148. My delegation appeals to the three permanent
members of the Security Council which exercised
their triple veto in October 1974 [/808th meeting] and
in June 1975 [1829th meeting] to protect South Africa
and their national economic interests, to reconsider
their position now and facilitate the adoption by the
Security Council of effective measures to ensure the
withdrawal of South Africa from Namibia.
149. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is *the
representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
17

154. Thirdly, the occupying Power has extended to the Territory the most repressive and inhuman practices. Racially discriminatory
and repressive laws
are ruthlessly applied, mass arrests and detentions
are practised and the old colonial political games and
gimmicks are employed with a view to breaking any
national
political
cohesion and perpetuating
the
division and fragmentation
of the people.
155. Fourthly,
a united national liberation’ movement has emerged and acquired broad recognition
and support. It is a national movement which, while
dedicated to the liberation of its homeland through
continued
struggle, including
armed struggle, has
shown maturity and responsibility
and readiness to
co-operate with the United Nations in all peaceful
efforts to bring about peaceful transfer of power and
independence to Namibia. This movement .has been
recognized not only by OAU but also by the United
Nations as the authentic representative of the people
of Namibia.

159. Only in such an atmosphere
can Namibia
proceed towards a peaceful and democratic evolution
to independence. In such an atmosphere, and under
the supervision of the United Nations, free elections
must be held for the whole of Namibia in order to
effect this evolution to independence.
The Security
Council has the responsibility
to strive for this goal
employing all the resources at its disposal. In pressing
towards these aims, the Council would be fulfilling
an earlier and irrevocable commitment
by the Council
and by the United Nations as a whole to the freedom,
welfare, integrity and independence of Namibia and
its brave and struggling people.
160. The PRESIDENT:
The next. speaker is the
representative of Tunisia. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

156. Those facts constitute the present situation in
Namibia. As I said earlier, what we should do as an
international
community
is both to arrest any deterioration in the situation and to chart the way to a
constructive future for the Namibian
people. There
is need, therefore, in the Council for firm andunanimous action. Security Council resolution 366 (1974),
adopted unanimously,
demanded that South Africa
take the necessary steps to withdraw its illegal administration from Namibia and transfer power to the
people of Namibia.
It demanded that South Africa
make a solemn declaration that it would abide by
these principles and goals and that it would recognize
the territorial
integrity and unity of Namibia.
As
South Africa reacted negatively to that unanimous
resolution,
the Security Council,
which had the
responsibility offollowingup
its decision, was thwarted
in its action by the triple veto of June 1975.

161. Mr. DRISS
(Tunisia)
(inferprefution
from
French): Mr. President, allow me first of all to express
to you and the other members of the Council the
gratitude of my delegation at being allowed to participate in your work on the question of Namibia. This
question which has been considered in the United
Nations since its establishment,
is of vital importance
for us because of the geographic position of Namibia, which is in a sensitive area of Africa, and
because of the principles involved.
162. On this question the authority of the United
Nations, the principles of international
law and the
decisions of the International
Court of Justice, as
well as the fundamental
and inalienable
rights of
peoples to self-determination
and even simply to be
treated as human beings-all
these principles, rules
and rights are being trampled underfoot, refuted and
ignored by the minority racist authorities of South
Africa, whose actions have been repeatedly condemned and whose policy has made it deserving of
being outlawed by the intematjonal
community.

157. ’ It is, incidentally,
ironic though familiar that
the States with special relationships
with South
Africa have all pronounced themselves for, ur at least
paid lip service to, the right principles in the question,
but have shown no consistency between their words
and their actions. But the Security Council must act
this time. The requirements of future peace in Africa
demand it; the imperatives of world peace demand it.
It must act on two levels: the first is that of arresting
the deteriorating situation in Namibia under the illegal
occupation; the second is the level of action to end
the occupation.

163.. Yet time and time again the United Nations
has endeavoured to find a peaceful solution of the
problem by way of negotiation. Without recalling all
the missions sent by the United Nations in the past,
I should simply like to mention those of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Representative
in 1972,
undertaken at the request of the Security Council. In
all the efforts made to arrive at a compromise which
would be acceptable both to the United Nations and
South Africa, the South African authorities
responded by manceuvres and tried to take advantage of
the honesty and integrity of the Secretary;General
to
such an extent that the Security Councii finally decided to break off contacts with South Africa.

158. On the first level, and pending the organization of democratic processes, under United Nations
supervision, for the transfer of power and indepenl
dence, the Council must ensure the minimal conditions of normal life and elemental welfare for the
population of Namibia under occupation. The human
rights of the population
under occupation must be
protected,
racially
discriminatory
and repressive

164. Even the day before yesterday the representative of the South African racist regime launched a
18

.

laws and practices must be abolished. the destructive
policy of Bantustans and homelands must be stopped
and political life must be normalized.

before yesterday is irrefutable proof of this. We see
nothing but contradictions
and delaying manoeuvres.
There is no concrete proposal in accordance with the
principles of the Charter and the recommendations
and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

new challenge to the authority of the Organization
when he stated that “the South African Government
does not recognize and has never recognized any
right on the part of the United Nations to supervise
the affairs of the Territory”
[188/sr meeting, paw. 921.
165. This attitude proves the obstinate determination of the regime to follow a senseless policy based
on inequality and repression against the Namibian
people. When in 1974 and after the peoples of Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau,
Angola and other former
Portuguese Territories
had forced the Portuguese
regime to change its policy, we in the United Nations
had hoped that South Africa would learn from these
events and settle the problem of Namibia.
In this
spirit, the Security Council adopted resolution 366
(1974), which was of the utmost importance because
it was unanimously
adopted by the members of the
Council. Although the resolution was conciliatory .in
tone and provided an opportunity for South Africa to
become reconciled
with the United Nations,
the
South African authorities once again multiplied
their
mamnuvres so as to perpetuate their domination over
the Territory. After negotiations with representatives
of three major European Powers, the South African
Minister of Foreign .Affairs addressed a letter to the
Secretary-General
in which he stated, inter alit, that
“if the African President of the United Nations
Council for South West Africa and the Special Committee of the Organization of African Unity are interested in discussing the progress and developments
in
the Territory with my Prime Minister, they are welcome to do so” [S/1170/].

168. I must pay a tribute to my friend and brother,
Mr. Sam Nujoma,
President of SWAPO,
and his
collaborators
for having evinced political
maturity
and a great sense of responsibility.
In the face of all
attempts to divide the country and of the mameuvres of
fragmentation
by South Africa, they maintained
unity and cohesion in their movement.
They have
furthermore displayed great moderation in favouring
the holding of free elections to be controlled by the
United Nations. They prefer this peaceful process
because they have confidence in the soundness and
representative
nature of their movement.
The challenge of the representative
of SWAP0 at the beginning of this debate to South Africa is significant.
169. We are happy to note that the formula of free
elections under United Nations auspices is supported
by the members of the European Economic Community, as we see in the letter sent to the SecretaryGeneral by Mr. Kaufmann,
representative
of the
Netherlands,
on behalf of the Community.
But for
these elections to have real significance, favourable
conditions
must be created for them to proceed
normally,
and this implies the release of political
prisoners, the return of the exiles, and the guarantee
of freedom of movement,
meetings and expression.
These conditions are essential. How can one be sure
of them if the Government
of South Africa refuses
the United Nations any control over Namibia or any
participation
in the emancipation
of the Namibian
people and its national independence? I

166. This was far from the solemn declaration on
the Territory requested by the Security Council. The
Government,
instead of complying
with United
Nations decisions, has increased arrests. and rendered more severe its repression against the Namibian people. Furthermore,
in order to pacify the
United Nations and mislead the world public, South
Africa gave great publicity to a so-called constitutional conference, which was supposed to provide
the people with an opportunity
to state its views on
the future of the Territory and also announced reforms of its racial legislation. But the policy of South
Africa in Namibia has deceived no one; it is still
inspired by the plan to divide up the Territory on a
tribal basis. Thus the so-called constitutional
conference gathered the so-called representatives of the
tribes whose representative
nature is relative and
was boycotted by the real representatives
of. the
people, in particular by SWAP0 and the Namibian
National Convention.

170. Thus, we are all faced with a real ‘problem to
be solved: how to bring the Government
of South
Africa to some conception of its obligations and its
role in the’ African and international
concert. That
will only be possible if the major Powers adopt a firm
attitude towards South Africa. Therefore,
no one
should be surprised if, as a result of the likely impossibility of holding free elections under United Nations
auspices owing to the obstinacy of South Africa and
the hesitation and weakness of the major Powers,
Namibia
becomes a hotbed of tension threatening
international
peace and security.
171. The leaders of the national liberation
movement of Namibia have taught their people, the peoples
of Africa and all peoples who prize peace and justice
the duty of fighting to the finish in the struggle for
freedom which their brothers have waged before
them. It is therefore up to the Security Council to act
in such a way- that this tight succeeds with a minimum
of bloodshed and massacres by democratic, peaceful
means and by all means provided for under the Charter was written with the blood of those who died. on

167. The efforts of South Africa to. legitimize that
conference, especially by sending a delegation of
33 persons to the United States and Europe, failed
lamentably.
As for the so-called reforms of the racial
legislation, they were merely deceptive and without
any real significance. The statement made by the
representative
of the South African regime the day
19

the battlefields of Europe and Asia for the triumph
of peace and justice, and not for the triumph of apartheid and its South African advocates who are getting
ready to perform new feats in defiance of the United
Nations and international
morality.

177. In that resolution,
adopted unanimously,
the
Security Council called upon South Africa to withdraw its administration
from Namibia and to transfer
power to the people of the Territory under the supervision of the United Nations, and, pending the transfer of power, to comply with the provisions of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

172. Who can doubt that Namibia
will be free?
Rather we doubt the future of the South African
regime if it persists in its policy of apartheid and
refuses to co-operate with the United Nations for the
liberation of Namibia and if it continues to consider
force to be its only guarantee, its sole protection.

178. What was South Africa’s response to it? It was
inadequate,
deliberately
vague and totally unsatisfactory. There was no doubt in the minds of our
delegation, and indeed in the minds of many other
delegations,
that this was yet another attempt to
prolong its ilIega1 occupation of Namibia through a
policy of divide and rule.

173. Mr. President, I would not wish to conclude
_ my brief statement without referring to your constant
activity, in the Security Council and in the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the Granting of
Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples,
for the emancipation of peoples. I also wish to express
our satisfaction because of the efforts being made by
the United Nations Council- for Namibia under the
effective presidency of Mr. Kamana for the liberation
of Namibia. Finally, I would like to pay a tribute to
the work of the United Nations Commissioner
for
Namibia,
Mr. Sean MacBride, and to his admirable
dynamism. The concerted action of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
the Commissioner
and
SWAP0
has effected spectacular
achievements,
such as the creation of the United Nations Institute
for Namibia at Lusaka’* which trains personnel who
will soon lead a free Namibia.

179. There was an apparent consensus of opinion
in the Security Council at that time that South Africa’s
response to resolution 366 (1974) was not satisfactory.
But the Security Council, at its June I975 meeting,
failed to adopt a draft resolution calling for a mandatory arms embargo against South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations on account
of the negative votes cast by three permanent members of the Security CouncikNow
we are gathered
here, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution
3399 (XXX) adopted last year, to consider anew the
implementation
of Security Council resolution 366
(1974).
180. We are meeting against a background of insidious developments.
While South Africa continues to
follow its policy of apartheid and political repression
in the Territory, it is simultaneously
promoting divisiveness among the inhabitants of the Territory behind
the smoke screen of a constitutional
conference from
which the authentic representatives of the people of
Namibia are excluded. South Africa’s position and
attitude since June last year has remained basicahy
unchanged. If it has changed at all, it has changed for
the worse.

174. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative
of Bangladesh. I accordingly
invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
175. Mr. KARIM
(Bangladesh):
Mr. President,
allow me to express my deep appreciation, first of all,
of this opportunity
to address the Security Council,
meeting here today to discuss the question of the
future of Namibia, and secondly, of the fact that I am
doing so at a time when the Council’s deliberations
are being presided over by you, a distinguished representative of a developing country of the continent of
Africa which has been in the vanguard of the struggle
for the liberation of peoples of Africa from colonial
domination.

181. We have heard, recently, the statement of the
representative of South Africa in this Council chamber. Instead of addressing himself to the issue under
consideration,
that is, the future of the people of
Namibia, he vainly tried to divert attention to Angola.
Even when he talked about Namibia,
he made it
amply clear that South Africa does not recognize
United Nations competence in Namibia, that South
Africa does not recognize the territorial integrity and
unity of Namibia,
and that South Africa does not
accept the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice. By talking about the peoples and the
territories of Namibia he only made clear the obnoxious intention of South Africa to bantustanize Namibia. He talked of ethnic groups and races, possibly
because racialism is the only system the South Africa
white minority knows and recognizes and believes in.

176. As a member of the United Nations Council
for Namibia,
Bangladesh has been following with
keen interest and fraternal concern the fate of the
people of Namibia in their travail. under the illegal
occupation of the racist South African regime. As
a member of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
Bangladesh participated
in the Council’s debate on
Namibia in June 1975. At that time the Council met
to consider and to take appropriate action on South
Africa’s compliance
with the terms and conditions
set out in resolution 366 (1974), which was adopted
by the Council in December 1974.

182. In their statements in the Council both the
Rapporteur of the Special Committee against Aport20

held and the representative of SWAPS have des-

happy- that you, an outstanding son of the United
Republic of Tanzania, are presiding over this debate
in the Security Council. My delegation’s esteem for
the Tanzanian delegation is equalled only by the
fraternal feelings that have united our two neighbouring and friendly countries from.Slme inmemorial.
We are proud of the firm and competent manner in
which the United Republic of Tanzania has always
vigorously fought for the cause of the colonized and
oppressed peoples of southern Africa who are struggling for their liberation.

cribed at some length the rapid expansion of South
Africa’s military presence and establishment of new
military bases in Namibia. Instead of removing its
racially discriminatory laws, the South African r&
gime has escalated repression in Namibia and has
been making desperate efforts to rush the creation of
.- .
bantustans in Namibia.
183. The Special timmittee
against Apartheid
is&d a statement on 23 June drawing ,@tention to
the military operations launched by the :Pretoria
&gime,against the people of Namibia boPh.in Namibia
itself and’ beyond its borders. The Territory of Namibia is now being used as the spring-board-for South
African intervention in the affairs of another African
country. The militariiation of Namibia is going ahead,
while South Africa prepares to become:.,a, nuclear
Power by exploiting uranium in Namibia.. These are
danberous developments and have serious ,imp!ications for international peace and security. .L :<

188. Allow me also to express to the Council as a
whole and to each of its members our gratitude at
being allowed to participate in its work on the important question of Namibia, which is unique in that it
represents the last remaining vestige of co!oni&lism
on the continent of Africa. But now the time has
come. The colonialists no longer hold sway. There is
no longer any distinction between white man and
coloured man. We are all free and equal brothers.,

184. Under the circumstances we are compelled to
ask ourselves: what should we do now? Should we
sit back with folded arms, as Namibia is progressively
dismembered and exploited to serve the perverted
designs of South Africa? Should we not take action
to fulfil the moral obligation that rests on us to ensure
that the people of Namibia enjoy their full political
and human rights? In June last year the -three permanent nieinbers of the Security Council, while
casting their triple veto, talked of hopeful signs that
they saw both in Namibia and in South ,Africa and
advised us to be patient. We have been patient, but
what has been the result?- Has it not enco.uraged the
racist &gime in South Africa to continue to flout the
wishes of the Organization?
,’
I*.
185. We are, therefore, required to consider what
course of action the Council should follow to implement its own decisions on the question of Namibia
contained in Security Council resolution 366 (1974).
I-mentioned earlier that Bangladesh, as a member of
the United Nations Council for Namibia, has been
closely associated with the affairs of Namibia. We
entirely agree with and support the proposals made
by the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, which form the basis for draft .,resolution
S/l1950 introduced this afternoon. The course of
action indicated- in the draft resolution represents, to
our minds, the least that the Council can do to ensure
that free elections take place for the whole of Namibia
as one political entity under the supervision and
control of the United Nations.

189. Now Africa has victoriously freed its&f from
colonialism, but its feet are still in fetters. Hence free
Africa, the truly democratic countries and, above all,
the concerned peoples of southern Africa, will no
longer tolerate the inhuman and unjust system of
racism, upurtheid, colonialism and shameless exploitation. We are convinced that al! means should’ be
used in order to put an end to this humiliating System
condemned by the Charter of the United Rations.
However, the minority racist regime of South Africa,
like a sleeping gan awakened by a gadfly, continues
to be obstinate and to struggle desperately so that it
may continue to doze in the dark night of racial domination, economic exploitation and upurtheid.
190. We must also deplore the attitude of Western
members of the Security Council and, above all, of
the three permanent members with their triple veto.
They always come to the rescue of the racist Republic of South Africa, thus encouraging it in its
defiance and,disdain for the international community.
Ahbough the hour of the end of the colonial era struck
long ago, Western companies, supported by the white
racist rkgime of South Africa, are stepping up their
plundering activities in order to exhaust the natural
resources of Namibia. These imperialist States are
deliberately disregarding the evolution of history.
Thanks to this Western encouragement, South Africa
is strengthening its military forces in Namibia and is
using this jntertiational Territory a> a base for attack
against neighbouring countries. The racist rdgime of
Pretoria persists in its oppression and in vain foreign
colonial wars, turning its back on the realities of
today’s world.

186. The PRESIDENT: The next speak& is the
representative of Burundi. Accordingly I invite him
‘to take a place at the Council table and to, make his
statement.

191. In its desperate struggle against the tide of
. history, thanks to the complicity of some Western
‘countries, the racist rkgime of Pretoria is now beconiing a nuclear Power, thereby threatening the
security of all African countries. The representative

187. Mr. MIKANAGU
(Burundi) (interpretc&n
Frakh):
Mr. President, Burundi is especially

from

21

of SWAPO, Mr. Garoeb, spoke to us yesterday of
the militarization of Namibia and he said that this
involved the creation as well at strategic points
throughout Namibia of new bases for the army and
the air force and that one of the largest air and land
bases in the entire African continent would be completed next month in Grootfontein.

197. Before concluding, I should Iikeonce again to
say that we firmly believe that the time. of wanton
power, racist domination and exploitation has passed;
That is why we remain confident of the final victory
of the- nationalist forces of Namibia over the racists
of South Africa, who stubbornly keep other human
beings like themselves in slavery, and in the twentieth
century no less.

192. In the light of what I have just said, the delegation of Burundi asks that the Western members of
the Security Council and all the Powers supporting
the absurd situation prevailing in Namibia should not
continue to disregard the emergence of a new era in
international relations which is witnessing the end of
oppression and exploitation. At any rate, whether
those Powers like it or not, history is irreversible and
its course inevitable.

198. I have not been able to:find a better conclusion,
than the one drawn by you, Mr. President, in the
speech you,.made with such brilliance following the,
statement af the representative of South Africa. You
said that ..
)‘ ‘>I
“we believe that it is,in the interests of the Namibian people, in the interests of the African people,
in the interests of international harmony, in the
interestseof race relations, in the interests of inter-.
national. yunderstanding, that the international
community must try once again to avoid the holo-.
caust of: a full-flegded conflagration in Namibia.
I believe that the Security Council has the opportunity totry to do that.” [/Mist meering, pat-a. .154.]

193. The position of Burundi is clear. We believe
that the valiant Namibian people will free itself from
the yoke of the South African regime by ‘using all
means possible, including the intensification of the
armed struggle. We are convinced that Namibia will
gain a resounding victory over the minority racist
r&gime of South Africa.

199. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
representative of India. Accordingly, I invite the
representative of India to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

194. My delegation recalls that several resolutions
of the General Assembly and of the Security Council
have been adopted and that all of them demanded the
withdrawal of the illegal administration of South
Africa from Namibia. But all those resolutions have
remained ineffectual because certain members of the
Council are giving their unconditional support to the
racist regime of South Africa. How long will we have
to tolerate this complete contempt for General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, as well as
for the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice?

200. Mr... BUDHIRAJA (India): I should like first
of all to thank the members of the Council for giv,ing
an opportunity to my delegation to participate in the
Council’sdebate on the question of Namibia. India’s
views on the question of Namibia have been aired -on
many occasions in the United Nations. .We have
taken an interest in this question since the very origin.
of the Mandates System, When the International
Court of Justice was asked for its advisory opinion
relating to the legal consequences of the failure of
the Government of South Africa to vacate Namibia,
India submitted a. written statement and also made
an oral statement before the Cor~rt.~~We have thus
shown a continuing interest in,this question and our
views are well known and, consequently, I do not
have. to reiterate them in any great detail during the
present debate. However, I must make it clear that
India regards South Africa to be in illegal occupation
of Namibia and we believe that South Africa must’
withdraw from this Territory which has been recog
nized by the General Assembly and by the Security
Council as ,a responsibility of the United Nations.

195. South Africa has refused to comply with Security Council resolution 366 (1974), although it was
adopted unanimously. We all recall that last June
three permanent members of the Security Council,
by casting their veto, prevented the Council from
taking concrete measures for the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 366 (1974).
196. Now, in order not to embarrass those who
support the white racist and minority regime of South
Africa, and in order to spare ourselves a repetition of
the humiliating triple veto which took place last year,
Burundi simply requests that the Council demand
free national elections under the supervision and
control of the United Nations for all of Namibia as
one political entity. This simple request will put the
sacred principles of democracy, freedom and selfdetermination to the test. We venture to hope that
the Security Council will finally be able to play a
rightful role by taking concrete measures to end the
shameful and humiliating racist-colonialist policy of
South Africa in Namibia.

<

201. There were some grounds for optimism in
December 1974 when the Security Coun&l adopted
its resolution 366 (1974). In that resolution the Security Council had reiterated its condemnation of the
continued illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by) South Africa. Further, the resolution,
infer uliu; demanded that South Africa should make
a solemn declaration that it would comply with the
resolutions and decisions of the United Nations a.nd
22

.‘.,

the advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice of 21 June 1971 in-regsrd to Namibia. in that
declaration South Africa was further required to
recognize the territorial integrity and unity of Namibia as a nation.

and imprison all the real and suspected political
opponents of the rigime in Namibia, before the
so-called constitutional conference, which was really
designed to divide the Namibian- people and thus
perpetuate South African..domination in the Territory.

202. The response of South Africa to resolution 366
(1974) can be described as Beringone of total cynicism.
The Sbuth African Foreign Minister in his!letter dated
27 May 1975 [S/lifOI] to the SecretaryLGeneral had
made it clear that South Africa would not allow the
United Nations to have any role in the ‘political and
constitutional future, of Namibia. Further, it became
evident that South Africa did not contemplate the
maintenance of the territorial integrity ‘of .Namibia,
though this was stated in an ambiguous’manner. In
short, South Africa had clearly indicated <thenthat it
would. not comply with the provisions of .resolution
366 (1974). The statement made by the representative
of South Africa in the Security Council- during ,th’e
current debate [see 188Ist meeting] and his letter to
the Secretary-General [S/t-i948 and Add.11 have
only confirmed .that South Africa will ‘continue to
follow its misguided and provocative policies in
Namibia.

206. It is well known that the elements collected
by the South African authorities to participate in the
so-calIed constitutional conference were people who
supported the idea of forming bantustans. The socalled constitutional conference excluded SWAPO,
which has been recognized by OAU and by the United
Nations as the soie and true representative of the
people of Namibia. The umbrella organization of
various groups of Africans in Namibia, the Namibian
National Convention, also did not participate in that
Conference. The holding of that so-called constitutional conference deserves to be condemned in
unequivocal terms. My delegation believes that that
was nothing else but an exercise in trying to implemeni the so-called Odendaal plan, which had initially
proposed the division of Namibia on tribal lines into
12 so-called homelands. It is nothing but annexation
hidden under the cloak of association and racial
discrimination under the pretext of constitutionalism.

203. The objectives of South Africa w&e clearly
before the Security Council when it met in May 1975
to consider what appropriate measures should be
taken in terms of the Charter of the United Nations
against South Africa so that it would comply with the
relevant decisions of the United Nations. We all
know what happened at that time. The Security Council was paralysed from taking any action ‘because of
the negative votes which were cast by three permanent members of the Council.

207. That so-called conference has adouted a “Declaration of Intent” [Ibid.] according to which Namibia
is to obtain some sort of “independence” by 1978 as
a loose confederation of ethnic states .in which the
white settlers will retain that part of the land of that’
Territory which has the maximum wealth. That
“Deciaration of Intent” seems to be in keeping with
the policy which was enunciated by the Foreign
Minister of South Africa in his letter of 27 May 1975
to the Secretary-General.

204. However, that development does iot have a
bearing on the validity of resolution 366 (1974). In
fact, the. General Assembly in its resolution 3399
(XXX) has urged the Security Council urgently to
take up the question of Namibia and to act to give
effect to its resolution 366 (1974). It is in this context
that the Council is now holding its ddiberations, and
it is the earnest hope of my delegation that the Councl1 will be able to act this time so that Sbuth Africa
withdraws from the illegally occupied Territory oY
Namibia. The responsibility of the Council is thus a
very heavy one. It. must act iti order to ensure that
South Africa compliers with its decisions:, otherwise
the ‘credibility of the United Nations, indeed that of
the provisions of the Charter itself, is at stake.

208. That policy was reaffirmed by the representative of South Africa the other day in his statement
before the Council. Listening to his statement one
might have thought that under the illegal administration Namibia has now become a land in which milk
and honey flowed freely and that the inhabitants
there are now living almost in paradise. In addition, there was a tone of injured innocence throughout
the statement because the world community had not
given recognition to the “great role” which South
Africa has played in Namibia. That tone does not
befit the representative of a country which practises
the heinous, indeed criminal, policy of apartheid at
home and which is in illegal occupation of a mandated
Territory.

205. Events in Namibia during the last few months 209. Instead of having fulfilled its responsibility to
promote the well-being pf the inhabitants of Namibia,
have taken a particularly disquieting turn. In August
1975 a new wage of repression, arrests and detention
which was its sacred trust, that country has exported
of Namibians was unleashed by the South African
its inhuman and degrading system of upurrhtid, has
r&gime. Undoubtedly, they were connected with the ruthlessly exploited the wealth of the Territory, has
convening of the so-called constitutional conference
unleashed terror, repression and oppression and is
which opened on 1 September 1975. Obviously, the now seeking to destroy its territorial integrity. Did
real purpose behind those renewed acts of terror and ’ the representative of South Africa believe that he
brutality against the Namibian people was to arrest was speaking before some uninformed and naive
23

results of the elections will clearly show what the
people of Namibia want. If, as South Africa asserts,
the people of Namibia want it to stay in that Tmitory, then the people of Namibia will no doubt indicate what their desire is. If, however, the people of
Namibia give a different verdict, then obviously
South Africa must withdraw from that Territory in
accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the
Namibian people and with its obligations as a Member of the ‘United Nations. The holding of such elections will clearly demonstrate to ail concerned the
freely expressed desire of the people of that Territory.
These elections should be held under United Nations
supervision and control, not only to guarantee that
they are free and fair elections, but also because the
United Nations is the legal authority in Namibia.

persons? He should have remembered that he was
addressing the Security Council, and no one in this
chamber can be misled by such vords.
210. Alarming reports have also been received
about South Africa’s military build-up in the illegally
occupied Territory of Namibia. South African troops
are not only being utilized for suppressing the legitimate aspirations of the Namibian people; there have
been also reports that South Africa has also forcibly
removed families along a broad stretch on the border
between Namibia and Angola. This has caused further suffering and misery for the Namibians who
have lived in that area for centuries. The forcible
removal of the population along the border has a
sinister purpose’ behind it. Even before Angola
became independent, South African troops had
occupied the Calueque Dam in the southern part of
Angola. Since the independence of Angola-which
has been welcomed by my Government-South
Africa has sent troops into the interior of that newly
independent State. All that shows the nature of the
South African racist regime. It not only believes that
it can with impunity illegally occupy Namibia but
also that its forces can go into the territory of a newly
independent State. Yet, the Security Council heard
from the representative of South Africa that South
Africa is not a colonial Power and that it wishes to
live in peace with its neighbours. A fine sense of
“living in peace” this is.

214. The President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia had conveyed the views. of that Council
regarding what the Security Council must do as the
very minimum. India is a member of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and my delegation
associated“itself with the five points which were
raised by him. The peaceful options available to the .Namibian. people to exercise their right to self-determination and independence are slowly being diminished. Increasingly, they .will be forced to resort to
violence to secure their aims and aspirations;. The
opportunity still exists for finding a peaceful solution
to this problem. It is up’to the Council now to take
an appropriate decision at this historic’ moment. We
hope that the wisdom of the Council will find the tight
formula for achieving a peaceful solution.

211. Those actions on the part of South Africa
deserve to be condemned by the international community. Those actions clearly show that South African policies are a threat to international peace and
security, especially in the southern part of Africa. It
is therefore all the more necessary to ensure that
appropriate measures are taken in order to compel
South Africa to change its present course, which will
otherwise result in a catastrophe.

The

meeting

rose at 7p.m.
Natcs

’ South West Africa,
Second Phase, Judgment,
1.C.J. Reports
1966. D. 6.
2mcgal Conseyctences
for States of the Cantinaed
Presence
of
South
AjXco
in Numibia
(South
West Aj%a)
notwithstanding
Security
Coancil
Resvlatian
216 (1970). Ah~isary
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reports
1971, p. 16.
3 Oficial
Records
qf the General
Assembly.
Twenty-ninth
Session, Supplement
No. 24A. para. 84.

212. An opportunity has presented itself for changing
this course and it is for the Security Council to seize
it. The General Assembly inits resolution 3399(XxX)
decided that free national elections should be held in
Namibia as a matter of urgency under the direct
supervision and control of the United Nations. I might
add that that particular General Assembly resolution
was adopted by an overwhelming majority; there
were no negative votes, though there were seven
abstentions.

4 See General Assembly resolution 21454XXI).
5 See General Assembly resolution 2248 ?S-Vj of 19 May 1967.
6 See A/AC. 131lSR.223.
’ See Offk-ial
Retards
sion. Ple&y
Meetings,

of the General

Assemble, -

Thirtieth

Ses-

2375th meeting.
s Commission of Etiquiry into South West Africa Affairs, established in 1962 by the Republic of South Africa under the chairmanship of Mr. F.H. Odendaal.
9 See Af10297. annex I.
I0 See A/i0217 and Corr. 1.

213. If South Africa is really serious in giving an
opportunity to the people of Namibia to exercise
their right to self-determination and independence,
then this is an opportunity which that regime can
avail itself of. Elections under United Nations supervision and control are bound to be free and fair. The

I’ See Oflcianl Records
qf the General
Assembly.
Thirtieth
Session. Supplement
No. 24.
I2 Ibid.. Twntv-ninth
Session, Supplement
Na. 24A. sect. IV.
*) See Lcnnl konseauences ‘fur States of the Continued
hrsence of S&h
Africa ‘in Nam-ibia
(South -West Africa)
natwithstanding
Stwwity
Council Rcsolatian
276 (1970). Ad\*isory
Opinion.
I.C.J. Reparts
1971, pp. 18 and 20.

24

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences dtpositaires
du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

HOlIY-IMTh

HS~AHEIII

WJA~HIIR
Opra~nsaquu
sasax
w at-‘CHTCTB~X

OPI-AH&i

O~~~~HH~HH~IS
BO BC~X paiioHax

aaule~

LHIIXKHOM

r.raraaune

HaqrlR,

Ce~qus?

no np0AEZW2

COMO

CONSECUIR

3A4HR

OWIaEAUHEHHIdX

HAI(MH

MOXCKHO ~ynwrb
B KHHXKHLIX
MWBH~BOAHT~
cnpsmcn
06 UJAM~ARX
B
wnw nnmn-re
do anpecy:
Opranmaqwn
06%eAWHeHHbIX
KSAaHr?ir,
Hbm-HOPK
HIIW >fCeHeBa.

PUBLICACIONES

Hauuii
Mwpa.

DE LAS NAClONES

UNIDAS

Las pubiicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o.dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations. New York

00400

83-60801-May

1984-2,200
