A /71/PV.97

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

97th plenary meeting

Monday, 11 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Young (Belize),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
2001-2010: Decade to Roll Back Malaria in
Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa
Draft resolution (A/71/L.89)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Swaziland to introduce draft
resolution A/71/L.89.
Mr. Masuku (Swaziland): It is an honour to
introduce, on behalf of the Group of African States and
in our capacity as current Chair of the African Leaders
Malaria Alliance, draft resolution A/71/L.89, entitled
“Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to
control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
Over the past two years, the world has seen
tremendous progress in malaria control, including an
estimated 60 per cent decline in malaria mortality rates
among all age groups and a 65 per cent decline among
children under five, with 6.2 million lives saved. In
Africa alone, which carries the highest malaria burden,
we have witnessed a 42 per cent decline in cases of
malaria and a 66 per cent decline in malaria death rates.
Even with such remarkable gains, every year there
are still over 200 million malaria cases and more than
300,000 malaria deaths worldwide. In addition, drug

and insecticide resistance has emerged as a new threat
to recent progress. In order to end the terrible scourge,
there is a need to redouble our global efforts to eliminate
the disease once and for all.
In pursuit of our goal to eliminate malaria by 2030,
there is a need to strengthen weak health systems, ramp
up domestic and international financing and deal with
insecticide resistance. African countries and partners
have mobilized hundreds of millions of dollars to
scale up malaria-control interventions, including longlasting insecticidal nets, indoor residual spraying, rapid
diagnostic tests and artemisinin-based combination
therapies.
The importance of the resolution cannot be
overemphasized. It sends a rallying message to key
partners — such as the African Development Bank, the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria,
the World Bank, the United Kingdom Department
for International Development, and the United States
President’s Malaria Initiative — to ensure that we
build sustainable funding plans and ensure quality
financial management, including priority-setting and
accountability for results.
The draft resolution maintains last year’s language
(see resolution 70/300), with the exception of a few
technical updates and new developments, including
welcoming the launch of the African Centres for Disease
Control and Prevention to bring much-needed capacity
to the African region by building surveillance systems,
responding and addressing health emergencies. In

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-28097 (E)

*1728097*

A/71/PV.97

addition, the draft resolution includes data from the
World Malaria Report 2016.
Our gratitude goes to all the partners who took part
in the consultations and to all those who have joined as
sponsors of this draft resolution. As in previous years,
we trust that the General Assembly will again adopt
this draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/71/L.89.
Before giving the floor for explanations of position,
may I remind delegations that explanations position are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): Malaria
has devastated the health of millions of people
throughout the developing world and created dire
economic consequences that undermine the efforts
of nations seeking to provide health access to their
populations. The United States Government remains
firmly committed to ending the scourge of malaria. For
over a decade it has been the largest source of bilateral
support, through the United States President’s Malaria
Initiative (PMI), and it is the largest contributor to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
PMI is a United States Government initiative,
established in 2005, to reduce malaria-related mortality
by 50 per cent across high-burden countries in
sub-Saharan Africa through a rapid scale-up of four
proven and highly effective malaria prevention and
treatment measures: insecticide-treated mosquito nets,
indoor residual spraying, accurate diagnosis and prompt
treatment with artemisinin combination therapies,
and intermittent preventive treatment of pregnant
women. PMI currently works in 19 sub-Saharan Africa
countries, where malaria exacts its greatest human toll,
and the Greater Mekong subregion, where resistance
to the most effective malaria treatment drugs has
unfortunately already appeared.
PMI’s strategy for the period from 2015 to 2020
takes into account the progress over the past decade and
the new challenges that have arisen. As such, a major
United States foreign assistance objective is to work
with PMI-supported countries and partners to further
reduce malaria deaths, substantially decrease malaria
morbidity and end extreme poverty. As acknowledged
in the thirty-first preambular paragraph of draft
resolution A/71/L.89,
2/15

11/09/2017

“the expansion of malaria interventions can be
used as an entry point for strengthening health
systems more broadly, including maternal and child
health services and laboratory services, and for
building stronger health information and disease
surveillance systems”.
That also aligns with the goals articulated in the Roll
Back Malaria Partnership Action and Investment to
Defeat Malaria 2016‑2030 — For a Malaria-Free World
and the World Health Organization (WHO) Global
Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016-2030.
The emergence and potential spread of multi-drug
resistant malaria and insecticide-resistant malaria
vectors are a threat to global health security requiring
immediate action, which includes strengthening
capacity for the effective use of existing drugs and
insecticides, as well as public-private partnerships
and innovation to develop the next generation of
malaria drugs and insecticides and other vectorcontrol approaches.
Meeting the WHO Strategy’s 2020 milestones
will require a tripling of existing funding, amounting
to $6.4 billion annually. While the United States
remains committed to providing support for countries
to reach those milestones through both bilateral PMI
and multilateral Global Fund funding, the need for
additional major funding will require significant
external and in-country resource mobilization. We
encourage affected countries to increase their financial
and human-resource commitment to the general health
sector, as well as to malaria-specific activities.
The United States shares many of the goals
expressed in the draft resolution and has therefore
joined the consensus in its adoption. The United States
Government shares the aspiration of increasing access
to health care, and we believe countries should do that
by reducing costs and expanding health-care choices.
We applaud efforts to encourage universal health access
but, in line with previous United Nations resolutions,
we understand that each country would develop a
system within its own cultural, economic, political and
structural contexts and priorities. We recognize that
the private sector is the cornerstone of many healthcare systems around the world, particularly in the
area of innovation, and therefore our efforts to expand
access should not imply primarily Government-centric
solutions or mandates. Universal health coverage, as
referenced in the draft resolution, is often interpreted
17-28097

11/09/2017

as supporting Government-centric solutions and
mandates, which the United States Government does
not support.
Concerning the right-to-health language contained
in paragraph 21 of the draft resolution, in light of article
2.1 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social,
and Cultural Rights, the United States interprets
references to the obligations of States as applicable only
to the extent that they have assumed such obligations.
We note that countries have a wide array of policies
and actions that may be appropriate in promoting the
progressive realization of the right to the enjoyment of
the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health. Therefore, we believe that these resolutions
should not try to define the content of the right.
Lastly, as we have stated in the past and continue to
state, it is not appropriate for a United Nations document
to speak to the ongoing or future work of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) or to undermine the independent
mandate and processes of that organization, which is an
independent institution with a different membership,
mandate and rules of procedure from those of the United
Nations. Discussion of the amendment to article 31 of
the Organization Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights in paragraph 33 of the
draft resolution is inaccurate, and it is inappropriate for
the United Nations to call on WTO members to take
action on that issue. Therefore, the United States must
disassociate itself from paragraph 33, and the inclusion
of this language here does not serve as a basis for
future negotiations.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.89, entitled “Consolidating gains and
accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in
developing countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/71/L.89, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Australia, Austria,
Brazil, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, Greece,

A/71/PV.97

Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lithuania,
Maldives, Malta, Monaco, Norway, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
the Sudan, Switzerland, Thailand, Uganda, the United
Kingdom, Viet Nam and the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.89.
Draft resolution A/71/L.89 was adopted (resolution
71/325).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/71/L.88)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will now take action on the draft resolution issued as
document A/71/L.88.
I give the floor to the representative of Gabon to
introduce draft resolution A/71/L.88.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): The
consideration of draft resolution A/71/L.88, on tackling
illicit trafficking in wildlife, is an excellent opportunity
for Gabon and Germany, the sponsors of the text, to
raise awareness within the international community of
this issue, which is crucial not only for the preservation
of wildlife but also for the stability of many States.
Poaching is currently the fourth most dangerous
form of trafficking in the world after drug trafficking,
counterfeiting and trafficking in persons, generating
almost $20 billion a year. That money contributes, inter
alia, to the fuelling of extremist groups and armed rebel
groups that are destabilizing many States, especially
in Africa.
In my country, Gabon, poaching has in 10 years
caused the loss of almost 25,000 elephants, nearly
80 per cent of the pachyderm population, and numerous
studies have established that the Central African

17-280973/15

A/71/PV.97

11/09/2017

subregion is the epicentre of the ivory supply in many
markets of the world.

regional and international levels for the conservation
and sustainable management of wildlife.

This sobering and alarming fact underpins our
commitment to the fight against poaching. It has led
us, since July 2015, to play a key role in international
advocacy against illicit trafficking in wildlife.

Finally, allow me to welcome the commitment of
the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany,
which is sparing no effort to support the noble fight
against poaching and illicit trafficking in wildlife.
I should like also to commend the tireless efforts of
the Group of Friends, and I thank all States that have
agreed to sponsor the draft, as well as all United
Nations delegations, specialized agencies and relevant
bodies for their contributions and support.

Significant progress has been made, specifically
the strengthening of legislation in many States, with
more binding measures and bold political measures in
States of origin, transit and destination. Nevertheless,
much remains to be done, as poaching networks are
increasingly well organized and better equipped and
continue to funnel resources not only to warlords
but also to the dangerous, uncontrollable extremist
networks that are operating in several regions. Thus,
poaching is today not only illicit predation against
fauna and biodiversity; it is also increasingly becoming
a transnational threat to the human race.
Faced with the magnitude of the threat, it is clear
that no nation can overcome this phenomenon alone. It
is important to undertake concerted action that includes
the entire international community. That is the goal of
the actions initiated by Gabon and Germany, which
have been endorsed by the Group of Friends.
In keeping with the momentum created by this
commitment on the part of Gabon, President Ali
Bongo Ondimba has made combating poaching a major
pillar of his political agenda. Increased financing, the
training of environmental guards, the establishment
of a rapid-intervention force in national parks and the
signing of many bilateral and multilateral partnerships
are reflections of Gabon’s firm commitment to
combatting poaching.
The draft resolution, sponsored by numerous States
from diverse geographic areas, offers an opportunity
to strengthen the mutuality of our actions and to
establish a comprehensive mechanism that takes into
account all of the dimensions of this phenomenon.
Draft resolution A/71/L.88, which I hope we will adopt
today, underscores, inter alia, the need for Member
States to take decisive measures to prevent, combat and
eventually eradicate illicit trafficking in wildlife, in
both supply and demand countries.
Member States are, moreover, invited to establish
and strengthen existing partnerships in order to
increase support for local communities at the national,
4/15

To conclude, I would like to underscore the
importance of young people, who will be the true
beneficiaries of the fight that we are waging today in
their name and in that of future generations. I hope that
the General Assembly will adopt this draft resolution
by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.88, entitled
“Tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/71/L.88: Albania, Austria, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Canada, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Finland, Gabon, Greece, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mexico,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Peru, the
Philippines, San Marino, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
the United Republic of Tanzania and the United States
of America.
Since the publication of the document, Cameroon,
Haiti, Botswana, Norway, Brunei Darussalam, Poland,
Namibia, Uganda, Mauritania, Nepal, Ukraine, the
Russian Federation, Antigua and Barbuda, the Niger
and Burkina Faso have indicated their intention to
become sponsors of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.88?
Draft resolution A/71/L.88 was adopted (resolution
71/326).
17-28097

11/09/2017

The Acting President: I shall now give the floor to
the representative of Germany, who wishes to make a
statement following the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): It is a great pleasure to
address the General Assembly today on the occasion
of the adoption of resolution 71/326, the third United
Nations resolution on tackling illicit trafficking
in wildlife.
Let me start by thanking Ambassador Michel
Xavier Biang of Gabon, our fellow co-chair of
the United Nations Group of Friends on Poaching
and Illicit Wildlife Trafficking, for the excellent
cooperation throughout the process. I would also like
to thank all members of the Group of Friends and all
other supporters for their strong commitment to this
important issue and for their constructive engagement
in preparing this resolution.
The General Assembly’s first resolution on
tackling illicit trafficking in wildlife — resolution
69/314, of 30 July 2015 — was a milestone and a clear
sign from the international community that it will not
tolerate the extinction of whole species. Since then, we
have not only raised global awareness remarkably but
have achieved progress in many areas, such as resource
protection and seizures along the main illegal trade
routes on the ground.
But poaching and illegal wildlife trafficking
continue to cause irreversible damage to biodiversity
and threaten local economic development. It was
therefore consequential to revisit this issue to further
enhance our efforts, specifically in areas that we
jointly identified as requiring more attention from the
international community during discussions on World
Wildlife Day last spring. Let me briefly highlight
three points.
First of all, the link between corruption and illicit
wildlife trafficking has proven a major challenge in
recent years. Corruption is a primary enabling factor for
the illegal wildlife trade in range, transit and destination
countries. Also, corruption allows black markets to
develop and illegal products to mix with legal products.
We believe that this third resolution highlights this link
and will lead to enhanced efforts against corruption
by the international community. Also, Germany is
very grateful for the appreciation of the work of the
Group of 20 under German and Chinese presidencies
in developing the high-level principles on combatting
corruption related to illegal trade in wildlife.

A/71/PV.97

Secondly, we believe that the recognition of
cybercrime’s growing role in facilitating illegal trade
in wildlife and the call for innovative strategies to
counter this phenomenon are exemplary for the new
and forward-looking approach needed to tackle current
and future challenges.
Thirdly, the resolution considerably strengthens
the aspects of the sustainable development of local
communities in range countries and promotes ways to
achieve sustainable and legal livelihoods for members
of these communities. Owing to their proximity, local
communities are well situated to become involved in
the process to find lasting solutions. Their rights and
responsibilities related to managing wildlife must be
strengthened and real economic opportunities for them
must be developed to create stability and resilience.
We believe that this third resolution paves the way in
this direction.
I am proud to say that Germany has been and
will continue to be an active supporter in the fight
against illicit trafficking in wildlife. Currently, we
have committed €624 million to projects combating
poaching and illegal trade in wildlife, €243 million of
which support specific measures to fight wildlife crime.
But we are aware that no country can win this fight on
its own. It is crucial that all parties, including donors,
continue to work together closely. It is therefore of great
importance that this resolution strongly encourages
donor coordination in order to collectively maximize
investment effectiveness and engage new partners.
Also, for our common fight against illicit wildlife
trafficking to be successful, it is crucial that we as
States Members of the United Nations keep on working
together closely. I believe the work leading to the
resolution we adopted by consensus today was the
perfect example of this spirit across all Member States
and regional groups. I want to thank all our colleagues
very much for this cooperation.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration agenda item 13?
It was so decided.

17-280975/15

A/71/PV.97

Agenda item 115 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of members of the Joint
Inspection Unit
Note by the President of the General Assembly
(A/71/1018)
The Acting President: As indicated in document
A/71/1018, the General Assembly is required, during
its current session, to appoint one member of the Joint
Inspection Unit to fill the vacancy that resulted from
the resignation of Rajab Sukayri of Jordan for a term
of office beginning on 1 January 2018 and expiring on
31 December 2019.
In accordance with the procedures described
in article 3, paragraph 1, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, and having consulted the regional
group concerned, I requested Japan to propose a
candidate to fill the vacancy.
I would like to remind members that, in
accordance with resolution 59/267 of 23 December
2004, the candidate should have experience in at
least one of the following fields: oversight, audit,
inspection, investigation, evaluation, finance, project
evaluation, programme evaluation, human resources
management, management, public administration,
monitoring and/or programme performance, as well as
knowledge of the United Nations system and its role in
international relations.
As also indicated in document A/71/1018, as a
result of the consultations held in accordance with
article 3, paragraph 2, of the statute of the Joint
Inspection Unit, including consultations with the
President of the Economic and Social Council and with
the Secretary-General, in his capacity as Chair of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for
Coordination, I submit to the Assembly the candidature
of Ms. Keiko Kamioka of Japan for appointment as a
member of the Joint Inspection Unit for a two-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2018 and expiring on
31 December 2019.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to appoint the candidate?
It was so decided.
6/15

11/09/2017

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (h)
of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
(b) Central role of the United Nations system in
global Governance
Draft resolution (A/71/L.90)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.90.
Mr. Viera Salazar (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to introduce to the General Assembly,
on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China, the
draft resolution entitled “The United Nations in global
economic governance”, as contained in document
A/71/L.90.
The G-77 and China reiterate the need for inclusive,
transparent and effective multilateral approaches in
order to address global challenges. That is why today we
are introducing this draft resolution, which reaffirms
the United Nations system’s central role in this area as
an intergovernmental forum for universal dialogue and
consensus on global challenges.
The draft resolution also reaffirms the importance
of multilateralism for the global trading system and of
a commitment to achieving a universal, rules-based,
open, non-discriminatory and equitable multilateral
trading system under the World Trade Organization
(WTO) that contributes to growth, sustainable
development and job creation in every sector. It looks
forward to the WTO’s eleventh Ministerial Conference,
to be held in Buenos Aires from 10 to 13 December,
and its outcome. It also recognizes the importance of
expanding and strengthening developing countries’
participation in decision-making and norm-setting
processes in the international economic arena, as well
as the importance of interaction within the United
Nations, particularly the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council. It welcomes the practice
of informal engagement between the United Nations
and intergovernmental groupings, including the Group
of 20, that make policy recommendations or take policy
decisions with global implications, through informal
17-28097

11/09/2017

briefings organized at the initiative of the President
of the General Assembly, and invites the President to
continue the practice.
Lastly, under the agenda item entitled “Strengthening
of the United Nations system”, the draft resolution
decides to include a sub-item entitled “Central role
of the United Nations system in global governance”,
to be considered thereafter on a biennial basis, in the
provisional agenda of the General Assembly at its
seventy-third session.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I would
like to thank the delegation of Argentina for its
outstanding efforts as coordinator for the Group, and
the delegation of Chile for facilitating the consultations
on the draft resolution, which it initially submitted.
And I thank all delegations for their commitment and
constructive participation.
Finally, we call on the General Assembly to support
the text of this draft resolution, which reaffirms
our Organization’s central role in global economic
governance and the Assembly’s central position as the
principal United Nations organ for deliberations, policy
adoption and representation.
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to those who wish to speak in explanation of vote
before the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kimmel (United States of America): We would
like to take this opportunity to explain our vote on draft
resolution A/71/L.90, on the United Nations in global
economic governance.
We would like to emphasize the importance of
the Secretary-General’s call for reform of the United
Nations and specifically for the elimination of
duplication and overlap. As the negotiations began on
this draft resolution, we expressed our concern that it
was duplicative and not a productive use of the time and
resources of the United Nations, especially since the
issues it treats are addressed in other United Nations
forums. From the outset, we worked to achieve a short,
concise text free of clearly communicated redlines. We
are disappointed with the outcome, and hope that all
Member States will consider and support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for these processes to be rationalized
so as to focus on substance and eliminate duplication
and redundancy.

A/71/PV.97

We are unable to accept the language in the
document in which the United Nations opines on
the World Trade Organization (WTO), which is
independent of the United Nations and has a different
membership, mandate and rules of procedure. As we
have stated on numerous occasions, it is unacceptable
for the United States when United Nations documents
speak to the ongoing or future work of the WTO in
order to reinterpret its agreements or rules, or to
otherwise engage on matters that fall within the WTO’s
independent mandate and processes.
With regard to paragraph 4, the United Nations
is not the appropriate venue for discussions of reform
of the Bretton Woods institutions. Reform of their
governance structures, quotas and voting rights is
a matter for the internal governing bodies of the
World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
We encourage countries to participate in that reform
dialogue through membership and representation in the
international financial institutions.
We are unable to accept the language in the draft
resolution that calls for strengthening the role of
the United Nations in global economic governance,
including with independent institutions and forums.
We do not support any changes designed to strengthen
or increase the mission or role of the United Nations
in that regard as it relates to economic governance.
In addition, we do not believe that the United Nations
has the expertise to evaluate the degree of coherence
and consistency among the international monetary,
financial and trading systems, and see no role for it in
opining further on the matter.
The United States supports the current practice
of engagement between the United Nations and the
Group of 20 (G-20). We would like to clarify the fact
that the United Nations has had regular opportunities to
participate in G-20 discussions as a partner organization
invited by G-20 host countries. We oppose efforts that
would call for United Nations participation in the G-20
beyond its current engagement.
Finally, the call for a report that would replicate
other ongoing United Nations efforts is unacceptable.
The United States and other Member States have
repeatedly argued against the inclusion of that language,
and we are extremely disappointed to see that the final
text of the draft resolution reinstates it. We emphasize
that United Nations resources would be much better
spent on programmes that have an impact on operations

17-280977/15

A/71/PV.97

on the ground and address the needs of people on the
ground rather than on reports that gather dust on the
shelf. As a result of the numerous concerns that I have
detailed about this draft resolution, we will not be able
to support its adoption.
Mr. Marobe (South Africa): We are grateful for
the opportunity to speak in explanation of vote before
the voting. We would like to thank the delegations of
Argentina and Chile for their roles in coordinating and
facilitating draft resolution A/71/L.90, entitled “The
United Nations in global economic governance”.
South Africa supports all initiatives aimed at
strengthening the United Nations system and its central
role in multilateralism. It is the principal vehicle for
advancing the global development agenda and for
addressing underdevelopment and the eradication
of poverty in all its forms and dimensions. The draft
resolution succinctly highlights all of those issues in its
enunciation of the importance of the United Nations in
global economic governance, particularly in the context
of the General Assembly.
It should also be borne in mind that what is being
outlined in this draft resolution is in alignment with
the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, it is part
of an important global dialogue that seeks to ensure
that all countries are afforded unfettered access to
this multilateral discourse in order to share ideas and
information on how to democratize global economic
governance. That is very much crucial as Member
States pool their efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, which will need strengthened
means of implementation and revitalized global
partnership for sustainable development. That includes
the call by the President of the General Assembly for
momentum in the implementation of the 17 Sustainable
Development 17 Goals, on which we had a chance
to deliberate during the High-level Sustainable
Development Goal Financing Lab earlier this year.
The draft resolution before us today captures
key areas between global economic governance in
the spirit of the global solidarity, which is beneficial
to all countries. The text, inter alia, reaffirms the
central position of the General Assembly as the chief
deliberative policymaking and representative organ of
the United Nations, as well as the role of the Assembly in
matters of concern for the international community, as
set out in the Charter, and the importance of broadening
and strengthening the participation of developing
8/15

11/09/2017

countries in international economic decision-making,
which remains very critical.
Furthermore, the draft resolution points to a need
for policy space and reflection on issues of economic
governance and underlines the need to continue
addressing the effects of the 2008 global financial crisis
in order to avoid its reoccurrence. By committing to the
ideals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
Member States have ipso facto pledged their support
to ensure sustained, inclusive and equitable global
economic growth for the benefit of all countries.
In conclusion, South Africa would like to ask all
Member States to support the global mandate and
aspirations of this draft resolution. This is an important
step in assessing progress in terms of bridging the
development gap between the global North and the
global South.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/71/L.90, entitled “The United Nations in
global economic governance”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to inform members that since the submission of draft
resolution A/71/L.90, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has indicated that it wishes to become a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has
been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda,
Argentina,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Bhutan, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Lao People’s
17-28097

11/09/2017

Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nicaragua,
Niger, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South
Africa, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, New Zealand,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/71/L.90 was adopted 86 votes to
2 with 42 abstentions (resolution 71/327).
[Subsequently, the delegations of the Plurinational
State of Bolivia and Malaysia informed the
Secretariat that they had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to delegations for explanations of vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. Australia and Canada associate themselves with
this statement.
The EU is committed to a global order based on
international law, including the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which ensures peace, human
rights, sustainable development and lasting access to the
global commons. The EU will strive for a strong United
Nations as the bedrock of multilateral, rules-based

A/71/PV.97

order and will develop globally coordinated responses
with international and regional organizations, States
and non-State actors.
The EU deeply regrets the process through which
the text before us today was elaborated. Not only was
the first draft of the resolution, “The United Nations
in global economic governance”, submitted during the
session, there was a reluctance by some delegations
to adequately reflect the adoption of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda and the Paris Agreement, which were adopted
since the last resolution (resolution 67/289) was agreed.
The EU was nevertheless willing to compromise on
the facilitator’s final draft and to accommodate the
concerns of certain delegations. We regret that one
delegation was not in a position to join consensus on
that text. While we respect the facilitator’s decision not
to table his text in the absence of consensus, we strongly
protest the submission of a text that reflects the views
of one group of countries, that did not enjoy consensus
during the facilitation period and on which the EU
had expressed a number of concerns, including on
non-consensus language and repetition with other texts
adopted by the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council.
Moreover, this text was brought forward without
prior clarifications on possible budgetary impact. In
view of our commitment to effective global governance,
the EU member States decided to abstain in spite of
our strong reservations regarding the process. The
EU and its member States will continue to reserve all
our options regarding proposals on which we have not
joined consensus. I would ask that this statement be
included in the record of the meeting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): Singapore is deeply
disappointed that consensus was not reached on
resolution 71/327, entitled “The United Nations in
global economic governance” this year. This resolution
has enjoyed strong cross-regional sponsorship and
consensus adoption since it was first introduced by
Chile during the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly. Today’s departure from tradition should
be of great concern to us all. Global problems require
global solutions. The United Nations is the only global

17-280979/15

A/71/PV.97

body with universal participation and unquestioned
legitimacy. Actions by the Group of 20 (G-20) and
other relevant international institutions and informal
groupings must complement and strengthen the United
Nations system, particularly as we aim to achieve to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals.
Strengthening the relationship between the United
Nations and the G-20 is key to enhancing global
economic governance. Although the G-20 comprises
the largest developed and emerging economies in
the world, the G-20 outcomes must have the support
of non G-20 members if they are to be implemented
globally and effectively. It is therefore important that
the G-20 engages the United Nations through more
institutionalized, predictable and regular channels. In
that regard, Singapore welcomes the attention the G-20
has given to the 2030 Agenda and the practices adopted
by G-20 presidents, which are aimed at strengthening
their engagement with the United Nations. Those
practices include the invitation to the United Nations
Secretary-General to attend G-20 summits, and the
holding of briefings and consultations with the United
Nations membership.
There is a need to build on those good practices.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development sets out
ambitious goals. If we want to succeed and achieve those
goals, we need all relevant actors in global economic
governance, including the Bretton Woods Institutions,
regional commissions and financial institutions, other
informal groupings, as well as the G-20, to work together
in a coherent way with the United Nations to address the
needs of all countries, including developing countries.
The resolution we have adopted today underscores that
vital point. We have therefore joined other countries in
support of the resolution and its objectives.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein voted
in favour of resolution 71/327, entitled “The United
Nations in global economic governance”, for the same
reasons just expressed eloquently by the representative
of Singapore.
Liechtenstein has a long-standing commitment to
strengthening the United Nations as an inclusive and
transparent multilateral forum with the necessary
legitimacy to make decisions with global implications.
In order to effectively implement our collective goals,
in particular those included in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, cooperation between all
10/15

11/09/2017

relevant actors is essential. While the United Nations
is best placed to channel and integrate these different
efforts into coherent action, helping to galvanize such
cooperation and to strengthen the United Nations as the
most important multilateral forum is the mission of the
Global Governance Group, of which Lichtenstein is a
proud member. Liechtenstein will continue to advocate
for the role of the United Nations in global governance
through the Global Governance Group and beyond.
Finally, let me also express Liechtenstein’s hope
that the consensus from the past on this important issue
can be restored in future.
Mr. Matsuhaga (Japan): At the outset, Japan
would like to express its gratitude to the representative
of Chile, the facilitator of resolution 71/327, for his
tireless efforts to seek a consensus. However, we have
to point out a few elements that led to the non-consensus
situation and to our abstention in the voting.
First, the timing of the negotiation was truly
problematic. We had thorough negotiations on the
outcome of the Financing for Development Forum in
May and had already started very tense negotiations
on the ministerial declaration of the high-level political
forum from mid-May. It was under those circumstances
that this negotiation was started. It could have been
started much earlier, even as early as January or
February, but that did not happen. Therefore, we had to
negotiate this resolution under great pressure.
Secondly, from our point of view, this negotiation
was really duplicative. Most of the elements of the
resolution were already under negotiation in the
Financing for Development Forum. In order to better
streamline our work, we could have chosen to discuss
all elements of this resolution in the negotiation of
the Financing for Development Forum, which would
have allowed us to withdraw this resolution from the
agenda entirely. Also, we did not hear any convincing
reasons to biannualize this resolution. Without proper
consideration, we are not in a position to accept the
biennialization of this resolution.
Thirdly, since we could not reach a consensus, we
proposed that the facilitator postpone the negotiation to
the next session of the General Assembly. It is quite a pity
that this option was not considered at all. It is regrettable
that we have received no programme budget-related
information. We cannot accept programme budget
implications without going through the established
process. In order to strongly push the implementation
17-28097

11/09/2017

of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we
should align and streamline our work with a view to the
betterment of its implementation in the field. To that
end, Japan will promise to constructively contribute.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker for this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 123 and of agenda item 123 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Multilingualism
Draft resolution (A/71/L.86)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso to introduce draft
resolution A/71/L.86.
Mr. Tiare (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Exactly
two years after the adoption of resolution 69/324, on
multilingualism, I have the honour to introduce, on
behalf of its sponsors, draft resolution A/71/L.86, of the
same title, under agenda item 125 at the seventy-first
session of the General Assembly.
Access to information has always been a part of the
strategic choices made in societies and institutions. It is
therefore no accident that the United Nations has made
this one of the fundamental pillars of its activities.
In fact, for an organization of the size of the United
Nations, taking into account linguistic diversity is
imperative in order to enable the ideals and messages
conveyed to be well received and understood by all
peoples of the world. As such, the draft resolution
before us reminds us of the role of multilingualism
in the construction of a world that is in harmony with
the ideals for which the Organization was created — a
world with a resolute focus on peace, justice and liberty.
To echo those ideals, we must consistently focus on the
promotion and strengthening of the equality of the six
official languages, as well as the recognition of the
importance of non-official languages.
The text of this year’s draft resolution welcomes
the initiatives undertaken by the Secretariat under the
leadership of the Coordinator for Multilingualism,
with a view to raising awareness in all the offices
and departments of the Secretariat of the importance
of multilingualism in their daily activities, and of

A/71/PV.97

their adherence to the efforts under way in this area.
To make it possible to continue those initiatives, the
text proposes that new terms for the Coordinator for
Multilingualism be adopted. The draft resolution also
notes the important role of the Department of Public
Information and underlines the importance of ensuring
that all United Nations documents be published and
accessible in all six official languages, particularly on
the United Nations website.
The text also recalls that in certain areas of United
Nations activity, such as the matter of procurement
and tenders, limited availability of documentation
in certain languages makes greater participation by
actors and service providers impossible, particularly
in field missions. Moreover, this year’s text revisits the
mobility mechanism and welcomes in that regard the
invitation made by the Secretary-General to all bodies
within the Secretariat to take stock of the linguistic
competencies of personnel. The text also notes with
concern that certain recruitment manuals, in particular
the applicant’s manual, remains available in one single
language, and takes note of the reforms under way to
ensure that language-related expectations are taken
into account in the personnel-recruitment process.
Finally, as this draft resolution on multilingualism
is the first after the adoption on the Sustainable
Development Goals, the text welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts to make information, technical
assistance and documents for capacity-building
accessible, in the framework of the implementation of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It urges
him to pursue those goals.
I would like to conclude by expressing the sincere
gratitude of Burkina Faso to all delegations that actively
participated in crafting this draft resolution. I hope that
the spirit of solidarity and consensus will lead to its
adoption without a vote.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.86, entitled
“Multilingualism”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that, since the submission of the
draft resolution, and in addition to those delegations
listed in the document, the following countries have
become sponsors of A/71/L.86: Andorra, Argentina,

17-2809711/15

A/71/PV.97

Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Cameroon, Chile,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Djibouti,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Gabon, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary,
Indonesia, Iraq, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco, Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines,
Senegal, Slovenia, Spain, Thailand, Tunisia, Uruguay
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.86?
Draft resolution A/71/L.86 was adopted (resolution
71/328).
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Ms. Shilo (Israel): As we know, a language is
not merely a language. It is an essential part of our
identity. It is a culture and a way of life. Martin Buber,
a twentieth century Jewish philosopher, once said that
it is essential “to begin with oneself but not to end with
oneself”. In order to end with the other and not with
oneself, we must employ the ideals of multilingualism.
Now, what exactly does that mean? It means
engaging in dialogue. Dialogue enables people with
diverse backgrounds, perspectives and world views
to collaborate and appreciate each other. Dialogue
provides the opportunity to mentally step beyond the
constraints of our own minds, and come closer to a
fuller and deeper understanding of people.
Here at the United Nations, we reflect this reality
of multilingualism and dialogue. It not only enables
communication between our linguistically diverse
Member States, but also creates bridges between us.
That is something that should be acknowledged and
appreciated. The bridge that multilingualism has
helped to create among our international and local
communities is one that we have all welcomed at several
points during our careers here at the United Nations.
Most importantly, it has facilitated dialogue among us.
When Egyptian author Naguib Mahfouz won the
Nobel Prize for Literature in 1988, he stated:
“The Arab world also won the Nobel with me.
I believe that international doors have opened, and
12/15

11/09/2017

that from now on, literate people will consider
Arab literature also. We deserve that recognition.”
Mahfouz emphasizes that embracing multilingualism,
in particular the translation of his work into different
languages, including Hebrew, allows us to recognize
and appreciate essential elements of different cultures.
In Israel, not only do we value multilingualism,
we embody it. Hebrew, Arabic and English do not
even begin to cover the languages that can be heard
throughout Israel. In the public sphere, all of our
signs, including road signs, official publications
and Government ministry websites are in all three
languages. Over several decades, Israel has absorbed
waves of immigrants. We have received people from
Western to Eastern Europe, from North to South
America, from Africa to the Middle East. We firmly
believe in the promotion and preservation of the
different languages that have been brought into Israel.
The multicultural nature of Israeli society is
embedded in our education system. The school system
offers Israeli students the opportunity to study several
other languages in addition to Hebrew, Arabic and
English, thereby promoting multilingualism. And
those are just some of the ways that Israel incorporates
the ideals of multilingualism. Let us continue to do
the same here at the United Nations. Let us allow
incomprehensible narratives to become comprehensible.
Let us make sure that we are reaching not only the
heads of our colleagues, but their characters, identities
and hearts.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Peru to make a statement after the
adoption of the draft resolution.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It is
my honour to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Spanish at the United Nations, which consists of over
20 Spanish-speaking countries on three continents and
has similar groups in Geneva and Vienna, and over
which Peru now presides.
First of all, we would like to thank the delegation
of Burkina Faso as facilitator of the resolution for
its arduous efforts, as well as all delegations that
participated in this complex negotiation process. We
also thank the Secretariat for its ongoing support.
Indeed, four months ago, during the presentation of
the Secretary-General’s report under this agenda item
(A/71/757), we highlighted in this Hall (see A/71/PV.82)
17-28097

11/09/2017

the importance of multilingualism for our Group and
for our willingness to work constructively to reach a
more robust, coherent and ambitious resolution.
Today, we feel that the Group has contributed to
achieving that goal, and in that regard we welcome
the adoption of resolution 71/328. Despite the complex
negotiations, we believe that the resolution contains
new and important themes for the development of
an efficient, coordinated and comprehensive policy
on multilingualism. In particular, we would like to
highlight three elements that we were gratified to see
stressed in the resolution.
First is the operational character of multilingualism,
which goes beyond without diminishing its cultural
dimension. In line with other resolutions, it is a central
value of the Organization and a tool for improving
its efficiency, productivity and transparency. As
such, we call on the Secretary-General to include an
indicator related to multilingualism in agreements with
senior management.
Secondly, it also looks at the cross-cutting
nature of multilingualism in the Organization, which
is better reflected in the heading for section VII,
“Multilingualism across the three pillars of the United
Nations”, which incorporates references to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. Thirdly, it
also calls for the importance of ensuring that more
information is provided and updated, for example
through the development of a platform to facilitate the
collection of information about the various languages
and the establishment of an inventory of Secretariat
staff language skills. This and other elements represent
important steps to achieving a genuinely multilingual
system of work that is integrated, logical and coherent
throughout the United Nations system.
We should point out that the negotiations on the
resolution were complex and that we should like to have
seen more concrete references in it to other topics, such
as a section dedicated to issues related to sustainable
development and the need for translations into all
six official languages of various documents that are
currently available in only one or two. Nonetheless,
we would also like to emphasize that the Group always
maintained a constructive spirit and a flexible attitude
and worked to achieve consensus on the text. Lastly,
I would like to reiterate our full commitment to
multilingualism and the Secretariat’s activities in that

A/71/PV.97

regard. The Group of Friends of Spanish will always be
available to fulfil that.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 125?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 126 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
Draft resolution (A/71/L.87)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Haiti to introduce draft resolution
A/71/L.87.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the 14 States members of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/71/L.87, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Caribbean Community”,
under sub-item (h) of item 126 of the agenda of the
seventy-first session.
The following countries have become sponsors of
the draft resolution since it was submitted: Antigua and
Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Brazil, Cabo
Verde, Canada, Denmark, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Israel, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Nauru, Nicaragua, Trinidad and Tobago,
Saint Lucia and my own country, Haiti.
Draft resolution A/71/L.87 reflects the values
we share, our common understanding of the major
challenges we have to overcome and CARICOM’s
unfailing willingness to grapple with all major
international issues. The text also reflects CARICOM’s
firm commitment to pursuing and strengthening its
cooperation with the United Nations in the effort to
achieve the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and
their 169 targets — a close, strong and deep cooperation
for a better world. It emphasizes CARICOM’s
commitment to clean and sustainable energy for all, to
the empowerment of women and girls, to education and
training, to the maintenance of peace and to capacitybuilding, including with regard to eradicating cholera
in Haiti and combating non-communicable diseases.
Lastly, it also encourages the CARICOM countries’

17-2809713/15

A/71/PV.97

continued commitment to combating terrorism
financing and money-laundering in the light of the threat
that de-risking represents to our banking and financial
systems. The draft resolution reflects the efforts of
CARICOM and the United Nations to undertake bettercoordinated actions that can bring ever more concrete
solutions and results for our peoples.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
special gratitude to the delegation of Guyana for its role
as co-facilitator of the draft resolution. Its unfailing
availability and commitment contributed enormously to
the broad support that will strengthen the cooperation
between the United Nations and CARICOM. I would also
like to thank all of the delegations and States Members
of the United Nations that took an active part in drafting
the text, and whose spirit of solidarity and consensus
will, I hope, enable us to adopt it by consensus. And I
hereby affirm CARICOM’s willingness to continue to
work to strengthen our cooperation.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/71/L.87, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Caribbean Community”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of
draft resolution A/71/L.87: Antigua and Barbuda,
Austria, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil,
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Canada, Denmark, Dominica,
the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea,
Estonia, Greece, Grenada, Haiti, Indonesia, Israel, Italy,
Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Maldives,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Portugal, Romania, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Singapore, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/71/L.87?
Draft resolution A/71/L.87 was adopted (resolution
71/329).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
14/15

11/09/2017

delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Lawrence (United States of America): First,
I would like to say that our thoughts are with those
Caribbean nations recently affected by the devastation
caused by Hurricane Irma.
The United States appreciates the good-faith efforts
in the negotiation of resolution 71/329, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM). We recognize and support
CARICOM’s overall mission to work with the United
Nations to address the critical challenges of poverty,
development and the Caribbean’s marginalization
internationally. The United States remains engaged in
order to enhance and expand CARICOM’s successes.
While we support CARICOM in its efforts to address
regular engagements, we take this opportunity to make
important points of clarification on the resolution and
underscore that this non-binding document does not
create rights or obligations under international law.
Furthermore, the outcomes and indicators referenced
in the resolution are to be implemented and applied on
a voluntary basis in a manner that is consistent with
the rights and obligations of States under international
law. Nothing in these outcomes or indicators, including
anything referred to as agreed, creates or affects States’
rights or obligations under international law.
The United States has consistently and publicly
maintained that the issue of access to banking services,
including correspondent banking and de-risking, should
be addressed by the existing and ongoing dialogues in the
appropriate forums, such as the Financial Action Task
Force, the Financial Stability Board’s Correspondent
Banking Coordination Group and the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision. The United States notes that
there is a lack of evidence to indicate that changes in
access to correspondent banking relationships have had
an impact on global financial stability and economic
performance. The United States also acknowledges
the importance of continuing to monitor the situation
with our Caribbean partners, in particular through the
ongoing collection of better data regarding changes in
access to international banking systems.
Regarding concessionary development funding,
the United States believes that institutions such as the
multilateral development banks should target their
scarce concessional financing to the poorest and least
credit-worthy countries and that countries’ access
17-28097

11/09/2017

to concessional financing should decrease as their
incomes increase. Rather than try to preserve access
to concessional finance, the multilateral development
banks’ implementation of their graduation policies
should aim to smooth the transition away from
concessional assistance and consider how to help
graduating countries in the Caribbean and elsewhere
avoid a large drop in overall development finance.
With these clarifications, we join the consensus on
the resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda item 126 and of
agenda item 126 as a whole?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to remind
delegations that the following agenda items, which have
been considered at previous meetings, remain open for
consideration during the seventy-first session of the
General Assembly: items 9, 14, 19, 19 (h), 20, 29, 34,
35, 51, 61, 68, 68 (b), 69, 69 (a) through (d), 73, 110, 112,
114, 114(a), 115, 115 (a), (b), (d), (g), (j), 117, 124, 127 to
135, 137 to 154 and 156 to 164.
As members are aware, these items have been
included in the provisional agenda of the seventysecond session of the General Assembly with the
exception of sub-item (d) of agenda item 69, entitled
“Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and minimize

A/71/PV.97

the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”; sub-item
(j) of agenda item 115, entitled “Confirmation of the
appointment of the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme”; agenda item 142, entitled
“United Nations pension system”, and agenda item
146, entitled “Financing of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to include agenda items 9, 14, 19, 19 (h), 20,
29, 34, 35, 51, 61, 68, 68 (b), 69, 69 (a) to (c), 73, 110,
112, 114, 114 (a), 115, 115 (a), 115 (b), 115 (d), 115 (g),
117, 124, 127 to 130, 132 to 135, 137 to 141, 143 to 145,
147 to 154 and 156 to 164 in the draft agenda of the
seventy-second session?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda items 9, 14, 19, 19 (h), 20, 29,
34, 35, 51, 61, 68, 68 (b), 69, 69 (a) through (d), 73, 110,
112, 114, 114 (a), 115, 115 (a), 115 (b), 115 (d), 115 (g),
115 (j), 117, 124, 127 to 135, 137 to 154 and 156 to 164
at the present session?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

17-2809715/15
