General A■1embl:r -

24

6. Invites the Government of the Union of South
Africa to co-operate with the Committee and, in particular, to submit to the Committee reports and such
petitions as may be received on its administration of
the Territory of South West Africa, and to assist the
Committee in the examination of such reports and petitions, or of such information and documentation as may
be available to that Committ~e;
7. Requests the Committee on South West Africa,
in the preparation of its next report, to take into account
the discussions in the Fourth Committee at the tenth
session of the General Assembly ;
8. Further requests the Committee on South West
Africa, in the preparation of its next and all future
reports, to include its recommendations on each aspect
of conditions in the Territory for such particular action
as it considers the Government of the Union of South
Africa should take to ensure the fulfilment of its obligations and -responsibilities under the Mandate.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
942 (X), Question of the admissibility of oral
hearings by the Committee on South Weal
Africa: request for an advisory opinion from
the International Court of Justice

The General Assembly,
Having been requested by the Committee on South
West Africa to decide whether or not the oral hearing
of petitioners on matters relating to the Territory of
South West Africa is admissible before that Commit•
tee, 28 •
Having instructed the Committee, in General Assembly resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November 1953, to
examine petitions as far as possible in accordance with
the procedure of the former Mandates System,
Requests the International Court of Justice to give an
advisory opinion on the following question:
"Is it consistent with the advisory opinion 24 of the
International Court of Justice of 11 July 1950 for the
Committee on South West Africa, established by General Assembly resolution 749 A {VIII) of 28 November 1953, to grant oral hearings to petitioners on
matters relating to the Territory of South West
Africa?"
550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1953.
943 (X). Hearing of the Reverend Michael Scott

The General Assembly,
Having granted an oral hearing to the Reverend
Michael Scott on behalf of the Native inhabitants of
the Territory of South West Africa under the adminis~
tration of the Union of South Africa,
1. Takes not<: of the statements of the Reverend
Michael Scott on behalf of the Native inhabitants of
South West Africa under the administration of the
Union of South Africa;
28 Ibid., Tentli Session, Annexes, agenda item 30 document
A/2913/Add.2.
'
• H International Status of South-W tsl Africa, Atlwory Opinson: I.C.l. Rtports 1950, p. 128.

Tenth Se■■ion

2. Decides to transmit to the Committee on South
West Africa the statements of the Reverend Michael
Scott for its study and consideration as appropriate.

550th plenary meeting,
3 December 1955.
944 (X). The Togoland unification problem and
the future of the Trust Territory of Togoland
under British administration

The General Assembly,

I. The future of Togo/and under British administration:
Recalling its resolution 860 (IX) of 14 December
1954, by which the Trusteeship Council was requested to
consider the arrangements to be made to ascertain the
wishes of the inhabitants of the Trust Territory of Togoland under British administration as to their future,
without prejudice to the eventual solution which they
might choose, whether it be independence, unification
of an independent Togoland under British administration with an independent Togoland under French administration, unification with an independent Gold Coast,
or some other self-governing or independent status,
Having received the report 25 of the Trusteeship Council transmitting the special report 26 of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to the Trust. Territories of Togoland
under British Administration and Togoland under
French Administration, 1955, the observations 21 of the
representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, and the officiaf records of the
relevant meetings of the Council,
Noting the opinion of the Trusteeship Council that
the views expressed in the special report of the Visiting
Mission provide in general a useful basis for determining the arrangements to be made in pursuance of General
Assembly resolution 860 (IX),
Taking note also of the views expressed orally by the
various local political groups before the Fourth Committee during its hearings,
Noting further the statement of the Government of
the United Kingdom that the Gold Coast will attain
independence in the near future and that, in consequence,
it will be impossible thereafter for Togoland under
British admimstration to be administered as at present,
1. Accepts the recommendation of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to the Trust Territories of Togoland
under British Administration and Togoland under
French Administration, 1955, contained in its special
report that the wishes of the inhabitants of Togoland
under British administration as to their future should
be ascertained by plel::iscite;
2. Recommends that the Administering Authority of
Togola~d under British administration, in pursuance
of Article 76 b of the Charter of the United Nations
take steps, in consultation with a United Nations Plebi~
scite Commissioner, to organize and conduct without
delay, under the supervision of the United Nations a
plepiscite in respect of the Trust Territory in order' to
20
Official Records of the General Assembly Tenth Session
Annexes,_agenda item 35, document A/3046. '
'
26
()fficial Records of lhe Trusteeship Council, Fifth Sp,ciol
Stsswn, Supplemtnt No. 2 (T/1218), document T/1206 and
Add.1.
2 7 Ibid., document T/1214.
