S/2018/391

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 April 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 26 April 2018 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to the letter dated 29 March 2018 from Ambassador Karel J. G. van
Oosterom, I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council
have agreed to send a mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar from 28 April to 2 May
2018. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference of the
mission, which are annexed hereto (see annex).
I will be leading the mission with Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi (Kuwait) and
Ambassador Karen Pierce (United Kingdom).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission will be as follows:
Ambassador Sacha Sergio Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia (Plurinational State of))
Ambassador Wu Haitao (China)
Ambassador Anatolio Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea)
Ambassador Tekeda Alemu (Ethiopia)
Ms. Anne Gueguen (France)
Ambassador Kairat Umarov (Kazakhstan)
Ambassador Mansour Alotaibi (Kuwait)
Ambassador Lise Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands)
Ambassador Gustavo Meza-Cuadra (Peru)
Ambassador Joanna Wronecka (Poland)
Mr. Dmitry Polyanskiy (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Olof Skoog (Sweden)
Ambassador Karen Pierce (United Kingdom)
Ambassador Kelley Eckels-Currie (United States)
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex cir culated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Gustavo Meza-Cuadra
President of the Security Council

18-06696 (E)

260418

*1806696*

S/2018/391

Annex to the letter dated 26 April 2018 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Security Council Mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar
Terms of reference
1.
The Security Council will carry out its mission to Bangladesh and Myanmar
from 28 April to 2 May 2018. The mission will include visits to Dhaka, refugee camps
near Cox’s Bazar, Nay Pyi Taw and areas in northern Rakhine State that were affected
by the violence that occurred after 25 August 2017. The mission will be co -led by the
United Kingdom, Peru and Kuwait.
2.

The objectives of the mission are as follows:

(a) To urge full implementation of the Security Council presidential statement
of 6 November 2017 (S/PRST/2017/22);
(b) To assess the efforts of the Government of Bangladesh, the United Nations
and other agencies to provide protection and assistance to refugees in Bangladesh;
(c) To assess the efforts of the Government of Myanmar to implement the
Security Council presidential statement of 6 November 2017 and the
recommendations put forward by the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, as well
as the situation in Rakhine State;
(d) To understand the views and concerns of all parties, including but not
limited to members of the Rohingya refugee community in Bangladesh and the
Rohingya, Rakhine and other communities in Rakhine State, regarding:
(i)

The violence that occurred in Rakhine after 25 August 2017;

(ii)

The provision of protection and assistance to refugees in Bangladesh;

(iii) The creation of conditions allowing for the safe, voluntary, sustainable and
dignified repatriation of refugees, including Rohingya and other minorities, to
their places of origin in Rakhine;
(iv) Efforts to address the root causes of the crisis in Rakhine State, including
through implementation of the recommendations of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, which is chaired by Kofi Annan.
3.

The mission will seek to achieve these objectives through meetings with:

(a) Representatives of the Governments of Bangladesh and Myanmar and
members of their parliaments;
(b) Representatives of the United Nations in Bangladesh and Myanmar,
including representatives of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees;
(c) Members of the Rohingya refugee community, including women and
children. Where appropriate, the Security Council will seek to meet survivors of
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence, that has occurred in Rakhine
since 25 August 2017;
(d) Members of the Bangladeshi host communities in Bangladesh, including
women and children;
(e)

2/3

Representatives of the Rakhine State government;

18-06696

S/2018/391

(f) Members of the Rohingya, Rakhine and other communities in Rakhine
State, including women and children;
(g) Representatives of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and
regional governments in Nay Pyi Taw;
(h)

Representatives of civil society in Bangladesh and Myanmar.

4.
The Security Council will be accompanied by representatives of the press and
media.
5.
The mission will seek to implement lessons learned from previous Security
Council missions.

18-06696

3/3
