UNITED NATIONS
NATIONS
UNITED

NATIONS UNIES
UNIES
I1 NATIONS

SECVRITY COUNCIl.
COUNCII.
SECURITY
OrrlCIAI. RECORDS
RECORDS
orrlCIAI.
TWELFTH YEAR
YEAR
TWELFTH
th MEETING:
MEETING: 66 SEPTEMBER
SEPTEMBER 1957
1957
th

788 - - : - - - - - - - --:--------

ème SEANCE:
SÉANCE: 66 SEPTElklBRE
SEPTElklBRE 1957
1957
erne
DOUZIÈME ANNEE
ANNÉE
DOUZIEME

CONIE.II. DE SECUBITE
CONSE.II.
SÉCURITÉ
DOCUMENTS orFICIEI.S
OFFICIE!.S
NEW

YORK

TABLE

OF

CONTENTS
Page
Page

Provisional agenda (SfAgendaf788fRev.
(SjAgendaj788jRev. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda
The Palestine question:
Letter dated 4 September 1957 from the representative
representative of
of Jordan
Jordan addressed
addressed
to
to the
the President
President of
of the
the Security
Security Council
Council (Sf3878);
(Sj3878);
(b)
(b) Letter
Letter dated
dated 55 September
September 1957
1957 from
from the
the representative
representative of
of Israel
Israel to
to the
the
President
President of
of the
the Security
Security Council
Council (Sf3883)
(Sj3883) (continued).
(continued). .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

1
1

(a)

11
:.•:1

,~

TABLE
TABLE DES
DES MATIÈRES
MATIERES
Ordre
Ordre du
du jour
jour provisoire
provisoire (SfAgendaf788fRev.1)............................
(SjAgendaj788jRev.1)............................
Adoption
du jour
jour
Adoption de
de l'ordre
l'ordre du
Question
Question de
de Palestine
Palestine ::
a)
a)

b)b)

Lettre,
Lettre, en
en date
date du
du 44 septembre
septembre 1957,
1957, adressée
adressee au
au Président
President du
du Conseil
Conseil de
de
sécurité
securite par
par lele représentant
representant de
de lala Jordanie
Jordanie (Sf3878)
(Sj3878) ;;
Lettre,
Lettre, en
en date
date du
du 55 septembre
septembre 1957,
1957, adressée
adressee au
au Président
President du
du Conseil
Conseil de
de
sécurité
securite par
par lele représentant
representant d'Israël
d'Israel (Sf3883)
(Sj3883) [suite]..................
[suite]..................

(30
(30 pp ))

11
11

11

SjPV.788
SfPV.788

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official
Records.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

'" * *
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les comptes
rendus des seances du Conseil de securite son.t publies dans des supplements trimestriels aux Documents officiels.

L:zs cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nations Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte signifie
qu'i[ s'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

SEVEN HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH MEETING
Held in New York, on Friday, 6 September 1957, at 2.30 p.m.

SEPT CENT QUATRE-VINGT-HUITIEME SEANCE
Tenue a New York, le vendrew 6 septembre 1957, a 14 h. 30.
President:
Mr. Emilio NUNEZ PORTUONDO (Cuba).

President:
M. Emilio NUNEZ PORTUONDO (Cuba).

Present: The representatives of the following countries: Australia, China, Colombia, Cuba, France, Iraq,
philippines, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, ''united Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents : Les representants des pays suivants :
Australie, Chine, Colombie, Cuba, France, Irak, Philippines, Suede, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'lrlande du Nord, Etats-Unis d'Amerique.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/788/Rev.l)

Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/788/Rev.l)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The Palestine question:
(a) Letter dated 4 September 1957 from the representative of Jordan to the President of the
Security Council;
(b) Letter dated 5 September 1957 from the representative of Israel to the President of the
Security Council.

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour:
2. Question de Palestine :
a) Lettre, en date du 4 septembre 1957, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par le representant de la J ordanie ;
b) Lettre, en date du 5 septembre 1957, adressee
au President du Conseil de securite par le representant d'Israel.

Adoption of the Agenda

Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

The agenda was adopted.

t

The Palestine question:

Question de Palestine:

(a) Letter dated 4 September 1957 from the represen-

a) Lettre, en date du 4 septembre 1957, adressee au

tative of Jordan to the President of the Security
Council (S/3878);
(b) Letter dated 5 September 1957 from the representative of Israel to the President of the Security
Council (S/3883) (continued).

President du Conseil de securite par le representant
de la Jordanie (S/3878) ;
b) Lettre, en date du 5 septembre 1957, adrcssee au
President du Conseil de securite par le representant
d'Israel (S/3883) (suite).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Yusuf Haikal,
representative of Jordan, and Mr. Mordecai R. Kidron,
representative of Israel, took places at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Yusuf Haikal, representant de la Jordanie, et M. Mordecai R. Kidron, representant d'Israel, prennent place ii la table du Conseil.

1. Mr. KIDRON (Israel): Mr. President, I thank you
for the opportunity which you have given me to take
my seat at the Council table. This is a privilege which
my Government values highly, and which it does not
seek for petty reasons or with the object of seeking
solutions for difficulties of a domestic political character
at the expense of the time and the prestige of the body
which, under the United Nations Charter, bears primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. With your permission, I shall address
myself in the first place to the second item of the
agenda - item (b) - which refers to violations by

1. M. KIDRON (Israel) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je vous
remercie, Monsieur le President, de me donner l'occasion
de prendre place a la table du Conseil. C'est un honneur
auquel mon gouvernement attache beaucoup de prix,
mais qu'il ne recherche pas pour de mesquines raisons
ou pour tacher de resoudre des problemes interieurs
d'ordre politique au risque de faire perdre son temps et
son prestige a l'organe qui, aux termes de la Charte des
Nations Unies, a la responsabilite principale du maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales. Permettez-moi de parler d'abord du deuxieme point de
l'ordre du jour -le point b) - qui a trait aux violations

,.1..

±

'C

.

Jordan of the provIsIOns of the General Armistice
Agreement 1 and in particular of article VIII thereof;
and later to the Jordan complaint about the trees
- item (a). In view of the character of the two complaints, this appears to me to be the logical order.

par la Jordanie des dispositions de la Convention generale d'armistice 1 et notamment de l'article VIII de
ladite Convention, pour passeI' ensuite a la plainte de
la Jordanie au sujet des arbres - le point a. Vu la
nature des deux plaintes, ce me parait etre l'ordre
logique.

2. The Security Council has discussed matters arising
out of the implementation of the General Armistice
Agreement between Israel and Jordan on many occasions these past few years - and, I would be the last
to deny that these occasions have been too numerous
and too frequent. It has been our hope, ever since the
Agreement was signed in April 1949, that it would
truly be, as it was designed to be, a transition to peace,
and that the international community would cease to
be agitated by rancour and strife in an area sacred to so
many millions of the peoples of the world. We were
sadly wrong.

2. Ces dernieres annees, le Conseil de securite a, en
maintes occasions, discute de problemes decoulant de
la mise en reuvre de la Convention d'armistice general
conclue entre Israel et la Jordanie. Je ne nie certes pas
que ces occasions ont ete trop nombreuses et trop frequentes. Nous avons toujours espere, depuis que la
Convention a ete signee en avril1949, qu'elle marquerait
- comme elle etait censee faire - le debut d'une
periode de transition vel'S la paix, et que la communaute
internationale cesserait d'etre agitee par des rancreurs
et par des luttes dans une region qui est sacree pour
tant de millions d'etres humains sur cette terre. Nous
nous sommes lamentablement trompes.

3. However, the frequent deliberations of the Council
have not, I regret to say, resulted in any fundamental
change in the situation. There are periods, such as
the present, when the borders are relatively quiescent;
there are others when they are red with blood and fire.
No one can tell when the exigencies of domestic politics
in Jordan, or of inter-Arab rivalries, will cause one
condition or the othe~. For, at the heart of the matter
is the Arab policy, to which Jordan enthusiastically
subscribes, of refusal to make peace or to live at peace
with Israel.

3. En effet, les frequentes deliberations du Conseil
n'ont pas, je le regrette, fondamentalement change la
situation. A de certaines periodes, actuellement par
exemple, la situation aux frontieres est relativement
calme; a d'autres, les frontieres s'ensanglantent et
s'enflamment. Nul ne peut predire quand les exigences
de la politique interieure jordanienne ou les rlvalites
entres Etats arabes engendreront l'une ou l'autre de ces
deux situations. Car au creur du probleme il y a ce principe de la polit.ique arabe, a laquelle la Jordanie souscrit avec enthousiasme : refuser de faire la paix ou de
vivre en paix avec Israel.

4. I venture to suggest that the principal reason for
the meagre results which have attended the Security
Council's efforts to restore peace to the Middle East
has been that it has been dealing with effects rather
than with causes. Nearly every debate around this
table has been conducted against the background of
border violence, and the main preoccupation of the
Council has been to put a stop to the outbreak and to
apportion responsibility. Perhaps because of this, the
Council has not found it possible to go beyond those
articles of the Armistice Agreement which refer specifically to conditions on the border and to examine the
Agreement as a whole and, in particular, the parts
which determine fundamental issues of principle. The
General Armistice Agreement is, after all, an integral
whole, and it is reasonable to assume that a standing
breach of any of its provisions, and particularly a
breach of basic principle, is likely to have adverse
effect upon the operation of the entire instrument.
Border violence is, in the view of the Government of
Israel, a function of the basic attitude of the parties
to their obligations unde the Armistice Agreements;
an effect, not a cause.

4. J e me permettrai de dire que les pietres resultats
des efforts deployes par le Conseil pour ramener la paix
au Moyen-Orient tiennent principalement a ce qu'il
s'est occupe des effets plutot que des causes. Presque
tous les debats qui se sont deroules autour de cette
table ont eu pour toile de fond des actes de violence aux
frontieres ; le principal souci du Conseil a ete d'y mettre
un terme et d'etablir les responsabilites. C'est peutetre pour cela que le Conseil n'a pas ete en mesure,
allant plus loin que les dispositions des articles de la
Convention d'armistice qui se rapportent expressement a la situation a la frontiere, d'examiner toutes les
dispositions de la Convention et particulierement celles
qui traitent des questions de principe fondamentales.
Somme toute, la Convention d'armistice est un tout,
et il est raisonnable de penser qu'une violation constante de l'une de ses dispositions et particulierement du
principe meme de la Convention doit nuire a la mise en
reuvre de toutes les dispositions. De l'avis du Gouvernement d'Israel, les actes de violence a la frontiere
sont lies a la fa«on dont les parties entendent les engagements qu'elles ont pris aux termes des accords
d'armistice. Ils sont une consequence et non pas une
cause.

5. It is for this reason that my Government instructed
me to request the Security Council to include a complaint against Jordanian violations of the Armistice
Agreement in the agenda of today's meeting. Our
purpose is to discuss the violations by Jordan of funda-

5. Voila pourquoi mon gouvernement m'a charge de
demander au Conseil de securite d'inscrire a l'ordre du
jour de la seance d'aujourd'hui une plainte contre les
violations par la Jordanie de la Convention d'armistice. Mon intention est d'exposer les violations par la

1 Official Records 0/ the Security Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 1.

1 Proces-verbaux ofliciels du Conseil de securite, qualrieme
annee, Supplement special nO 1.

~~

1IiIIIiIIIIIiiI........1IIIIIIIII-......................

iiiiiiiii"'''"
"iiiiiIII'-""

....................................................

····~

..............

mental provisions of the Agreement, provisions which
are a touchstone of its real intent and attitude.

Jordanie des dispositions fondamentales de la Convention, dispositions qui font connaitre les intentions reelleli
et comprendre l'attitude de ce pays.

6. We have laid particular stress on article VIII which,
as the Chief of Staff rightly stated in his memorandum
to the Secretary-General 2 - is for Israel one of the
crucial provisions of the General Armistice Agreement. Article VIn reads as follows:
"1. A Special Committee, composed of two representatives of each Party designated by the respective
Governments, shall be established for the purpose
of formulating agreed plans and arrangements
designed to enlarge the scope of this Agreement and
to effect improvements in its application.
"2. The Special Committee shall be organized
immediately following the coming into effect of this
Agreement and shall direct its attention to the formulation of agreed plans and arrangements for such
matters as either Party may submit to it, which,
in any case. shall include the following, on which
agreement in principle already exists: free movement
of traffic on vital roads, induding the Bethlehem
and Latrun-Jerusalem roads; resumption of the
normal functioning of the cultural and humanitarian
institutions on Mount Scopus and free access thereto;
free access to the Holy Places and cultural institutions
and use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives;
resumption of operation of the Latrun pumping
station; provision of electricity for the Old City; and
resumption of operation of the railroad to Jerusalem.

6. Nous avons insiste sur l'article VIII, car, comme l'a
justement declare le Chef d'etat-major dans son memorandum au Secretaire general 2, pour Israel, l'article VIII
est une des dispositions capitales de la Convention
d'armistice general. Je cite le texte de cet article:
« 1. Les Gouvernements de rune et l'autre parties nommeront chacun deux represerrtants, qui
constitueront un Comite special charge d'etablir
des plans et des arrangements communs en vue
d'etendre la portee de la presente Convention et d'en
ameliorer la mise en ceuvre.
« 2. Le Comite special entrera en {onctions immediatement apres l' entree en vigueur de la presente
Convention; il sera charge d'etablir des plans et
arrangements concernant les questions que rune ou
l'autre partie pourra lui soumettre; ces questions
devront notamment comprendre les suivantes, sur
lesquelles un accord de principe a deja ete realise:
libre circulation sur les routes essentielles, y compris
la route de BethIeem et la. route Latroun-Jerusalem;
reprise de l' activite normale des institutions culturelIes et humanitaires du mont Scopus et liberte
d'acces a ces institutions; liberte d'acces aux Lieux
saints et aux institutions cUlturelles et libre utilisation du cimetiere du mont des Oliviers ; remise
en service de la station de pompage de Latroun;
fourniture de courant electrique a la Vieille Ville;
et reprise du service de la ligne ferroviaire desservant
Jerusalem.
« 3. Le Comite special sera selll competent pour
les questions qui pourront lui etre referees. Les plans
et arrangements communs qu'il pourra etablir pourront prevoir l'exercice de fonctions de surveillance
par la Commission mixte d'armistice prevue a
l'article XI.»

"3. The Special Committee shall have exclusive
competence over such matters as may be referred to
it. Agreed plans and arrangements formulated by
it may provide for the exercise of supervisory functions by the Mixed Armistice Commission established
in article XI."
7. The Special Committee established under paragraph 1 met a few times in 1949 and, after overcoming
a series of procedural roadblocks put up by the Jordan
representatives, succeeded in accomplishing one of the
tasks enumerated in paragraph 2, namely, the resumption of the operation of the railroad from the coast to
Jerusalem. Since then it has not met, because Jordan
has refused to appoint any representatives to it, and
this in spite of the resolution of the Security Council
of 17 November 1950 [8/1907 and Corr. 1], which took
note that the Special Committee had been formed and
had convened, and expressed the hope that it would
proceed expeditiously to carry out the functions contemplated in article VIII, paragraphs 2 and 3.

7. Le Comite special prevu au paragraphe 1 de cet
article s'est reuni quelques fois en 1949 et, apres avoir
surmonte divers obstacles interessant la procedure,
eleves par les representants de la Jordanie, est parvenu
a accomplir l'une des taches enoncees au paragraphe 2 :
remise en service de la ligne de chemin de fer reliant
la cote et Jerusalem. Depuis lors, il ne s'est plus reuni,
la J ordanie ayant refuse de designer des representants,
et ce malgre la resolutipn du 17 .novembre 1950 [8/1907]
oil le Conseil de securite constate que le Comite special
a ete constitue et s'est reuni et exprime l'espoir que ce
comite s'acquittera sans retard des fonctions envisagees
dans les paragraphes 2 et 3 de l'article VIII.

8. In consequence of this clear violation by Jordan of
its obligations under article VIII, the other plans and
arrangements enumerated in paragraph 2 have remained
a dead letter. The main road from Jerusalem to the
coast is still cut; the Hadassah Hospital and the Hebrew
University buildings on Mount Scopus, including the
National Library of Israel, are becoming deserted

8. A cause de cette violation flagrante par la J ordanie
des obligations decoulant de l'article VIII, les autres
plans et arrangements enonces au paragraphe 2 sont
restes lettre morte. La grande route reliant Jerusalem
a la cote est encore coupee; I'hopital Hadassah et les
batiments de l'Universite hebraique du mont Scopus
- y compris la Bibliotheque nationale d'Israel-

2 Official Records of the Security Council, Eleventh Year, Supplement for April, May and June 1596, document 8/3596, annex 6.

: Documents officiels du Conseil de st!curife, onzieme annt!e,
Supplement d'avril, mai et juin 1956, document 8/3596, annexe 6.

3

ruins; the Western Wall of the Second Temple, the
Wailing Wall, which is the most ancient and sacred
relic which the Jewish people possess, and other Jewish
holy places and shrines, are barred to Jewish pilgrims;
the historic cemetery on the Mount of Olives is desecrated by vandalism and neglect; the water-pumping
station at Latrun, which was destroyed by Jordanian
military forces during the truce imposed by the Security
Council in 1948, remains destroyed.

tombent en ruines et sont abandonnes; le mur occidental du deuxieme Temple, le mur des Lamentations,
la relique la plus ancienne et la plus sacree du penple
juil et d'autre lieux saints et sanctuaires juifs sont
interdits aux pelerins juifs. Le cimetiere historiqlle du
mont des Oliviers est profane par le vandalisme et
l'abandon; la station de pompage de Latroun, detruite
par les force"S militaires jordaniennes pendant la treve
imposee par le Conseil de securite en 1948, n' est pas
reconstruite.

9. During the past eight years the Government of
Israel has made frequent efforts to secure the implementation of article VIII of the General Armistice
Agreement but has constantly met with an obdurate
refusal on the part of Jordan to carry out this clear
and unmistaken obligation of the Agreement. The
matter was discussed with the Secretary-General and
the Chief o~ StaiI on a number of occasions during the
past eighteen months, but all efforts to secure Jordan's
compliance with the article have failed. The result is
that rights which Israel regards as of cardinal religious,
educational and practical importance have been gravely
prejudiced.

9. Au cours des huit annees ecouIees, le Gouvernement
d'Israel a souvent essaye d'obtenir que soit applique
l'article VIII de la Convention d'armistice general,
mais toujours il s'est heurte au refus obstiIie de la
Jordanie de tenir cet engagement clair et net de la
Convention. La question a ete examinee par le Secretaire general et le Chef d'etat-major it de nombrenses
reprises au cours des 18 mois ecouIes, mais tous les
efforts pour obtenir que la Jordanie observe les dispositions de cet article ont echoue.. I1 s'ensuit qu'il est
gravement porte atteinte it des droits qu' Israel considere
comme essentiels sur le plan de la religion, de l'enseignement et de la vie courante.

10. My Government accordingly turns to the Security
Council in the hope that its influence will obtain for
Israel relief from the denial of rights to which Israel
has been subjected by Jordan's defiance of the provisions
of article VIII of the General Armistice Agreement.

10. C'est pourquoi mon gouvernement s'adresse au
COTJ.seil de securite, 6sperant que par son influence il
supprimera ce deni de droits qui vient de cc que la
Jordanie fait echec aux dispositions de l'article VIII
de la Convention d'armistice general.

11. Article I of the General Armistice Agreement is,
in the view of the Government of Israel, the heart of
the General Armistice Agreement, and a violation of
any of its provisions jeopardizes, if it does not indeed
nullify, the operation of the entire instrument. Article I
reads as follows:
"With a view to promoting the return of permanent peace in Palestine and in recognition of the
importance in this regard of mutual assurances
concerning the future military operations of the
parties, the following principles, which shall be fully
observed by both parties during the armistice, are
hereby affirmed:
"1. The injunction of the Security Council against
resort to military force in the settlement of the
Palestine question shall henceforth be scrupulously
respected by both parties;
"2. No agressive action by the armed forces
- land, sea, or air - of either party shall be undertaken, planned, or threatened against the people
or the armed forces of the other; it being understood
that the use of the term planned in this context has
no bearing on normal staff planning as generally
practised in military organizations;

11. L'article premier de cette Convention d'armistice
est, de l'avis du Gouvernement d'Israel, le creur meme
de la Convention, et toute violation de l'une quelconque
de ses dispositions compromet, si elle ne l'empeche,
l'application de toutes les autres. En voici le texte :
« En vue de favoriser le retablissement de la paix
permanente en Palestine, et reconnaissant !'importance que revetent it cet egard des assurances reciproques concernant les operations militaires futures
des parties, les deux parties souscrivent par les
presentes aux principes ci-apres qu'elles respecteront pleinement pendant la duree de l'armistice :
« 1. Les deux parties respecteront scrupuleusement
dorenavant !'interdiction faite par le Conseil de secnrite de recouriL it la force militaire dans le reglement
de la question palestinienne ;
« 2. Les forces armees terrestres, aeriennes et navales
de l'une et de l'autre partie n'entreprendront ni ne
prepareront aucune action agressive contre la population ou les forces armees de l'autre partie, ni ne
les en menaceront ; il est entendu que le mot « prepareron!» employe dans le present texte ne s'applique
pas au travail de preparation normal d'un etatmajor, tel qu'il se pratique ordinairement dans les
organisations militaires ;
« 3. Le droit de chacune des parties it etre assnree
de sa securite et it ne pas craindre d'attaques de la
part des forces armees de l'autre partie sera pleinement respecte ;
«4. L'existence d'un armistice entre les forces
armees des deux parties est reconnue comme une
indispensable etape vers la fin du conflit arme et dn
retablissement de la paix en Palestine .»)

"3. The right of each party to its security and
freedom from fear of attack by the armed forces
of the other shall be fully respected;
"4. The establishment of an armistice between
the armed forces of the two parties is accepted as
an indispensable step toward the liquidation of
armed conflict and the restoration of peace in
Palestine. "
4

I

J

r

"'12.

S
~
~

~.'.

!
~

!
,

The Council will note that the theme of peace
appears twice in the article - onee in its preamble,
where the reference is to " the return of perman ent
peace in Palesti ne ", and again in paragr aph 4, which
speaks of "the restora tion of peace in Palesti ne ".
It is thus the central theme, the theme of peace,
which has been constan ly, flagran tly and wilfully
ianored by the Arab States. Jordan , in common with
its neighbours, has made it clear that under no circumstances will it be prepar ed to make peace with
Israel. On the contrar y, the consta nt motive of the
pronouncements of the leaders of its Govern ment has
been and continues to be the destruc tion of Israel and
its obliteration from the map of the Middle East.
13. One does not have to go far back for proof of
this contention. On 25 June 1957, the Foreig n Minister
of Jordan , Mr. Samir er-Rifa 'i, made a statem ent to
the Arab News Agency which included the following
passage:
"Jorda n, the sincere and patien t country , will
not accept any solutio n of the Palesti ne issue which
does not fulfil the mission for which she has always
striven - to restore this usurpe d section of the
great Arab homela nd."

14. A few days later, on 4 July 1957, Chief of Staff of
the Jordan ian Army, Major-General Habbe s el Majali,
held a press conference in which he said, inter alia:

12. Le Conseil peut consta ter que le theme de la paix
revient deux fois dans cet article : une fois dans le
preamb ule, oil il est questio n du « retabli ssemen t de la
paix perman ente en Palesti ne )), et une autre fois au
paragr aphe 4, qui parle du « retabli ssemen t de la paix
en Palesti ne ". C'est done le theme principal, le theme
de la paix, que les Etats arabes ont feint d'ignor er
system atiquem ent, de fa~on flagran te et de propos delihere. Comme tous ses voisins, la J ordanie a proclame
qu'en aucune circons tance elle ne serait disposee a
faire la paix avec Israel. Le leitmo tiv des declara tions
des chefs de son gouver nemen t a toujou rs ete et continu e
d'etre : detruir e Israel et l'effacer de la carte du MoyenOrient.
13. Il ne faut pas remon ter bien loin pour en trouve r
la preuve . Le 25 juin 1957, le Ministre des affaires
etrange res de Jordan ie, M. Samir er-Rifa 'i, a fait a
l' Agence de presse arabe une declara tion dont j'extra is
le passage suivan t :
« La Jordan ie, dont on connai t lasinc erite et la
patience, n'accep tera aucune solutio n de la questio n
palesti nienne qui ne lui perme tte pas de rempli r la
mission qu'elle s'est toujou rs assignee : recupe rer
cette portion usurpe e de la grande patrie arabe. ))
14. Peu de jours apres, le 4 juillet 1957, le Chef d'etatmajor de 1'armee jordKnienne, le, genera l Habbe s elMajali, a tenu une conference de presse au cours de
laquelle il a notamm ent declare :
« Si les relation s entre pays arabes sont solides et
si Ieurs forces armees sont en mesure de consacrer
toute leur energie a se prepare r, ce sera chose aisee
que de repren dre Jaffa, Hai'fa et les autres villes.
C'est a nous de prepar er ce grand jour et, pour ce
ce faire, nous devons cooperer et creel' la stabilit e
necessaire. Dans notre patrie voIee, il n'y a place ni
pour les Juifs ni pour le sionisme mondial. »
15. Le roi de Jordan ie n'a pas tarde lui non plus a
tonitru er contre Israel. Le 5 juillet, il a declare, au cours
d'une intervi ew it la television britann ique, qu'il etait
hors de questio n que les Etats arabes accept ent jamais
1'existence d'Israe l. Peu avant, il avait invite son
peuple cc it travail ler a 1'unisson pour affermir sa securit e
economique, souten ir la grande armee et prepar er le
grand jour oil tous les Arabes se joindro nt en vue de
recupe rer la patrie arabe perdue et realiser l'unite tant
attendu e. »

" If relations among the Arabs will be establi shed
and their armed forces will be able to devote their
energies to the job of prepare dness, it will be an
easy matter to retriev e J affa, Haifa and the other
towns. It is up to us to prepare for this day, and for
this purpose we are obliged to co-ope rate and create
the necessary stabilit y. There is no room in our
stolen homeland for Jews or for world Zionism ."
15. The King of Jordan has also not been laggard in
his fulminations agains t Israel. On 5 JUlY he declared
in a British television intervi ew that there was no
possibility that the Arab States would ever accept the
existence of Israel. A short while before, he had called
upon his people to "work togeth er to strengt hen their
economic securit y, to bolster the great army, and to
prepare for the great day of Arabis m when they would
all gather to retriev e the lost Arab homela nd and to
attain their long-so ught unity" .
16. I have given here a few examp les of some of the 16. J e
viens de donner quelques exemples des declaramost recent of the threate ning statem ents made by tions agressi
ves les plus recente s des principales personthe principal officials of the Jordan ian Govern ment nalites du
Gouve rnemen t jordan ien it l'adress e d'Israe l,
against Israel, but we have been hearing this sort of mais iI y a
huit ans que nous entend ons chante r cette
thing for the past eight years. Well-disposed people antienn e.
Des personnes bien disposees a notre egard
tell us that we should pay no attenti on to these threats nous conseil
lent de ne pas nous preocc uper de ces
because, firstly, they say, the Arab countri es, neither menaces,
parce que les pays arabes, disent-ils, ne
singly nor in combin ation, would have the strengt h to ~.eraient,
d'abord , pas assez forts ni individ uellem ent,
harm Israel, and, secondly, that the statem ents are ni ensemble,
pour porter un coup a Israel et, ensuite ,
really meant for interna l consum ption. We are unable parce que ces
declara tions sont en realite destinees a la
to accept these comfor ting words. On all sides we see consommation
interieu re. Nous ne saurion s accept er
Arab nations arming feverishly while making no secret cette interpr
etation rassura nte. Nous voyons de toutes
of their intenti on to use these newly acquire d arms parts les nations
arabes s'arme r fievreusement, sans
against Israel. And we do not believe that the inflam ma- cacher leur
intenti on d'utilis er contre Israel les armes
tory statem ents are made for interna l consum ption. nouvellement
acquises. Nous ne pensons pas que ces
We think that the Arab leaders mean what they say, declarations
incendiaires soient destinees it la consombut even if they do not the inevita ble outcom e of mation interieu
re. Nous croyons que les chefs arabes
5

their propaganda for the past eight years has been to
inculcate hatred and hostility and dreams of military
conquest in a whole generation of Arab youth. The
result is that the prospects of peace and tranquillity
in the Middle East are receding and not advancing.

pensent effectivement ce qu'ils disent, mais, meme si
tel n'etait pasJe. __~as, la propagande qu'ils ont menee
pendant les huit dernieres annees n'a pu qu'engendrer
la haine et l'hostilite et faire naitre des reves de conqup.te
militaire parmi toute la jeune generation arabe. Il en
resulte que les perspectives de paix et de tranquillite
dans le Moyen-Orient s'estompent au lieu de se preciser.

17. We hold it essential that compliance with the
Armistice Agreement means not only compliance with
those of its provisions which call for the inviolability
of the borders but also, and primarily, compliance
with the fundamental principles of non-aggression, nonintimidation, and the promotion of peace which are
included in article I of the Agreement. Without
article I the General Armistice Agreement has no
meaning. Israel would not have signed such an instrument on 3 April 1949 had article I not been included
in it.

17. Il est essentiel, it nos yeux, que soient respectees
non seulement les dispositions de la Convention d'armistice general qui concernent l'inviolabilite des frontieres,
mais aussi et surtout les dispositions fondamentales
sur le principe de la non-agression, de la non-intimidation et de la recherche de la paix, dont il est question
it l'article premier de la Convention. Sans son artiCle
premier, la Convention d'armistice general n'a pas de
sens. Si cet article n'avait pas ete insere dans la Convention, Israel ne l'aurait pas signee le 3 avril 1949.

18. Another major provision of the Armistice Agreement of which Jordan has been in standing violation
for the past four years is article XII, which lays down
the procedure for review or modification of its provisions. The relevant paragraphs of article XII of the
General Armistice Agreement read as follows:
"2. This Agreement, having been negotiated and
concluded in pursuance of the resolution of the
Security Council of 16 November 1948 calling for
the establishment of an armistice in order to eliminate
the threat to the peace in Palestine and to facilitate
the transition from the present truce to permanent
peace in Palestine, shall remain in force until a
peaceful settlement between the Parties is achieved,
except as provided in paragraph 3 of this article.
"3. The parties to this Agreement may, by
mutual consent, revise this Agreement or any of
its provisions, or may suspend its application, other
than articles I and Ill, at any time. In the absence
of mutual agreement and after this Agreement has
been in effect for one year from the date of its signing,
either of the Parties may call upon the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to convoke a conference
of representatives of the two Parties for the purpose
of reviewing, revising, or suspending any of the
provisions of this Agreement other than articles I
and Ill. Participation in such conference shall be
obligatory upon the Parties.

18. Une autre disposition importante de la Convention
d'armistice, que la Jordanie a sans cesse violee au cours
des quatre dernieres annees est celle de l'article XII
qui fixe la procedure de revision ou d'amendement
des dispositions de la Convention. Voici les paragraphes
pertinents de cet article:
« 2. La presente Convention, negociee et conclue
en execution de la resolution adoptee par le ConseiI
de securite le 16 novembre 1948 et demandant la
conclusion d'un armistice afin d'eliminer la menace
contre la paix en Palestine et de faciliter le passage
de la treve actuelle it une paix permanente en Palestine, restera en vigueur jusqu'it ce qu'intervienne un
reglement pacifique entre les deux parties, sauf dans
le cas prevu au paragraphe 3 du present article.
« 3. Les parties it la presente Convention pourront,
d'un commun accord, proceder it la revision de la
presente Convention ou de l'une quelconque de ses
dispositions, ou en suspendre l'application, it l'exception des articles I et Ill, il n'importe quel moment.
En l'absence d'un commun accord et si la presente
Convention a ete en vigueur pendant une duree d'un
an it dater de sa signature, l'une quelconque des
deux parties pourra demander au Secretaire general
des Nations Unies de convoquer une conference de
representants des deux parties en vue d'examiner
it nouveau, ou de reviser, l'une quelconque des
clauses de la presente Convention autre que les
articles I et Ill, ou d'en suspendre l'application. Les
deux parties seront tenues de prendre part it cette
conference.
« 4. Si la conference prevue au paragraphe 3 du
present article n'aboutit pas it une solution d'un
point litigieux acceptee par les deux parties, l'une
ou l'autre partie pourra porter la question devant
le Conseil de securite des Nations Unies pour en
obtenir l'aide voulue, en faisant valoir que la presente
Convention a ete conclue en execution d'une decision
prise par le Conseil de securite pour etablir la paix en
Palestine. »

" 4. If the conference provided for in paragraph 3
of this article does not result in an agreed solution
of a point in dispute, either Party may bring the
matter before the Security Council of the United
Nations for the relief sought on the grounds that this
Agreement has been concluded in pursuance of
Security Council action toward the end of achieving
peace in Palestine."

19. Le 23 novembre 1953, le representant permanent
d'Israel, dans une lettre adressee au Secretaire general
[8/3140], a appele l'attention sur la profonde inquietude
que causait au Gouvernement d'Israell'affaiblissement
de la paix et de la securite sur la frontiere israelo-

19. On 23 November 1953, the permanent representative of Israel addressed a letter to the SecretaryGeneral [8/3140] drawing his attention to the deep
concern of the Government of Israel at the impairment
of peace and security on the Israel-Jordan frontier
6

J
I:

i

I
~

I.'

I
I
I
I

'0... ·

resulting from Jordan 's refusal to implem ent many of jordani
enne, dii au fait que la Jordan ie refusai t de
the provisions and obligations of the General Armistice respect
er de nombreuses dispositions et obligations de
Agreement. He, therefore, formally invoked article XII la
Convention d'armistice general. A ce propos, il a
and asked the Secretary-General to convoke a confeinvoque expressement I'article XII et deman de 8,U
rence of representatives of the two parties for the Secreta
ire general de convoquer une conference de
purpose of reviewing it in accordance with paragr aph 3 represe
ntants des deux parties aux fins d'une revision
of this article. The Securi ty Council took cognizance de
la Convention en application du paragr aphe 3 dudit
of this action in its resolution of 24 November 1953 article.
Le Conseil de securite a pris note de cette
[8/3139/RelJ. 2J.
demarche dans sa resolution du 24 novembre 1953
[8/3139, RelJ.2J.

20. The Secretary-General thereup on approached the
Government of Jordan and made it clear that article
XII, paragr aph 3, imposed an obligation on him to
convoke the conference and upon the parties to attend it.

20. Le Secretaire general a, des lors, pris contac t avec
le Gouvernement de la J ordanie et rappeIe que le paragraphe 3 de l'articl e XII faisait une obligation au
Secretaire genera! de convoquer la conference et aux
parties a la Convention d'y assister.

21. The Secretary-General later reporte d on the failure
of his efforts to secure Jordan 's compliance with this
article [8/3180 and add. 1 and 2.J Here again Israel
was faced with an obdura te refusal on the part of
Jordan to comply with a central provision of the
Armistice Agreement.

21. Le Secretaire general a, par la suite, fait savoir
que ses efforts en vue d'amen er la Jordan ie a respecter
l' article XII avaien t echoue [8/3180 et Add.1 et 2J.
Israel se heurta it donc de nouveau au refus obstine de
la J ordanie de se conformer a une disposition cle de
la Convention d'armistice.

22. In bringing this matter once again before the
Security Council the Govern ment of Israel is actuate d
by two considerations: firstly, it wishes to df\fend the
legal integri ty of the Agreement as a whole, and,
secondly, it wishes to preserve the only constructive
mec:(ns offered by the Agreement for review and modification of its provisions. The refusal of Jordan to
accede to the Secretary-General's invitat ion when it
was made betokens an attitud e to the Armistice Agreement which cannot but have grave consequences for its
continued integrity.

22. Si le GouvernemeIit d'Israe l souleve une fois de
plus ce probleme devant le Conseil de securite, c'est
pour deux raisons : premierement, il d~sire conserver
sa valeur juridiq ue a l'ensemble'd.e la Convention et,
deuxiemement, il desire sauvegarder ce seul moyen
pratiqu e que prevoi t la Convention pour I'amen demen t
ou la modification de ses dispositions. Le fait que la
Jordan ie n'a pas, it l'epoque, repond u favorablement it
!'invita tion du Secretaire general reveIe it I'egard de la
Convention d'armistice une attitud e qui ne peut que
compro mettre gravem ent la valeur juridiq ue de l'ensemble des dispositions de cette Convention.

23. When representatives of the Government of Israel
signed the Armistice Agreement at Rhodes, in April
1949, they signed an agreem ent which contained a
preamble, twelve articles and two annexes. Some of
the provisions of the Agreement, such as the references
to the withdrawal of Iraqi forces, the exchange of
prisoners and other matter s of a transit ory nature,
have been rendered inopera tive by the fact of implementation; others have been nullified for years by
Jordan 's persist ent and purposeful evasion. What is
left now of the Armistice Agreement is a mere shell of
the document which represe ntative s of Israel and
Jordan signed eight years ago.

23. Lorsque les represe ntants diu Gouvernement
d' Israel. ont signe la Convention d'armis tice a Rhodes,
en avril 1949, ils ont signe un instrum ent conten ant un
preambule, douze articles et deux annexes. Certaines
dispositions de cette Convention, notamm ent celles
qui concernent le retrait des forces irakiennes, l'echange
de prisonniers et d'autre s questions de caractere transitoire, sont mainte nant sans effet puisqu'elles ont ete
appliquees. D'autre s sont toujou rs demeurees lettre
morte parce que la J ordanie en a consta mment elude
l'applic ation de propos delibere. De l'accord d'armi stice signe il y a huit ans par les represe ntants d'Israe l
et de la Jordan ie, il ne reste plus, aujour d'hui, qu'un
document vide de sa substance.

24. The Govern ment of Israel cannot passively acquiesce in a selective interpr etation and implem entatio n
of the Armistice Agreem ent by Jordan , and therefore
appeals to the Securit y Council to use its influence to
restore to full effect all the articles of the Agreement,
including articles VIII, I and XII, which lay down
fundamental principles of action for the parties.

24. Le Gouvernement d'Israe l ne saurait rester
indifferent devant !'interp retatio n et l'applic ation
tendancieuses de la Convention d'armistice par la Jordanie; c'est pourquoi il deman de au Conseil de securite d'user de son credit pour rendre plein effet it tous
les articles de la Convention, et notamm ent aux articles VIII, I et XII qui posent les principes fondamentau x qui doiven t regir les actes des deux parties .

25. I now turn b ."e second part of my statem ent,
concerning the JOi. ';'1 compla int about the afforestation work on the Israel side of the civilian line established in the former Govern ment House area in Jerusalem. There mayo r may not be some significance in

25. J'en viens mainte nant it la deuxieme partie de
ma declaration, qui porte sur la plainte relative aux
travau x de boisement executes du cote israelien sur la
ligne civile etablie dans l'ancienne zone du Palais du
Gouvernement, it Jerusalem. On peut se demander,
7

the fact that it is situated on a hill historically known
in Jerusalem as the Hill of Evil Counsel.

peut-etre, s'il ne s'attache pas une certaine importance
au fait qu'elle se situe sur une colline qui, de tout
temps, a ~te appelee, a Jerusalem, «la colline de mauvais
conseil ».

26. In the view of my delegation, this Jordan complaint
should not have been brought to the Security Council
at all. I know that many share our opinion. The Security Council has established a very wise practice whereby it does not consider any situation or dispute until
all means of resolving it outside the Council have been
exhausted. In this particular case the Government of
Jordan had at least three subsidiary bodies to which
it could have brought its complaint before bringing
it before the Council, if indeed the plantii1;J (If trees,
wherever they are planted, is a fit subject for di:;cussion
by the United Nations organ principally responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
These bodies were a sub-committee of the Mixed
Armistice Commission, which has discussed similar
questions in the past; the Jerusalem Area Commanders
meeting, which was set up for the precise purpose of
dealing with disputes of this kind, and the Special
Committee established under article VIII of the General
Armistice Agreement, to which the question of the area
between the lines had been transferred by the Mixed
Armistice Commission on 21 May 1949. The Jordan
Government, however, has refused to use these normal
channels and has brought this trifling affair straight
to the attention of the Security Council for reasons
which, I am afraid, I have not been able to elucidate
from the statement we have just heard.

26. La delegation israelienne estime que la plainte
jordanienne n'aurait pas dO. etre portee devant le
Conseil de securite. Je sais que nombreux sont ceux
qui partagent cette opinion. Le Conseil suit une procedure tres judicieuse en evitant d'examiner un etat de
choses ou un difIerend tant que tous les moyens de
reglement en dehors du Conseil n'ont pas ete epuises.
En l'occurrence, le Gouvernement jordanien aurait
pu s'adresser a trois organes subsidiaires au moins
avant de porter plainte devant le Conseil - si tant est
que planter des arbres, oil que ce soit, puisse faire
l'objet d'une discussion devant l'organe des Nations
Unies principalement responsable du maintien de la
paix et de la securite internationales. Ces trois organes
sont un Sous-Comite de la Commission mixte d'armistice, qui a deja examine des problemes analogues dans
le passe, le Conseil des commandants de la region de
Jerusalem, qui a precisement ete cree pour s'occuper
de difIerends de cette nature, et le Comite special cree
aux termes de l'article VIII de la Convention d'armistice general, a qui la Commission mixte d'armistice a
renvoye, le 21 mai 1949, la question de la zone situee
entre les lignes. Or, le Gonvernement jordanien a
refuse de suivre l'une ou l'autre de ces procedures
normales, preferant soumettre cette afIaire insignifiante directement au Conseil de securite pour des
raisons que l'expose que nous venons d'entendre ne
m'ont pas, je le crains, fait decouvrir.

27. The Jordan authorities are, I fear, prone to that
sort of thing. A fairly typical example was a double
complaint submitted to the Mixed Armistice Commission
on 17 July 1957 about huge Israel troop concentrations
on the Jerusalem road and opposite Qalqilia. After
investigation it was found that the Jerusalem troop
concentration consisted of a group of followers of the
late Rabbi of Belz who had come to visit him in J erusalem and had been met on the outskirts of the city
by the venerable Rabbi himself. A slight traffic jam
ensued, and the Jordanian scouts therefore transmitted
the dread news of an impending Israel attack posthaste to Amman. The troop concentration opposite
Qalqilia was similarly, after investigation, found to
have been a well-attended concert held at a labour
college at the Israel village of Kefar Sava, which faces
the Jordan town of Qalqilia.

27. Les autorites jordaniennes aiment apparemment
agir de la sorte. On peut en trouver un exemple typique
dans la double plainte soumise a la Commission mixte
d'armistice le 17 juillet 1957 au sujet de concentrations
massives de troupes israeliennes sur la route de Jerusalem, en face de Qalqilia. Apres enquete, il s'est avere
que les troupes concentrees a Jerusalem etaient un
groupe de partisans du rabbin de Belz, maintenant
decede, qui etaient venus lui rendre visite a Jerusalem,
et que le venerable rabbin lui-meme etait alle accueillir
dans la banlieue de la ville. Cela avait provoque une
legere perturbation de la circulation, et les eclaireurs
jordaniens transmirent a Amman la nouvelle d'une
attaque israelienne imminente. De meme, apres enquHe,
on a etabli que les troupes concentrees devant Qalqilia
n'etaient rien d'autre que la grande foule assistant
a un concert donne au Labour College dans le village
israelien de Kefar Sava, situe en face de la ville jordanienne de Qalqilia.

28. I have listened to the dissertation of the Jordan
representative with attention. He has gone to great
lengths to prove that the silvicultural activity which
has for the past few weeks been pursued on the Israel
side of the civilian line in the " area between the lines "
in Jerusalem is of a hostile and, to quote the words of
his Foreign Minister, "aggressive" nature. In view
of the length and detail of the Jordan representative's
statement, I wish to reserve my right to reply to it
more fully at a future meeting of the Council. On this
present occasion I wish briefly to give the Israel view
of the matter.

28. J'ai ecoute avec attention les developpements du
representant de la J ordanie. II s'est evertue a faire la
preuve que les travaux forestiers effectues par Israel,
au cours des dernieres semaines, du cote israelien de la
ligne civile de la « zone situee entre les lignes » a Jerusalem presentent le caractere d'actes hostiles ou, pour
citer les paroles du Ministre jordanien des afIaires
etrangeres, d'« actes d'agression». Etant donne la
longueur et le caractere detaille de l'expose du representant de la Jordanie, je voudrais me reserver le droit
de lui repondre plus a fond a une seance ulterieure du
ConseiI. Aujourd'hui, je voudrais me borner a exposer
brievement le point de vue israelien sur la question.

8

29. The subject of the Jordan complaint is work which
has been undertaken on the Israel side of the "area
between the lines" preparatory to the planting of trees.
It might appear that the appropriate place for a discussion of this nature is the Food and Agriculture Organization rather than the Security Council, because
despite the assertions of the Jordan Foreign Minister
there are no aggressive or other military aspects to
the planting of trees in this area.

29. La plainte jordanienne a pour objet les travaux
qu'Israel a entrepris du c6te israelien de la 11 zone situ~e
entre les lignes», en vue d'y planter des arbres. Il
semblerait que 1'organe competent pour en connaitre soit
1'Organisation pour l'alimentation et 1'agriculture
pluMt que le Conseil de securite, car, malgre les affirmations du Ministre des affaires etrangeres de Jordanie,
planter des arbres dans cette zone n'a rien d'agressif
ni meme de militaire.

30. We in Israel have a particular feeling about trees.
Among the things of which we are most proud in the
history of modern Jewish settlement in the Holy Land
is the conversion of large stretches of barren hills and
rock-strewn mountains into verdant forests. Trees are
for us symbols of life and of growth. It is the custom
in Israel to signify anything of importance in the life
of a man by the planting of a tree in his honour or
in his memory. When a child is born, a tree is planted
for his future growth. When he reaches the age of
manhood, more trees are planted, and so on throughout every important event in his life. When he dies
a grove is planted in his memory. It was thus with a
particular feeling of amazement and lack of comprehension that we heard that Jordan wished to put a
stop to the planting of trees in the former Government
House area.

30. En Israel, nous aimons beaucoup les arbres.
Parmi les realisations dont nous sommes le plus fiers
dans 1'histoire de l' etablissement des J uifs en Terre
Sainte a notre epoque, figure la transformation en forets
verdoyantes de vastes etendues de collines denudees
et de montagnes rocheuses. Pour nous, les arbres
symbolisent la vie et la croissance. C'est la coutume
en Israel de marquer tout evenement important dans
la vie d'un homme en plantant un arbre en son honneur
ou en sa memoire. Quand un enfant nait, on plante un
arbre qui grandira avec luL Lorsqu'il atteint l'age
adulte, on plante d'autres arbres pour marquer tous les
evenements importants de sa vie. Lorsqu'il meurt, on
plante un bosquet d'arbres pour honorer sa memoire.
Aussi c'est avec un vif etonnement, et sans comprendre,
que nous avons appris que la Jordanie desirait mettre
fin a la plantation d'arbres dans l'ancienne zone du
Palais du gouvernement.

31. But one is, of course, compelled to assume that
it is not the trees to which the Jordan Government
objects, but to the fact that they are being planted
in the " area between the lines ". This assumption makes
necessary an examination of the origins, the history
and the present circumstances of this area in order
to find out whether the work at present being undertaken there is indeed legitimate, as we have no doubt
it is.

31. On est donc force de supposer que ce ne !'Iont pas
les arbres memes qui indisposent le Gouvernement
jordanien, mais le fait qu'ils sont plantes dans la (I zone
situee entre les lignes ll.. Ayant fait cette supposition, on
est conduit necessairement a examiner les origines,
l'histoire et la situation actuelle de cette zone, et ce
afin de determiner si les travaux actuellement effectues
sont vraiment legitimes, comme nous en sommes
persuades.

32. The" area between the lines" had its origin in
the neutral zone established by the Red Cross in 194748 and was one of a few such areas in the Jerusalem
district in which civilians of both sides were able to
take refuge during the course of the fighting. When
the Red Cross withdrew from active operations in
Israel and Jordan, the area was handed over in almost
precisely its present boundaries to the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization, which established its
headquarters in the former Government House and a
small area immediately surrounding it.

32. ;La « zone situee entre les lignes» a son origine dans
la zone neutre etablie en 1947-1949 par la CroixRouge; elle est 1'une des quelques zones de meme
nature dans le district de Jerusalem Oll des civils des
deux parties ont pu se refugier au cours des combats.
Lorsque la Croix-Rouge a cesse ses activites en Israel
et en Jordanie, la region a ete confiee, presque dans ses
limites actuelles, a l'Organisme des Nations Unies
charge de la surveillance de la treve qui a installe son
siege dans 1'ancien Palais du gouvernement et dans une
petite zone alentour.

33. On 27 August 1948 the central Truce Supervision
Board declared this area a non-combatant zone. The
existence of this zone was further referred to in the
cease-fire agreement signed on 30 November 1948.

33. Le 27 aout 1948, la Commission centrale de surveillance de la treve a declare cette zone no man's land; la
Convention de suspension d'armes signee le 30 novembre
1948 rappelle 1'existence de cette zone.

34. A new situation, however, arose following the
signature of the Israel-Jordan General Armistice Agreement on 3 April 1949. There is no specific reference in
this agreement to the area around the former Government House. A vacuum was thus created in a densely
populated part of the country where civilian activity
had never ceased even during the time of the fighting.
Both Israel and Jordan recognized the need to remedy
this anomalous situation and therefore made several
attempts to arrive at an agreement which would allow
civilians to continue with their normal activities. To

34. La signature de la Convention d'armistice general
israelo-jordanienne, le 3 avril1949, est venue modifier la
situation. Cette convention ne contient aucune mention
expresse de la zone qui entoure l'ancien Palais du gouvernement. Il s'est donc cree un vide dans une partie
du pays fortement peupIee Oll les activites n'ont jamais
cesse, meme pendant les combats. Israel et la Jordanie
ont reconnu la necessite de redresser cette situation
anormale et ont essaye a plusieurs reprises d'arriver a un
accord en vue de permettre aux civils de poursuivre
leurs activites normales. A cette fin, les parties ont
9

this end attempts were made by the parties to agree
on the division of the Government House area.

essaye de s'entendre sur le partage de la zone du Palais
du gouvernement.

35. Thus as early as 21 May 1949 a discussion took
place in the newly constituted Mixed Armistice Commission with a view to solving the problem. The parties,
however, agreed that the Special Committee established
under article VIII of the General Armistice Agreement
would be a more suitable organ to deal with the matter.
This proposal had the same fate as other matters submitted to the Special Committee.

35. Le 21 mai 1949 deja, un debat s'est institue au
sein de la Commission mixte d'armistice nouvellement
creee pour la recherche d'une solution au probleme.
Toutefois, les parties sont convenues que le Comite
special etabli aux termes de l'article VIII de la Convention d'armistice general etait mieux qualifie pour
connaitre de cette question. La proposition a en le
meme sort que les autres qui ont ete soumises a ce
Comite.

36. The question of the status of the area came up
again on 12 June 1949 when the Mixed Armistice
Commission adopted a resolution holding that "the
advance into and the presence in the Government
House area of armed forces of both parties is a breach
of the Rhodes Agreement." Following the adoption of
this resolution, the United Nations Chairman of the
Commission declared:
"Initially, or during the period of the truce, it
was possible for the Truce Supervision Organization
to control the civilian situation within the a.rea.
Upon the signing of the Armistice Agreement between
the two Parties, the Truce Supervision control was
withdrawn. We still have civilians in the area... I,
therefore, propose making contacts with both Governments... to see if a solution, satisfactory to both sides,
can be worked out at the earliest possible date..."

36. La question du statut de la region s'est posee de
nouveau le 12 juin 1949, jour OU la Commission mixte
d'armistice a adopte une resolution dans laquelle elle
declare que « l'avance et la presence, dans la zone du
Palais du gouvernement, de forces armees des deux
parties constituent une violation de la Convention
de Rhodes».
Apres l'adoption de cette resolution, le President de la
Commission a declare :
« A l'origine, et pendant la periode de la treve,
l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve
pouvait controler, sur le plan civil, la situation dans
la zone. Une fois signee la Convention d'armistice
entre les deux parties, ce controle a cesse. Des civils
se trouvant encore dans cette zone... C'est pourquoi
je me propose d'entrer en contact avec les deux
gouvernements... afin d'examiner si une solution
acceptable pour les deux parties peut etre elaboree
a une date aussi proche que possible... »
37. Cette declaration du President de la Commission
mixte d'armistice doit suffire, je pense, pour infirmer
l'argument selon lequel la zone se trouverait sous la
surveillance de l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge
de la surveillance de la treve. S'il fallait une autre
preuve, le lieutenant-colonel M. M. Izhaq de l'armee
jordanienne 1'30 lui-meme fournie dans une interview
accordee le 24 aout dernier au journal Falastin de
Jerusalem. Il a declare a cette occasion:
« Il a ete etabli de falion irrefutable que les Juifs
n'ont ose agir de la sorte que lorsqu'ils ont ete assures
que l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge de la
surveillance de la treve n'interviendrait pas. Ainsi,
al'automne dernier, les Juifs ont commence a planter
des arbres dans la zone du Palais du gouvernement
du cote du village de Sur Bahir. Les Jordaniens ayant
proteste, le Chef d'Etat-major de l'Organisme charge
de la surveillance de la treve a repondu qu'il s'agissait
d'une activite de caractere civil, et qui ne relevait
donc pas de I'Organisme charge de la surveillance de
la treve. Cette prise de position a encourage les
Israeliens a entreprendre d'autres travaux agricoles
et militaires, de plus grande envergure. Le Gouvernement jordanien a laisse au Chef d'etat-major
suffisamment de temps pour prendre les mesures
necessaires en vue de faire evacuer la zone par les
Juifs. Une fois convaincu que le Chef d'etat-major
n'etait pas en mesure d'exercer son autorite, il s'est
vu dans l'obligation de porter plainte devant le
Conseil de securite.»

37. This statement by the United Nations Chairman
of the Mixed Armistice Commission should, I think,
dispose of the argument that the area is under the
supervision of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization. If further proof were required, LieutenantColonel MM. Izhaq of Jordan provided it himself in
an interview with the Jerusalem newspaper Falastin
on 24 August of this year. He said:
" It has been established beyond any doubt that
the Jews have dared to do what they did only when
they were certain that UNTSO Headquarters would
not intervene. For instance, last autumn the Jews
started planting trees in the Government House
area in the direction of Sur Bahir village. When
the Jordanians protested, the Chief of Staff of UNTSO
replied that this was an action of a civilian nature and
therefore not within the purview of UNTSO. This
position of UNTSO encouraged the Israelis to cany
out other agricultural and military works of a larger
scope at this time. The Jordan Government gave the
Chief of Staff sufficient time to take the necessary
measures to evict the Jews from this area. When it
was convinced that the Chief of Staff was unable
to exercise his authority, it was compelled to lodge a
complaint with the Security Council."

38. Sur !'initiative du President de la Commission
mixte d'armistice, les deux parties se sont reunies

38. Following the initiative of the Chairman of the
Mixed Armistice Commission in 1949, both parties met

IQ

at Government House to demarcate the internal lines
or " civilian lines ", as they became to be known, that
divided the Israel and Jordan sectors around Government House. On the basis of a proposal submitted
by the then Captain Ali Abu Nuwar of Jordan, these
civilian lines were delineated on a map which was
signed by both parties. It may be assumed that Captain
Nuwar, the Jordanian representative, in making his
proposal, took care to include all Arab-owned properties
on the Jordan side of the line.

en 1949 au Palais du gouvernement pour fixer le trace
des lignes interieures - ou « lignes civiles ll, comme on
les a appeIees - entre les secteurs israelien et jordanien
dans le voisinage du Palais du gouvernement. En
partant d'une proposition soumise par Ali Abu Nuwar,
qui etait alors capitaine dans l'armee jordanienne, le
trace de ces lignes civiles a ete porte sur une carte
que les deux parties ont signee. Il est permis de supposer
que le capitaine Nuwar, representant de la Jordanie, a
pris soin, lorsqu'il a presente sa proposition, d'inclure
dans le secteur jordanien toutes les proprietes appartenant a des Arabes.

39. At a meeting of the Mixed Armistice Commission
on 26 June 1949 - that is, three days later - an agreement between the parties was formulated which was
designed to regulate the conduct of civilian activities
on both sides of the civilian line. However on 28 June
1949 the Jordan representative to the Mixed Armistice
Commission informed the Chairman that his Government
did not wish to ratify the arrangement regarding the
area of the Government House and that it demanded
modificaUons in the line proposed by Captain Nuwar.
Israel refused to reopen the negotiations. As a result
the Nuwar line became the de facto demarcation line
dividing the respective areas of activity of Israel and
Jordan civilians despite the fact that the proposed
limitations on civilian activities never became effective.
Both parties have ever since conducted their activities
in the area between the lines on the basis of the existence of the civilian line.

39. A une reunion de la Commission mixte d'armistice
qui s'est tenue le 26 juin 1949, c'est-a-dire trois jours
plus tard., un accord entre les parties a ete soumis
visant a reglementer les activites civiles de part et
d'autre de la ligne civile. Cependant, le 28 juin 1949, le
representant jordanien a cette commission a informe
le President que son gouvernement ne desirait pas
ratifier l'arrangement relatif it la zone du Palais du
gouvernement et exigeait que des modifications soient
apportees a la ligne proposee par le capitaine Nuwar.
Israel a refuse de rouvrir les negociations. En consequence, la ligne Nuwar est devenue la ligne de demarcation de facto entre les secteurs d'activite respectifs
des civils israeliens et jordaniens, en depit du fait que
les restrictions proposees touchant les activites civiles
n'ont jamais ete appliquees. Les deux parties ont
toujours, depuis lors, exerce leurs activites dans la
zone situee entre les lignes en se fondant sur l'existence
de la ligne civile.

40. This is the only status quo ever recognized by both
parties. Thus, on the Jordanian side of the area an
important section of the highway leading to Bethlehem
was built across the Jordanian sector by labourers
brought in from outside. The villagers of Jebel El
Mukabbir situated in the area enjoyed unrestricted
access to Jordan and no restrictions were imposed
on the number of Jordanian civilians entering the
village and settling there; nor have complaints ever
been submitted by Israel against planting or other
agricultural or civilian activities such as the erection
of permanent buildings, including a school, that the
villagers have undertaken from time to time right
up to the civilian line.

40. C'est la le seul statu quo que les deux parties aient
jamais reconnu. Ainsi, dans le secteur jordanien de la
region, un tron<;on important de la grand-route conduisant a BethIeem a ete construit a travers ce secteur par
des travailleurs venant de l'exterieur de la zone. Les
habitants du village de Djebel el-Moukkaber, situe a
l'interieur de la zone, peuvent librement passer en
Jordanie, et le nombre des civils jordaniens qui se
rendent dans le village et s'y etablissent n'est pas
limite. Israel n'a depose aucune plainte au sujet de la
plantation d'arbres ou d'a,utres tra,vaux de cara,ctere
agricole ou civil, tels que la construction de batiments
permanents - nota,mment une ecole - que les habitants du village entreprennent de temps a autre dans
leur secteur jusqu'a proximite de la ligne civile.

41. On the Israel side, the Hebrew University Experimental Farm continued to function, its students
performing various agricultural tasks in the area,
including exactly the same type of forestry work that
they are pursuing now.

41. Du cote israelien, la ferme experimentale de
I'Universite hebra,ique n'a pas cesse d'etre exploitee
et les etudiants ont effectue divers travaux agricoles
dans la zone, notamment des trava,ux identiques aux
travaux forestiers dont ils s'occupent a,ctuellement.

42. Again in June of this year fresh proof was given
of the valid existence of this civilian line when Colonel
Byron V. Leary, the Acting Chief of Staff, ordered a
team of United Nations observers to examine the border
markers placed on the ground by Israel surveyors. The
Chief of Staff reported that no mistakes had been made
by Israel in demarcating the civilian line. Obviously
the United Nations surveyors could have arrived at
their verdict only by comparing tb-:o grounc demarcations with the lines drawn on the map of 23 June
1949.

42. En juin dernier, le colonel Byron V. Leary, chef
d'etat-major par interim, a donne une preuve de plus
que la ligne civile existait bel et bien puisqu'il a donne
l'ordre a une equipe d'observateurs des Nations Unies
d'examiner les bornes frontieres installees sur le terrain
par des geometres israeliens. Le Chef d'etat-major a
signaIe qu'Isra,el n'avait commis aucune erreur dans la,
demarcation de la ligne civile. De toute evidence, les
geometres designes par les Nations Unies n'ont pu
arriver a cette conclusion qu'en comparant la demarcation sur le terrain avec les lignes pm"tees sur la carte
du 23 juin 1949.

43. As evidence of the fact that the existence of the
civilian line and its implications were clearly understood by Jordan and its legality not challenged, the
following example of the attitude adopted by Jordan
in matters concerning the area between the lines may
be cited. At the thirtieth Mixed Armistice Commission
meeting on 24 February 1950, the Jordanian representative stated:
" We count this area as a civilian area and the
line as a civilian line . . .
"The logical proposal is that we form an investigating body of the three parties, the United Nations,
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and Israel, a
member from each side to go to the area and look
into the digging alleged in this complaint. If it is
of a civilian nature we have no claim. If it is of a
military nature it must be rectified.
" If the Commission which goes to investigate the
matter reached the conclusion that this has been
made for civilian purposes in the area, I would
have no say in the matter."

43. Une preuve du fait que la Jordanie a tres bien
compris qu'une ligne civile - avec tout ce qu'une telle
ligne implique - existait et qu'elle n'a pas mis en
cause sa valeur juridique, reside dans l'attitude que ce
pays a adoptee it propos de questions interessant la
zone situee entre les lignes. Le 24 fevrier 1950, it la
trentieme reunion de la Commission mixte d'armistice,
le representant de la J ordanie a declare :
« Nous considerons cette zone comme une zone
civile et les lignes comme des lignes civiles... »
« Il est logique de proposer que nous constituions
un organe d'enquete compose de trois parties, it savoir
les Nations Unies, le Royaume hachemite de Jordanie
et Israel, representees chacune par un membre. Les
membres se rendraient dans la region et s'informeraient des travaux d'excavation dont il est fait etat
dans la plainte. Si ces travaux ont un caractere
militaire, il faut redresser la situation.»
« Si la Commission chargee de l'enquete conclut
que les travaux entrepris repondent it des besoins
civils dans la region, je n'aurai den it dire.»

44. On 20 July 1957, the Israel representative to the
Israel-Jordan Mixed Armistice Commission informed
the Chairman and the Jordan representative as a
matter of courtesy, that on the following day a party
of labourers employed by the Agricultural Experimental Farm, with agricultural machinery, would
start levelling the ground on the Israel side of the
civilian line preparatory to the planting of trees. This
was part of a large project to surround Jerusalem with
a green belt. No opposition was expressed at that time
by the Jordan representative or by any other Jordan
authority.

44. Le 20 juillet 1957, le representant d'Israel it la
Commission mixte d'armistice israelo-jordanienne a
informe le President et le representant de la Jordanie,
par courtoisie, que le jour suivant une equipe de travailleurs employes par la ferme experimentale commencerait, en utilisant un outillage agricole, it aplanir le
terrain du cote israelien de la ligne civile en vue d'y
planter des arbres. Ces travaux s'inseraient dans un
vaste programme visant it entourer Jerusalem d'une
ceinture de verdure. Aucune objection n'a ete soulevee
it l'epoque par le representant de la Jordanie ou par
une autorite jordanienne quelconque.

45. However, after the work had begun the Jordanians
suddenly announced that they would oppose the continuation of the work until a new agreement was made
to modify the existing civilian line. Israel immediately
agreed to negotiate the demarcation of this line with
Jordan. The Jordanians, however, made such discussion
conditional on the immediate suspension of the work
by Israel. To this demand Israel was not prepared to
submit. We were, as we always have been, willing to
meet the Jordanians to discuss outstanding points of
difference, but we are not prepared to forgo the exercise of legitimate rights as a condition to the holding
of such discussions.

45. Or, une fois les travaux commences, les Jordaniens
ont soudain annonce qu'ils s'opposeraient it la poursuite
des travaux jusqu'it ce qu'un nouvel accord filt conclu
qui modifierait la ligne civile existante. Israel a immediatement accepte de discuter le trace de cette ligne
avec la Jordanie. Toutefois, les Jordaniens ont fait
dependre la discussion de la suspension immediate des
travaux entrepris par Israel. Israel n'etait pas dispose
it accepter cette condition. Il etait pret, comme il l'a
toujours ete, it discuter avec la Jordanie les questions
restees en suspens, mais non it renoncer it exercer ses
droits iegitimes pour que les discussions puissent avoir
lieu.

46. Faced with the refusal of Jordan to participate
with Israel in a joint demarcation of the civilian line,
Israel surveyors then proceeded to do it alone in the
presence of United Nations observers. In the meantime,
however, the Jordan authorities took other measures.
Elements of the Jordanian army crossed the demarcation line and moved into certain parts of the area
between the lines where they proceeded to establish
strong-points.

46. Devant le refus de la J ordanie de participer avec
Israel au trace de la ligne civile, les geometres israeliens
entreprirent de le faire seuls, en presence d'observateurs
des Nations Unies. Cependant, dans le meme temps, les
autorites jordaniennes prirent d'autres mesures. Des
elements de l'armee jordanienne franchirent la ligne
de demarcation' et penetrerent dans certaines parties
de la zone situee entre les lignes, oil ils commencerent
it installer des positions.

47. Consequently, on the same day, 21 July, Israel
submitted to the Israel-Jordan Mixed Commission a
complaint against the stationing of units of the J 01'dal1ian army in the area. A relevant passage from the
complaint reads as follows:
"Work began as scheduled and continued without
interference for approximately one hour when J 01'-

47. En consequence, le meme jour, c'est-it-dire le
21 juillet, Israel a adresse it la Commission mixte d'armistice israelo-jordanienne une plainte relative it la
presence d'unites de l'armee jordanienne dans la zone.
Voici un passage pertinent de cette plainte :
« .. .les travaux ont commence it la date prevue
et se sont poursuivis sans incident pendant it peu
12

danian soldiers who had penetrated in the 'area
between the lines' surrounding the former Government House, threatened the Israel workers and demanded they stop their work. Though the Jordanian
soldiers left the area about 12.15 p.m. Israel time,
following the intervention they returned with reinforcements at 1500 hours Israel time.
"These soldiers occupied well-fortified Jordanian
military positions the presence of which in the area
is illegal. One of these positions is situated at a
distance of less than fifty metres from the fence
surrounding the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization Headquarters near the east gate."
In this connexion, I am able to state categorically
that no elements of the Israel defence forces have
entered the area during this whole period.
48. The situation, therefore, Jis as follows:
(1) The General Armistice Agreement contains
no provisions determini!'lg the legal status of the
area between the lines and does not define the respective rights and obligations of the parties in the
area. However, the prohibition applicable to the
crossing of the demarcation line by military forces
also applies of necessity to the entry into this area,
as it is completely surrounded by demarcation lines.
(2) Article IV, paragraph 3, of the general Armistice
Agreement provides that the rules and regulations
of the armed forces of the parties prohibiting civilians
from entering the area between the lines shall remain
in force. As no such rules were applicable at that
time to the area under discussion, it is not subject
to any restrictions in this connexion under the Armistice Agreement.
(3) All subsequent arrangements concerning rights
and duties of the parties in the area have been the
result of agreements between the parties. Such
agreements have been either of a formal nature or on
the basis of tacit consent without any limitation as
to the duration of their validity.
(4) The most important arrangement that has
been made between the parties was the drawing,
eight years ago, of a civilian line running through
the area dividing it between Jordan and Israel.
As a result, ever since, civilians of both parties could
move into and perform civilian functions in their
respective sectors without specific agreement between the two countries, but could not enter the
sector of the other party.
(5) Attempts at spelling out these functions in
formal agreements have been made in the past,
but no valid agreement of this nature exist at
present.
(6) Hence no activity which is civilian in character, carried out by either party within its own sector
of the area between the lines, can be considered to
be in violation of either the General Armistice Agreement or of any other binding arrangement between
the parties.
(7) Evidence that this has been the view not only
of Israel, but also of Jordan, is to be found in thefact

pres une heure; alors les soldats jordaniens, qui
avaient penetre dans la « zone situee entre les lignes »
entourant l'ancien Palais du gouvernement, ont
menace les travailleurs israeliens et exige qu'ils
s'arretent de travailler. Les soldats jordaniens ont
quitte la zone a environ 12 h. 15, heure d'Israel,
mais ils sont revenus avec des renforts a 15 heures,
heure d'Israel.
« Ces soldats ont occupe des positions militaires
jordaniennes tres fortifiees qui sont illegalement
installees dans la region. L'une de ces positions se
trouve a moins de cinquante metres de la cloture qui
entoure le siege de l'Organisme des Nations Unies
charge de la surveillance de la treve, pres de la
porte Est».
Ace propos, je puis affirmer categoriquement qu'aucun
element des forces defensives israeliennes n'a penetre
dans la zone pendant toute cette periode.
48.

La situation se presente donc comme suit :
1) Il n'y a pas, dans la Convention d'armistice
general, de dispositions qui fixent le statut juridique
de la zone situee entre les lignes et definissent les
droits et devoirs respectifs des parties dans cette
zone. De toute evidence, cependant, l'interdiction
de franchir la ligne de demarcation qui s'applique
aux forces militaires vaut egalement pour l'entree
dans cette zone, entierement a l'interieur des lignes
de demarcation.
2) Le paragraphe 3 de l'article IV de la Convention
d'armistice general stipule que les decrets et reglements des forces armees des parties interdisant aux
civils de penetrer dans la zone situee entre les lignes,
resteront en vigueur. Etant donne que de tels reglements n'etaient pas applicables, a l'epoque, a la
zone en question, cette derniere n'est a cet egard
soumise a aucune restriction aux termes de la Convention d'armistice.
.3) Tous les arrangements subsequents relatifs aux
droits et devoirs des parties a l'interieur de la zone
decoulent d'accords conclus entre les parties. Ces
accords sont de veritables instruments ou resultent
d'une acceptation tacite, sans limitation quant a la
duree d'application.
4) L'arrangement le plus important qu'ont pris
les parties a ete le trace, il y a huit ans, d'une ligne
civile qui traverse la zone et la partage entre la
J ordanie et Israel. Depuis lors, les civils qui sont
ressortissants de l'une ou de l'autre partie ont
toujours pu se deplacer dans leur secteur respectif
et y exercer leurs activites civiles, sans convention
particuliere entre les deux pays, mais ils ne pouvaient
penetrer dans le secteur relevant de l'autre partie.
5) On a essaye de preciser ces activites dans des
accords ecrits, mais il n'en existe aucun de valable
a l'heure actuelle.
6) En consequence, on ne saurait considerer qu'une
activite quelconque de caractere civil, exercee par
l'une ou l'autre des parties dans son propre secteur
de la zone situee entre les lignes, constitue une violation soit de la Convention d'armistice general, soit
de tout autre accord liant les parties.
7) Que ce point de vue n'etait pas seulement
celui d'Israel, mais aussi celui de la Jordanie, on en a

la preuve dans le fait que, depuis l'etablissement de
la ligne civile, la J ordanie a construit une route
reliant Jerusalem a Bethleem et traversant le secteur
jordanien de la zone situee entre les lignes, ainsi que
dans le fait que tous les habitants de Djebel elMoukkaber sont rentres dans leurs foyers, dans le
secteur jordanien de cette zone.
8) Nous estimons donc que le Conseil de securite
n'a aucune raison d'examiner la plainte jordanienne
relative a la plantation d'arbres dans le secteur
israelien de la zone situee entre les lignes, puisqu'une
activite aussi exclusivement civile ne viole aucun
accord international liant les deux parties. Pretendre
que les travaux aurait ete executes sous la protection
de forces de securite israeliennes, qui auraient penetre
dans le secteur, est simplement dire une contreverite. Aucun militaire israelien n'a penetre dans la
zone situee entre les lignes.
9) Les seules violations d'accords de cette nature
sont le fait de la Jordanie : premierement, la Jordanie
a construit, a l'interieur de la zone, des fortifications
militaires qui, en maintes occasions, ont ete occupees
par des troupes jordaniennes; deuxiememt)nt, la
Jordanie a installe un poste de sentinelle, garde
par un ou plusieurs soldats, pres de la porte Est du
Palais du gouvernementa l'interieur de la zone ;
troisiemement, les forces militaires n'ont cesse
d'utiliser la grand-route construite a travers la zone.
Ces actes sont des violations flagrantes, par la
Jordanie, du paragraphe 2 de l'article III et du paragraphe 2 de l'article IV de la Convention d'armistice
general.

that since the establishment of the civilian line,
Jordan has constructed a road from Jerusalem to
Bethlehem which runs through the Jordanian sector
of the area between the lines, and all the villagers of
Jebel El Mukabbir have returned to their houses
in the Jordanian sector of that area.
(8) It is submitted, therefore, that there is no
basis on which the Security Council can entertain
the Jordanian complaint concerning the planting
of trees in the Israel sector of the area between the
lines, as such a purely civilian activity carried out
there does not violate any international agreement
binding on the parties. The allegation that this work
was being carried out under the protection of Israel
security forces which had entered the sector is simply
not true. No Israeli military personnel has entered
the area between the lines.
(9) The only violations of such agreements are
those which are being committed by Jordan: ifrstly,
Jordan has erected military fortifications inside
the area which have been manned on many occasions
by Jordanian troops; secondly, Jordan has set up
a sentry post, manned by a soldier or soldiers, near
the eastern gate of Government House inside the
area; thirdly, military traffic has continuously used
the highway constructed through the area. These
acts constitute flagrant violations by Jordan of
article Ill, paragraph 2, and article IV, paragraph 2,
of the General Armistice Agreement.

49. I would therefore urge the Council to dismiss the
Jordanian complaint as being without foundation
either in fact or in law.

49. Je prie donc instamment le Conseil de securite de
rejeter la plainte jordanienne qui n'est fondee ni en
fait ni en droit.

50. The PRESIDENT [translated trom Spanish] :
I have several speakers on my list, and before calling
on them, I should like to draw the Council's attention
to the fact that this afternoon, at 4 p.m., the SecretaryGeneral, the President of the Council and, I think, the
Council members are invited to attend an official
ceremony here at Headquarters. I would therefore
suggest that we suspend the meeting at 4 p.m. and
resume it at 4.30.

50. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol): Plusieurs autres orateurs sont inscrits. Avant de leur donner la parole, je voudrais cependant informer le Conseil
que cet apres-midi, a 16 heures, le Secretaire general,
le President du Conseil de securite ainsi que les membres
du Conseil, je pense, sont invites a assister a une ceremonie officielle au Siege de I'Organisation. Je suggere
donc que le Conseil suspende la seance a 16 heures pour
la reprendre une demi-heure plus tard.

51. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq) : I should like to refer to a
point which was discussed this morning. It had been
decided that after listening to the statements of the
two parties, the council would consider the order of
the debate. You mentioned that there were a number
of speakers on your list. I am wondering whether the
members who have asked to speak will speak on the
question of the order of the debate or on the substance
of the matter.

51. M. JAWAD (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je voudrais me rMerer a une question qui a ete examinee ce
matin. Il avait ete decide que le Conseil, apres avoir
entendu les exposes des deux parties, examinerait
l'ordre d'examen des points de l'ordre du jour. Le President vient de nous annoncer que plusieurs orateurs
sont inscrits. Je me demande si les membres du Conseil
qui ont demande a prendre la parole examineront
l'ordre d'examen ou le fond de la question.

52. The PRESIDENT [translated trom Spanish] : As
I do not know what the speakers on my list are going
to say, I cannot answer your question.

52. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : J'ignore
ce dont traiteront les orateurs inscrits sur ma liste.

53. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq) : I agree that no one here, not
even the President, is able to say whether those who
have asked for the floor will speak on the substance of
the matter or on the point that was decided upon this

53. M. JAWAD (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je
comprends, bien entendu, que personne ici, pas meme
le President, ne puisse dire si les orateurs inscrits parleront du fond du probleme ou se conformeront a la
14

morning. I only wanted to invite attention to the fact
that a decision was taken this morning to the effect
that once the Council has listened to the two parties,
the question of the order of the debate would be considered by the Council itself.

decision prise ce matin. Je tiens simplement it attirer
l'attention du Conseil sur le fait que cette decision est
la suivante : le Conseil, apres avoir entendu les exposes
des deux parties, examinera l'ordre d'examen des points
de l'ordre du jour.

54. The PRESIDENT [translated from Spanish]:
There are two points to be decided. The first is whether
the Council agrees to recess the meeting for exactly
one half-hour at 4 p.m.

54. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : Il reste
au Conseil a se prononcer sur deux questions : tout
d'abord, le Conseil accepte-t-il qu'a 16 heures nous
interrompions la seance pour une demi-heure exactement?
Il en est ainsi decide.

It was so decided.

55. The PRESIDENT [translated from Spanish]:
The second point is that rightly raised by the representative of Iraq. Unless one of the speakers on my list
wishes to refer to other matters such as the postponement of the debate, a request for information concerning the problems before us, etc., we shall discuss the
order of priority of the items on our agenda.

55. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : Le
Conseil doit en outre se prononcer sur la question que
vient de poser - et a bon droit - le representant de
l'Irak. A moins que certains des orateurs inscrits ne
desirent faire d'autres suggestions tendant, par exemple~
a ajourner le debat ou a demander des renseignements
concernant les problemes dont le Conseil est saisi~
nous examinerons l'ordre de priorite des questions
inscrites a l'ordre du jour.

56. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): The Security Council
is meeting at the request of the Government of
Jordan which has complained that activities conducted
by the Government of Israel in the area between
the armistice demarcation lines in the vicinity of
Government House at Jerusalem are illegal. We have
heard the reply of the representative of Israel. The
representative of Israel has also requested that this
body consider at the same time the implementation
of the General Armistice Agreement, especially article
VIII thereof.

56. M. ROMULO (Philippines) [traduit de l'anglaisJ
Le Conseil de securite s'est reuni a la demande du
Gouvernement jordanien qui invoque l'illegalite de
l'activite du Gouvernement israelien dans la zone
situee entre les lignes de demarcation prevues dans la
Convention d'armistice, au voisinage du Palais du
gouvernement a Jerusalem. Nous avons entendu la
reponse du representant d'Israel. Celui-d, de son cote,
a demande au Conseil d'etudier en meme temps les
conditions de mise en reuvre de la Convention d'armistice general et particulierement des dispositions
de son article VIII.

57. The General Armistice Agreement concluded
between Israel and Jordan in 1949 governs the relationship between the two parties, and this includes their
responsibilities along the armistice demarcation lines.
This agreement, however, does not provide for the
regulation of affairs within the area between the lines
in the vicinity of Government House. Neither does it
contain provisions similar to those in article V of the
Israel-Syrian Armistice Agreement which clearly defines
the responsibility of the Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization for the general
supervision of that demilitarized zone between Israel
and Syria.

57. La Convention d'armistice general conclue en
1949 entre Israel et la Jordanie regit les relations entre
les deux parties et fixe notamment leurs responsabilites le long des lignes de demarcation prevues dans la
Convention d'armistice. Toutefois, cette Convention
ne contient aucune disposition visant it aplanir les
difficultes qui pourraient surgir it l'int6rieur de la zone
situee entre les lignes dans le voisinage du Palais
du gouvernement. Elle ne contient pas non plus de
stipulations identiques a celles de l'article V de la
Convention d'armistice israelo-syrienne qui fixe nettement les responsabilites du Chef d'etat-major de
l'Organisme des Nations Unies charge quant a la surveillance generale de la zone demilitarisee entre Israel
et la Syrie.

58. As we heard the statements of the two parties,
we found that there is considerable uncertainty about
the extent and nature of the authority of the parties
and of the United Nations over the area between the
lines. In the circumstances, the Council should receive
from the Acting Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization a report on conditions
prevailing in the area between the lines in the vicinity
of Government House.

58. Ayant entendu les deux parties, nous avons pu
constater qu'une grande incertitude regne encore sur
l'etendue et la nature de l'autorite des parties et des
Nations Unies dans la zone situee entre les lignes.
Dans ces conditions, le Conseil devrait demander au
Chef d'etat-major par interim de l'Organisme des
Nations Unies charge de la surveillance de la treve
un rapport sur la situation existant dans la zone
situee entre les lignes aux alentours du Palais du gouvernement.

59. The Philippine delegation believes that it would
be particularly useful if the report were to encompass,
first, a review of the presence and activities of the parties

59. La delegation des Philippines estime qu'il y aurait
grand interet que ce rapport contienne un expose qui
traite, premierement, de la presence et de l'activite

15

b

in the area between the lines; second, existing provisions
for regulating activities there; and third, possible
recommendations of the Acting Chief of Staff. In view
of the item submitted by the representative of Israel,
it would also seem useful to have a report on compliance
with the General Armistice Agreement.

des parties dans la zone situee entre les lignes, deuxiemement, des dispositions qui reglementent cette
activite et, troisiemement, des recommandations eventuelles du Chef d'etat-major par interim. Touchant la
question soumise par le representant d'Israel, il serait
egalement utile que le Conseil soit saisi d'un rapport
sur la maniere dont la Convention d'armistice general
a He observee.

60. Pending receipt of the report on conditions between
the lines, the Philippine delegation hopes that both
parties will refrain from taking any action between
the armistice lines that would tend to increase tensions.
In particular we hope that both parties will abide by
the provisions of article III of the Armistice Agreement
which states that no military or para-military forces
of either party shall pass beyond the armistice demarcation lines.

60. En attendant ce rapport sur la situation entre
les lignes d'armistice, la delegation des Philippines
espere que les deux parties s'abstiendront de toute
activite entre les lignes d'armistice qui soit de nature
a aggraver la tension. Elle espere en particulier qu'elles
observeront les dispositions de l'article III de la Convention d'armistice qui stipule qu'aucun element des forces
militaires ou paramilitaires de l'une ou l'autre partie
ne franchira les lignes de demarcation de l'armistice.

61. Mr. LODGE (United States of America): The
United States is of much the same mind on this matter
as the representative of the Philippines; we find a
great deal in his statement that we can support. In
particular, the concrete suggestions at the end of his
speech seem to us to have a great deal of merit. It
would surely be very useful to have a review of the
activities of the parties in the area between the lines.
It would be a valuable thing to have a review of the
existing provisions for regulating the activities there,
and, of course, if there is a possibility of recommendations by the Acting Chief of Staff, that would be of
great interest and value to the Security Council also.
We do hope - and we echo the hope expressed by
Mr. Romulo - that, pending receipt of such a report,
both parties would refrain from taking any action
between the armistice lines that would tend to increase
tensions. We think that those are constructive steps
that this Council could take which would certainly
lead in the right direction.

61. M. LODGE (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit de
l'anglais] : La delegation des Etats-Unis partage, dans
l'ensemble, I'avis du representant des Philippines;
eUe s'associe a une bonne partie de sa declaration. Les
suggestions concretes qu'il a formulees a la fin de son
intervention lui semblent notamment tres interessantes. Il serait certes tres utile que nous ayons un
tableau general de l'activite des deux parties dans la
zone situee entre les lignes. Il y aurait grand interet
a ce que nous a.yons un releve des dispositions qui
reglementent cette activite et, bien entendu, toute
recommandation que le Chef d'etat-major pourrait
soumettre au Conseil de securite serait aussi tres precieuse. Nous esperons - rejoignant en cela M. Romu10 - que, jusqu'au moment Oll un rapport de cette
nature nous sera parvenu, les deux parties eviteront
de se livrer, entre les lignes de l'armistice, a tout acte
qui pourrait accroitre la tension. Ce sont la, a notre
sens, des mesures constructives que le Conseil pourrait
prendre et qui sont orientees dans la bonne voie.

62. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): We have
before us the complaint of the Government of Jordan
about digging in the area surrounding what was the
Government House in Jerusalem, and I have listened
to the exposition which the representative of Jordan
has given of this complaint. We also have before us
the letter of the Acting Representative of Israel and
have heard his speech, giving his view of the matter
and also covering a variety of issues in a more general
field.

62. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais] : Nous sommes saisis de la plainte du Gouvernement jordanien concernant les travaux de terrassement dans la zone qui entoure I'ancien Palais du
gouvernement a Jerusalem. Nous avons entendu la
declaration du representant de la Jordaniea l'appui
de cette plainte. Nous sommes aussi saisis de la lettre
du representant d'Israel par interim et nous venons
d'entendre son intervention, dans laquelle il a expose
son point de vue sur la question et divers problemes
de caractere plus general.

63. No one could pretend that the situation in Jerusalem left by the Armistice Agreement of 1949 is a
happy one or that the arrangements made can be easy
to work. These arrangements are very complicated
and very delicate, and indeed it is far from clear exactly what they are.

63. Nul ne saurait pretendre que la situation qui existe .
a Jerusalem a la suite de la Convention d'armistice
de 1949 est exceUente ou que les arrangements pris
peuvent etre facilement appliques. Ces arrangements
sont extremement complexes et delicats, et il est en
fait dilIicile de definir en quoi ils consistent exactement.

64. Having heard the statements by the two parties,
I feel that the Council should be allowed time for
reflection and research. The debate which we had
earlier today on the procedural question showed that
many members of the Council would wish for more
information an; more time before coming to any
conclusion on thl" matter. The fact that we have only

64. Apres avoir entendu les exposes des deux parties,
j'estime que le Conseil devrait disposer d'un certain
temps pour reflechir et s'informer. Le debat touchant
la question de procedure a montre que bon nombre
des membres du Conseil souhaiteraient avoir plus de
renseignements et plus de temps pour se faire une
opinion sur la question. Cela d'autant plus que nous

16

today received the letter from the Acting Representative of Israel adds to this need. I should certainly
not like to express a final opinion on either complaint
at this stage. Moreover, the Security Council has, in
the Truce Supervision Organization, experts of its own
on the spot.

n'avons rel;u qu'aujourd'hui la lettre du representant
d'Israel par interim. Je n'aimerais pas exprimer une
opinion definitive sur l'une ou l'autre plainte pour le
moment. De plus, le Conseil de securite dispose, au
sein de l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la
treve, d'experts se trouvant sur place.

65. I agree very much with what has already been said
by the representatives of the Philippines and the
United States. It would, I think, be useful if we could
have a report from the Acting Chief of Staff on the
subject of the complaint of the Government of Jordan
on the events which have led up to it and, in particular,
on the status of the area to which the complaint of
the Government of Jordan refers.

65. J'approuve en bonne partie ce qu'ont dit les
representants des Philippines et des Etats-Unis. II
serait, je pense, utile que nous disposions d'un rapport,
emanant du Chef d'etat-major par interim, qui traite
de la plainte du Gouvernement jordanien, des evenements qui l'ont motivee et, en particuIier, du statut
de la region auquel se refere la plainte du Gouvernement
jordanien.

66. I also agree that, in view of the item submitted
by the representative of Israel, it would also be useful
if the Acting Chief of Staff could give us a report
covering those points as well.

66. J'estime egalement qu'il serait utile que le Chef
d'etat-major par interim nous fasse parvenir egalement
un rapport au sujet de la plainte soumise par le representant d'Israel.

67. We must, of course, allow a little time for such
reports to be prepared, though I hope that they will
be prepared as a matter of urgency. In the meantime,
the first concern of the Security Council must surely
be to seek to avoid any deterioration in the situation
on the spot. I, therefore, would echo what has already
been said by the representatives of the Philippines and
the United States and say that it is the earnest hope
of my Government that the Governments of Israel
and Jordan will ensure that nothing is done on either
side ·which could aggravate the situation.

67. II faut evidemment un certain temps pour preparer des rapports de cette nature. J'espere cependant
qu'ils seront etablis d'urgence. En attendant, le ConseiI
de securite doit assurement avoir pour principal
souci de chercher a eviter toute aggravation de la situation sur place. Je voudrais par consequent m'associer
a ce qu'ont dit les representants des Philippines et des
Etats-Unis et declarer 'que mon gouvernement compte
que les Gouvernements· d'Israel et de la Jordanie
feront en sorte qu'aucune mesure ne soit prise, d'un
cote ou de l'autre, qui serait de nature a faire empirer
la situation.
:
La seance est suspendue a 15 h. 30; eIle est reprise
1116 h. 35.

The meeting was suspended at 3.50 p.m. and resumed
at 4.35 p.m.

68. Mr. TSIANG (China): I listened very carefully to
the statement made by the representative of Jordan.
I likewise listened with great care to the statement
made by the representative of Israel. I find that the
two statements contained a considerable number of
differences. There are differences, in the first place, in
regard to ,,,hat has taken place in the so-called no
man's land or the area between demarcation lines.
These differences are what we might call differences in
regard to facts, in regard to exactly what has taken
place or, in other words, what activities have occurred
in that zone. In the second place, these two statements
contain differences in regard to the understanding of
the legal provisions governing what is called the status
quo.

68. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais] : J'ai
ecoute tres attentivement l'expose du representant·
de la Jordanie et j'ai aussi suivi avec beaucoup d'attention celui du representant d'Israel. Je constate de
nombreuses divergences entre les deux declarations.
J'en ai trouve tout d'abord au sujet des evenements
qui se sont produits dans ce qu'il est convenu d'appeler
le no man's land ou la zone situee entre les lignes de
demarcation. II s'agit, pourrait-on dire, de divergences
sur les faits, sur ce qui s'est reellement produit, en
d'autres termes sur les activites exercees dans cette
zone. II y a aussi entre les deux exposes des divergences
touchant I'interpretation des dispositions juridiques
qui regissent ce qu'on appelle le statu quo.

69. In the face of such a situation, we would benefit
greatly from a report made by United Nations officers
on the spot. My delegation therefore welcomes the
suggestion made by the representative of the Philippines, that ive should ask for a report from the Truce
Supervision Organization.

69. Telle etant la situation, il serait extremement
utile que les fonctionnaires des Nations Unies qui se
trouvent sur place nous fassent parvenir un rapport.
Aussi, ma delegation se felicite-t-elle de la suggestion
du representant des Philippines, de demander a l'Organisme charge de la surveillance de la treve de soumettre un rapport au Conseil.

70. The speeches also convinced me that the two
complaints - one by Jordan against Israel, and the
?ther by Israel against Jordan - though related, are
III fact separate. The two complaints admit of separate
treatment. In fact, if they are treated separately, we
could save much time and effort. Furthermore, separate treatment would tend to simplify our task. If we
should put them together, I am afraid we would increase

70. Les exposes m'ont, en outre, convaincu que les
deux plaintes - celle de la Jordanie contre Israel
et celle d'Israel contre la Jordanie -, bien qu'elles
soient Iiees, sont en reaIite distinctes. Les deux peuvent
etre etudiees separement. Bien plus, si le Conseil les
examine separement, il gagnera beaucoup de temps
et s'epargnera beaucoup d'efforts. Enfin, cette fal;on
de proceder simpIifierait la tache. En les examinant

L

~~---~

17

the complexity of the issues involved. I hope - I am
not sure on this point - that the representative of
the Philippines and the representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom, in suggesting reports,
had in mind separate reports. Therefore, I should like
to see a report on the Jordan complaint and a report
on the Israel complaint.

ensemble, je crains que nous n'ajoutions a la complexite des problemes en cause. J'espere - mais je peux
me tromper - que le representant des Philippines
et les representants des Etats-Unis et du RoyaumeUni, en proposant que des rapports soient soumis au
Conseil, songeaient a des rapports distincts. Quant a
moi, j'aimerais que le Conseil soit saisi d'un rapport
sur la plainte jordanienne et d'un autre sur la plainte
israelienne.

71. If we are going to have separate reports, I would
suggest that the report on the Jordan complaint should
reach us as early as possible. That complaint should
get at least that much priority in our treatment. The
Jordan complaint is, in fact, very specific. I should
think that a report covering the Jordan complaint
would not take too much time. Therefore, even in the
natural course of events, such a report should reach us,
and could reach us, much earlier than a report covering
all the topics mentioned in the Israel complaint. To
sum up: my delegation, too, feels that we should ask
for reports from our men on the spot, that we should
have separate reports, and that the report on the
Jordan complaint should have priority.

71. Si le Conseil demandait des rapports distinets,
j'aimerais suggerer que le rapport sur la plainte jordanienne lui soit soumis le plus tot possible. Dans
notre examen, nous devrions accorder au moins eette
priorite a la plainte jordanienne. Elle est en effet tres
precise. Je pense que la redaction du rapport sur eette
plainte ne prendrait pas beaucoup de temps. Par
consequent, dans des conditions normales, ce rapport
devrait nous parvenir - et pourrait nous parvenir beaucoup plus rapidement qu'un rapport couvrant
tous les points mentionnes dans la plainte israelienne.
En resume, ma delegation estime, elle aussi, que le
Conseil devrait demander que les representants des
Nations Unies qui se trouvent sur place lui fassent
parvenir des rapports, que chaque plainte devrait faire
l'objet d'un rapport distinct et que celui interessant
la plainte jordanienne devrait etre etabli par priorite.

72. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [translated trom Russian]: The Security Council's
attention has again been drawn to violations of the
Armistice Agreement between Israel and Jordan, which
have strained the already tense rdations between these
countries. In his letter and in his statement before the
Security Council the permanent representative of
Jordan submitted specific facts indicating that Israel
has again violated both the Armistice Agreement and
previous decisions of the Security Council, which has
on a number of occasions examined the complaints
of the Arab countries concerning the aggressive acts
of Israel.

72. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : L'attention du Conseil
de securite a de nouveau ete attiree sur les violations
de la Convention d'armistice conclue entre Israel et la
Jordanie, qui ont aggrave les relations deja tendues
de ces deux pays. La lettre du representant permanent
de la J ordanie et le texte de son intervention au
Conseil de securite contiennent des faits concrets qui
permettent de dire qu'il y a eu a nouveau violation
par Israel de la Convention d'armistice ainsi que des
decisions prises anterieurement par le Conseil de seeurite, lequel a examine a plusieurs reprises les plaintes
de pays arabes apropos d'actes d'agression commis
par Israel.

73. As the representatative of Jordan points out in
his letter, Israel, in violation of articles Il, III and IV
of the Armistice Agreement, engaged in unilateral action
in the neutral zone of the Jerusalem sector, where,
under the protection of its police forces, various kinds
of construction work, including the construction of
roads which have a definite military significance, were
carried out.

73. Ainsi qu'il est dit dans la lettre du representant
de la Jordanie, Israel a entrepris des actions unilaterales dans la zone neutre du secteur de Jerusalem,
au mepris des articles Il, III et IV de la Convention
d'armistice : sous la protection de la police, divers
travaux de construction y ont ete effectues, notamment
la construction de routes ayant une importance strategique certaine.

74. There can be no doubt that the introduction of
armed forces into the neutral zone and these unilateral
activities which can alter or provide grounds for altering
the status of the "neutral zone" are a violation of
the provisions of the Armistice Agreement to which
I have referred.

74. Il ne fait pas de doute que l'introduction de forces
armees dans la zone neutre, de meme que les activites
unilaterales d'Israel susceptibles de modifier le caraetere de cette zone ou de creer des conditions de cette
nature, portent atteinte aux dispositions des articles
de la Convention que je viens de mentionner.

75. The Israel representative in his statement did
not deny that Israel was carrying out work in the
neutral zone. He only endeavoured to minimize the
significance of this work and to pass it off as something
in the nature of recreational activity.

75. Dans son intervention, le representant d'Israel
n'a pas nie le fait meme que des travaux aient ete
effectues dans la zone neutre. Il a seulement essaye
d'en diminuer l'importance et de les presenter presque
comme d'innocents delassements.

76. The Security Council, which bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security
and, in the present case, for ensuring the implementation

76. Le Conseil de securite, qui a la responsabiIite
principale du maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales et qui, en l'occurrence, a le devoir de veiller

18

of the Armistice Agreement, cannot disregard this
information concerning further violations of the Agreement. It is quite clear that the compla int of the Government of Jordan must be examined by the Security
Council and that the necessary steps to ensure the
effectiveness of the armistice system must be taken.
Action by the Council is all the more necessary as the
Government of Israel, stubbo rnly pursuing its policy
of boycotting and disrupt ing the work of the Mixed
Armistice Commission, has again refused to send its
reuresentatives to the Commission to which the Governm~nt of Jordan had submit ted its complaint in the
first instance. Thus the Government of Israel not only
committed anothe r violation of the Armistice Agreement but in fact did not allow the compe tent United
Nations body responsible for ensuring compliance with
the Armistice Agreement to investi gate Jordan 's complaint on the spot.
77. The Soviet delegation unders tands Jordan 's concern in connexion with this as yet bloodless but serious
violation of the Armistice Agreement, because it
occurred after repeate d warnings to Israel from the
Security Council and when all peace-loving States are
endeavouring to reduce tension in this area of the world.
78. We may well ask what is the purpose of these
incessant provocations by Israel on its neighbours'
frontiers, accompanied by a campaign of threats and
sabre-rattling directed at the Arab countries. There can
be only one answer; the continu ation of straine d relations between Israel and the Arab countries and the
incessant frontier incidents are of advant age only to
the aggressive circles in certain States, which use
Israel as a tool in their far-reaching plans which are
not concerned either with the interes ts of the peoples
of the Arab countries or with the mainte nance of peace.
It is not by chance that the presen t increase in tension
between Israel and the Arab countries coincides with
the pressure that is being crudely exerted by the
United States on certain Arab countries.
79. In his statem ent the represe ntative of Jordan
has requested the Securi ty Council to take a numbe r
of steps which, in his opinion, are necessary to strengthen the Armistice Agreement. The Soviet delegation
considers that these proposals made by Jordan should
be studied by the Security Council which must investigate the statem ents contained in Jordan 's complaint,
and, if they are substa ntiated , take the necessary
measures to preven t further violations of the Armistice
Agreement.
80. Regardless of what decisions it may take as a
result of its investigation, the Securit y Council should
here and now formally require the Government of
Israel to comply strictly with the Armistice Agreement
and respect the obligations it assumed in becoming a
Member of the United Nations.
81. The Soviet delegation does not object to the
proposal that the United Nation s representative,
namely, the Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organization should be reques ted to submit a report,
Pt

a l'applic ation de la Convention d'armis tice, ne saurait
negliger cette plainte concer nant de nouvelles violations de la Convention. Il est parfait ement eviden t
que la plainte du Gouve rnemen t jordani en requie rt
1'atten tion du Conseil de securite et lui impose de
prendr e les mesures necessaires pOUf assurer l' efficacite
du systeme d'armistice. L'inter ventio n du Conseil est
d'auta nt plus indispensable que le Gouve rnemen t
d'Israe l, poursu ivant obtine ment sa. politique de sabotage et entrav ant l'muvr e de la Commission mixte
d'armis tice - saisie en premiere instance de la plainte
jordan ienne - a refuse cette fois encore d'envo yer
ses represe ntants a cette Commission. Le Gouve rnemen t
d'Israe l non seulement a commis ainsi une nouvelle
violation de la Convention d'armis tice, mais il n'a
pas permis a l'organ e compe tent des Nations Unies
charge de l'applic ation de cette Convention de mener
sur place l'enque te necessitee par la plainte jordanienne.
77. La delegation sovietique comprend l'inqui etude
de la Jordan ie en presence de cette violation qui,
bien qu'elle n'ait pas, pour l'instan t, entrain e d'effusion
de sang, n'en est pas moins grave puisqu'elle a lieu
malgre les multiples avertissements adresses a Israel
par le Conseil de securite et a un momen t oil tous les
Etats pacifiques s'efforcent de reduire la tension dans
cette region du monde;
78. Quel est le but de ces incursions incessantes
d'Israe l sur les frontieres des Etats voisins, incursions
accompagnees de campagnes de menaces et de manifestations guerrieres a l'adresse des peuples arabes ?
A cette question il n'y a qu'une reponse : le mainti en
de la tension entre Israel et les pays arabes et les frequents inciden ts de frontiere profite nt unique ment
aux groupes agressifs de certain s Etats qui utilisen t
Israel comme instrum ent de leurs plans a long terme,
contraires aussi bien aux interet s des Etats arabes
qu'a la cause de la paix. On ne sa.urait considerer comme
fortuit le fait que l'aggra vation actuelle de la tension des
relations entre Israel et les pays arabes voisins coincide avec la pression que les Eta.ts-Unis exercent ouvertement sur certain s Eta.ts arabes.
79. Dans son interve ntion, le represe ntant de la Jordanie a deman de au Conseil de securite de prendr e une
serie de mesures qui sont a son avis indispensables
pour consolider la Convention d'armistice. La delegation sovietique considere que cette proposition de
la. Jordan ie merite d'etre retenue par le Conseil de
securite, qui a pour manda t d'exam iner les faits relates
dans la plainte de la Jordan ie et de prendre, au cas
oil ils se reveler aient exacts, des mesures appropriees
afin d'evite r des violations ulterieures de la Convention
d'armistice.
80. Indepe ndamm ent des decisions que le Conseil de
securite pourra it prendr e apres l'enque te, il doit demande r des mainte nant et avec insistance au Gouvernemen t d'Israe l de respec ter de la fal(on la plus stricte
la Convention d'armis tice et les obligations qu'il a
assumees lorsqu'il est devenu Membre de l'Organ isation
des Nations Unies.

81. La delegation sovietique n'a pas d'objection a
formuler it la proposition qui tend a deman der au representan t des Nation s Unies, le Chef d'etat- major
charge de la surveillance de la treve, de faire rappor t

19

which would give the Security Council an idea of the
actual situation and the steps that must be taken to
strengthen the armistice system. The Soviet delegation,
like other delegations, hopes that the Government of
Israel, pending receipt of this report, will discontinue
work in the neutral zone since such work is a violation
of the Armistice Agreement.

au Conseil de securite sur l'etat de choses reel dans la
zone et sur les mesures qu'il conviendrait de prendre
afin de consolider le systeme d'armistice. Comme
d'autres delegations, celle de I'Union sovietique espere
qu'en attendant ce rapport, I'Etat d'Israel interrompra
les travaux entrepris dans la zone neutre, etant donne
qu'ils constituent une violation de la Convention d'armistice.

82. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): I should like to point out
incidentally that the point which I raised a short while
ago regarding the order of the debate has not been
touched upon. Nevertheless, after listening to the
fltatement of the representative of China, I do not see
any reason to insist on this point any longer. The
question was fully discussed this morning and, as a
matter of fact, I had been convinced that the wisdom
of China would prevail in the end.

82. l\L JAWAD (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] : J'aimerais faire observer - dans un autre ordre d'idees _
que la question que j'ai soulevee tout a l'heure au sujet
de l'ordre du de-hat n'a pas ete abordee. Quoi qu'iI
en soit, apres avoir ecoute l'expose du representant
de la Chine, je ne vois plus aucune raison d'insister.
Nous avons longuement discute ce matin de l'ordre
du debat et, pour dire vrai, j'avais la conviction que
la sagesse chinoise l'emporterait.

83. The two questions which are before the Council
are separate questions and should have been so considered from the beginning. I do not wish to speak at
great length at this time. To enter into the substance
of the Jordanian complaint would take a very long
time. If I sensed the feeling of the Council correctly,
that is not its desire at this time.

83. Les deux questions dont le Conseil est saisi sont
distinctes et on aurait dll les separer des le debut.
Je ne desire pas parler longuement maintenant. Pour
traiter du fond de la plainte jordanienne il faut beaucoup de temps. Or, si j'interprete bien l'opinion du
Conseil, il ne desire pas le faire pour le moment.

84. On the other hand, I shall not reply to the allegations and the naive ideas which have been expressed
by the representative of Israel regarding certain
matters. We all like trees, but let everybody plant
trees in his own country and not cross frontiers to
plant them in other people's countries.

84. Par ailleurs, je ne repondrai pas aux allegations
et aux arguments naIfs du representant d'Israel au
sujet de certains faits. Nous aimons tous, assurement,
les arbres, mais que chacun en plante dans son pays
et ne franchisse pas les frontieres pour aller en planter
dans le pays des autres.

85. If I have correctly judged the sense of the discussion this afternoon, I feel that there is a general consensus regarding a new approach to the question. The
representative of the Philippines has brought to the
Council certain practical and concrete suggestions, and
I am inclined to agree with the points raised by him.

85. Si j'ai bien compris la signification du debat de
cet apres-midi, il me semble que l'unanimite s'est
faite sur une nouvelle fal,(on d'examiner la question.
Le representant des Philippines a soumis au ConseiI
des suggestions concretes et pratiques et je penche
pour sa fal,(on de voir.

86. As the representative of the United Kingdom
pointed out, the report regarding the complaint of
Jordan should be considered as a matter of great
urgency. I repeat: it should be considered as a matter
of great urgency. This view was supported by the
representatives of China, the Soviet Union and the
Philippines. I feel that unless we set l:l time-limit we
shall be returning to try to define "a matter of
urgency". In this connexion, I might ask the SecretaryGeneral, as he has kept in touch with the matte r
since 21 July 1957, to tell us the length of time required
for the preparation of the report.

86. Comme l'a fait observer le representant du Royaume-Uni, il faut que le rapport touchant la plainte de
la Jordanie soit etabli d'urgence. Je repete: il faut qu'iI
soit etabli d'urgence. Tel a aussi ete l'avis des representants de la Chine, de I'Union sovietique et des
Philippines. Je pense que si nous ne thons pas un
delai, il nous faudra de nouveau essayer de definir ce
que signifie ({ une question urgente ». A ce propos, je
me permets de demander au Secretaire general, qui
s'est tenu au courant de la question depuis le 21 juiIlet 1957, de nous dire combien de temps il faudrait
pour rediger le rapport.

87. Another point on which I agree completely with
the representative of China is that priority should be
given to the report on the complaint of Jordan. I
should say that a high priority should be given to the
report on the complaint of Jordan, and that might
explain in a certain way what time will be required for
the preparation cf this report.

87. Je suis d'accord avec le representant de la Chine
sur un autre point : il faut donner la priorite au rapport touchant la plainte de la J ordanie. Il faut donner
a ce rapport une importance premiere, et c'est ce qui
explique dans une certaine mesure pourquoi je demande
quel serait le d6lai necessaire pour l'etablissement du
rapport.

88. Great concern was expressed regarding the
increased tension in the area. I wholeheartedly agree
that nothing should be done to increase the tension
in the area, Consequently, Israel should take measures
so as not to intervene any more in this particular
area. For that reason I suggest - and this has already

88. On s'est beaucoup inquiete de l'aggravation de
la tension dans la zone consideree. Je partage entierement l'avis de ceux qui ont exprime cette inquietude.
Rien ne doit venir aggraver la tension. C'est pourquoi
Isra.el devrait prendre des mesures pour mettre fin
a son intervention dans cette zone particuliere. Je sug-

20

been suggested - that the activities of Israel in the
Jebel El Mukabbir area should be immediately aD~
completely stopped.

gere done - d'autres l'ont fait avant moi - qu'il
soit mis fin immediatement aux activites d'Israel dans
la zone de Djebel el-Mukkaber.

89. If this is a correct understanding of the consensus
which has been expressed here this afternoon, I am
in agreement with the suggestion made by the representative of the Philippines.

89. Si c'est la bien interpreter l'opinion generale qui
s'est degagee de la discussion de cet apres-midi, j'approuve la suggestion du representant des Philippines'

90. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I wish to reply to
the question put to me by the representative of Iraq.
It is quite correct that we have studied this question
for some time, and for that reason I think that the
time necessary for a report to the Council can be
fairly short. It is always difficult to speak for somebody
else, but my guess would be that something like ten
days or a fortnight would be sufficient. If the Council
were to decide on a fortnight, my own feeling is that
we would be on the safe side.

90. Le SECRETAIRE GENERAL (traduit de l'anglais) : Je voudrais repondre a la question que m'a posee
le representant de l'Irak. Il est exact que j'etudie le
probleme depuis quelque temps deja, ce qui me permet
de dire qu'un rapport pourrait etre soumis au Conseil
assez tOt. Il est toujours difficile de repondre pour quelqu'un d'autre, mais une dizaine ou une quinzaine de
jours me paraissent suffisants. Si le Conseil decide de
fixer un delai de quinze jours, j'estime personnellement
que nous ne risquons pas de le depasser.

91. Mr. WALKER (Australia): It was agreed this
morning that we should place both parts of this item
on the agenda and leave until later the consideration
of the procedure to be followed by the Council in dealing
with it. I note that only the Soviet representative has
entered at any length into the substance of the matter.
The other speeches have mainly been concerned with
the procedure.

91. M. WALKER (Australie) [traduit de l'anglais]
Il a ete convenu ce matin que nous inscririons a notre
ordre du jour les deux rubriques de la question et
que nous remettrions a plus tard l'examen de la procedure que le Conseil suivrait a leur sujet. J'ai note
que seulle representant de l'Union sovietique a discute
aSsez longuement du fond du probleme. Les autres
orateurs se sont principalement occupes de la procedure.

92. I merely speak myself at this point in order to
assist you, Mr. President, in gauging the feeling of
the Council regarding the procedure that it presumably
would wish to follow. It seems to me that the position
is a clear one. We have heard both parties and I am
sure that the whole Council has listened with very
great care and attention to the different points that
have been made and the information presented.

92. Si j'ai demande a prendre la parole maintenant.
c'est uniquement pour aider le President a degager
l'opinion du Conseil touchant la procedure qu'il voudra
suivre. La situation me parait claire. Nous avons entendu les deux parties, et tous les membres du Conseil
ont surement ecoute avec la plus grande attention les
divers arguments avances et les renseignements presentes.

93. It is quite clear that these two statements present
certain considerable differences, in emphasis, in the
picture they paint of conditions in the area, differences
as regards matters of fact, differences as regards matters
of interpretation of the legal position and the status
of the area in question. In these circumstances it is
the normal practice for the Council to ask the United
Nations own authority on the spot, the Chief of Staff,
to prepare a report for the information of the Council.
While we are awaiting that report, this problem must
be considered as in a sense sub judice, and for that
reason I am sure the Council would not wish at this
stage to take any step that would appear to prejudge
the matters on which the Chief of Staff might report
to us.

93. On a pu voir que les deux exposes different sensiblement dans la. maniere de decrire la situation dans
cette region : ils different par l'interpretation des faits,
de la. position juridique et du statut de la zone en question. Il est done normal, dans ces conditions, que le
Conseil demande a.u representant autorise des Nations
Unies sur place, c'est-a-dire au Chef d'Hat-major, de
preparer un rapport pour informer le Conseil. En attendant que ce rapport nous soit parvenu, l'affaire doit
etre consideree comme etant en instance. C'est pourquoi
je suis sur que le Conseil ne desirera pas, pour le moment, prendre des mesures qui pourraient faire croire
qu'il prejuge les questions sur lesquelles le Chef d'etatmajor lui ferait rapport.

94. I think that in any decision of the Council or any
instructions to the Secretary-General in this connexioil,
we should refrain from any action that would appear
to prejudice the legitimacy of the activities of either
party, because those are the very matters that have
to be considered by the Council when we receive the
report of' the Chief of Staff. There is very general
agreement, I think, in the Council that nothing should
be done to render the situation more difficult during
the period in which this report is being prepared and
SUbmitted to the Council, and I am sure that you will
already have taken account, Mr. President, of the

94. A mon avis, le Conseil devrait, dans toute decision
qu'il prendralt ou dans toute instruction qu'il adresserait au Secretaire general, s'abstenir d'un acte qui
pourrait sembler mettre en doute la Iegitimite des
activites de l'une ou l'a-utre partie, etant donne qu'il
s'agit la de la question meme que le Conseil sera appele a examiner une fois qu'il sera en possession du
rapport du Chef d'etat-major. Il y a, me semble-t-il,
au Conseil une large majorite sur ce po,int : le Conseil
ne doit rien faire qui soit de nature a rendre la situation
plus difficile avant que le rapport ne soit etabli et
soumis au Conseil. Je suis sur, d'autre part, que le

21

desire expressed by various members of the Council
that both parties should avoid taking any action likely
to aggravate the situation or to build up tension in
the area.

President aura pris note du desir exprime par plusieurs
membres du Conseil, sa.voir que les deux parties evitent
de faire quoi que ce soit qui puisse aggraver la situation ou accroitre la tension dans la region.

95. I am sure that is the general line of thinking in
the Council at this moment and it certainly is the
viewpoint of the Australian delegation.

95. C'est hl, j'en suis sur, l'opinion generale du Conseil
en ce moment. C'est, assurement, l'opinion de la delegation australienne.

96. The PRESIDENT (translated tram Spanish):
I feel it my duty to point out to the representative of
Iraq that the Council has not yet decided whether to
discuss items (a) and (b) of the agenda separately or
simultaneously.

96. Le PRESIDENT (traduil de l'espagnol) : Je
tiens a preciseI' a l'intention du representant de l'Irak
que jusqu'ici le Conseil n'a pas decide si les alineas
a et b du point a l'ordre du jour seraient examines
isolement on ensemble.

97. I made no ruling on the point of order raised by
the representative of Iraq, because I was wlliting to
hear the views of the other members of the Council
and because I considered, as I still do, that the representative of the Philippines proposed something for
which provision is made in rule 33 (point 4) of the rules
of procedure, that is, that we ask a rapporteur - in
this instance the Chief of Staff whose duty it is to
supervise the truce in Palestine - to submit two reports: one on the Jordanian complaint and the other
on the complaint submitted by Israel.

97. Je n'ai pas pris de decision sur la motion d'ordre
sonlevee par le representant de l'Irak parce que j'attendais de connaitre l'avis des autres representants
dn COllseil et parce que j'estimais - et j'estime encoreqne le representant des Philippines a fait une suggestion
conforme a l'alinea d de l'article 33 dn reglernent
interieur : demander a un rapporteur - en l'occurence
le Chef d'etat-major charge de la surveillance de la
treve en Palestine - de rediger deux rapports, l'un
sur la plainte de la Jordanie et l'autre sur celle d'Israel.

98. I have noted that there is unanimous support
in the Council - or at least support from a large majority - in favour of requesting those reports.

98. J'ai constate que tous les membres dn Conseil,
ou tout an moins la tres grande majorite d'entre eux,
aimeraient que ces deux rapports soient demandes.

99. I also understand that a majority of the members
feel that it is particularly urgent that we should request
the report concerning the Jordanian complaint and
allow a fortnight for it to be submitted.

99. Je crois comprendre egalement que la majorite
des membres du Conseil aimerait que le rapport touchant la plainte de la Jordanie soit etabli d'nrgence
et parvienne au Conseil dans un delai de quinze jours.

100. I also believe that the majority in the Council
is in favour of informing the parties that they are to
refrain from taking any steps which may increase
tensirm in that part of Palestine. That is my interpretation vf the views put forward. If any representative
considers that I have not accurately represented the
view of the majority, he is, of course, entitled to say so.

100. Je pense enfin que la majorite des membres du
Conseil desire que les parties soient informees qu'elles
doivent s'abstenir de prendre toute mesure de nature
a aggraver la tension dans cette partie de la Palestine.
TeIle est mon interpretation des opinions qui ont ete
exprimees. Si un memb .~ du Conseil juge que je n'ai
pas fidelement interprete l'opinion de la majorite du
Conseil, il a tonte liberte de prendre la parole sur
ce point.

101. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): I feel it my duty to thank
you, Mr. Presider.t, for the explanation which you
have kindly given regarding the point of order that I
raised. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for
the precision which he has given to the word" urgency".
I am sure that you, Sir, have given a correct interpretation of the opinion and ideas expressed in this Council;
there is nothing for which you can be reproached. I
feel, however, that I, personally, have not fully understood your interpretation or that the opinions which have
been expressed on this particular point have not taken
a very definite shape in my mind. I should like to know
whether the statements with regard to decreasing tension by refraining from acts which would lead to its
increase mean at the same time that the activities of
Israel in the Jebel El Mukabbir area should be stopped
immediately and completely while the Seeurity Council
awaits the report of the Acting Chief of Staff.

101. M. JAWAD (Irak) [traduil de l'anglais]: Je tiens
a vous remercier Monsieur le President, de l'explication
que vons avez bien voulu me donner au sujet de la
motion d'ordre que j'ai presentee. Je desire egalement
remercier le Secretaire general des precisions qu'il a
apportees au sujet du sens du mot « urgence n. Je suis
sur, Monsieur le President, que vous avez correctement
interprete les opinions et les idees exprimees au Conseil.
Aucun reproche ne peut vous etre fait. Peut-etre,
cependant, n'ai-je pas, sur un point particulier, tres
bien compris votre interpretation ou saisi exactement
le sens des opinions emises. J'aimerais savoir si les
membres du Conseil qui ont preconise que, pour
diminuer la tension, les parties s'abstiennent de cornmettre des actes qui pourraient l'aggraver, voulaient
dire par la qu'il convenait de mettre fin immediatement
et completement, en attendant que le Conseil de securite soit saisi du rapport du Chef d'etat-major par
interim, aux activites d'Israel dans la region de Djebel
el-Mukkaber.

22

102. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
In accordance with the proposal put forward by the
representatives of the Philippines, the United Kingdom
and Australia, I feel that I must reply in the negative
to the question put by the representative of Iraq,
for, as the representative of Australia rightly pointed
out, it is clear that if we were to take such action, it
would be tantamount to prejudging the whole question
and the report would consequently be unnecessary. I
therefore consider, in accordance with what the authors
of the proposal have said, that the request of the representative of Iraq cannot be accepted.

102. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : Me
fondant sur la proposition des representants de' l'Australie, des Philippines et du Royaume-Uni, je pense
que je dois repondre negativement a la question que
vient de poser le representant de l'Irak; en effet,
comme l'a souligne le representant de I'Australie,
le Conseil, a agir ainsi, prejugerait la question et le
rapport deviendrait par consequent inutile. J'estime
done, si je me conforme a ce qu'ont declare les auteurs
de la proposition dans leurs exposes, ne pouvoir repondre affirmativement a la question du representant
de l'Irak.

103. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): When I stated that I was
in agreement with the suggestion made by the representative of the Philippines, I understood his third
suggestion - which followed logically upon tht second - was that all activities should be stopped. It
may have been my own interpretation of his words.
However, the representative of the Philippines is here
in the Council and will be able to explain the point.
But I should merely like to invite attention to the
fact that when the Council is considering a complaint,
and a logical and clear statement has been made proving beyond any doubt that there has been a violation
of the Armistice Agreement and that certain activities
have been carried out, whether or not of a civil nature,
a risk is involved. If these activities are to be followed
up, by the time we receive the report of the Acting
Chief of Staff, most of the data involved will be out of
date. Consequently, the Council might ask for another
report, because developments will be going on all the
time.

103. M. JAWAD (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] : Lorsque
j'ai dit que j'approuvais la suggestion de representant
des Philippines, j'avais compris que sa troisieme
suggestion - consequence logique de la deuxieme tendait a faire cesser toutes les activites. C'est peutetre une interpretation toute personnelle. Le representant des Philippines, qui est parmi nous, pourra
m'eclairer sur ce point. J'aimerais simplement appeler
l'attention du Conseil sur le fait que lorsqu'il examine
une plainte et qu'un expose logique et clair a ete fait
d'oil. il ressort de toute evidence qu'il y a eu violation
de la Convention d'armistice general et que certaines
activites - civiles ou non - ont ete entreprises dans
la region, le Conseil ,court un certain risque. Si ces
activites se poursuivaient, la plupart des elements
que contiendrait le rapport demande au Chef d'etatmajor par interim ne seraient plus d'actualite au
moment oil. ce document nous parviendrait. En sorte
que le Conseil pourrait desirer alors - la situation
evoluant sans cesse - qu'un nouveau rapport lui
soit soumis.

104. I think we will be underestimating the danger
involved in this matter if we agree that all Israel's
activities should be continued as not endangering the
situation there. In 1953, when the question of the
Jordan waters was considered by the Council, all
activities were stopped pending a report on the question.
It is only logical, it is only in the interests of peace,
it is only in the interests of facilitating the work of
this Council, that all activities should be stopped.
As a matter of fact, the Council should have gone further and asked the representative of Israel for an undertaking that his Government would not do anything
of the kind until the matter was discussed once more
by the Council.

104. Ce serait, je crois, meconnaitre le risque que
nous courons que de permettre a Israel de poursuivre
toutes ses activites dans la conviction que rien de
grave ne pourrait en resulter. En 1953, lorsque la question des eaux du Jourdain est venue devant le Conseil,
tous les travaux en cours ont ete interrompus jusqu'a
ce qu'un rapport ffit presente. Il est logique,
et il est de l'interet de la paix et de l'interet
des travaux du Conseil, que toutes les activites prennent
fin. En fait, le Conseil aurait dft aller plus loin et
demander au representant d'Israel de donner l'assurance
que son gouvernement ne poursuivrait pas ses activites
aussi longtemps que le Conseil n'aurait pas repris
l'e~amen de la question.

105. If this matter is not understood in the way I
have put it to the Council, I think I shall have to change
the attitude which I have expressed and withhold
my agreement to the whole measure which has been
proposed by the representative of the Philippines.

105. Si l'opinion du Conseil n'etait pas celle que je
viens d'exprimer, il me faudrait revenir sur la position
que j'ai exposee precedemment et renoncer a accepter
toutes les suggestions du representant des Philippines.

106. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
I call on the representative of the Philippines to explain
whether I correctly interpreted his proposal or whether
the interpretation of the representative of Iraq is
the correct one.

106. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : Je
donne la parole au representant des Philippines pour
qu'il precise si j'ai correctement interprete sa suggestion ou si l'interpretation du representant de l'Irak
est la bonne.

107. Mr. ROMULO (Philippines): The President has
made a correct interpretation of my proposal. When
I said that, pending the receipt of the report on conditions between the lines, we hoped that both parties

107. M. ROMULO (Philippines) [traduit de l'anglais] :
Le President a correctement interprete ma suggestion.
Lorsque j'ai dit qu'en attendant d'etre en possession
du rapport sur la situation qui existe entre les !ignes

23

would refrain from taking any action between the armistice lines that would tend to increase tensions, I meant
that we should not prejudge this question. The charges
made by Jordan are that the activities of Israel in
that section are illegal. For us now to order the suspension of those activities would be for us to decide
that those activities are really illegal. Not only that,
but it would establish a dangerous precedent: whenever
a party would desire to have the activities of another
party suspended, all it would have to do would be to
file a complaint and make a charge before this body.

de l'armistice, nous esperlOns que les deux parties
s'abstiendraient, dans la zone situee entre les lignes
de l'a.rmistice, de toute activite qui serait de nature
a accroitre la tension, j'entendais que nous ne devions
pas prejuger la question. Dans sa plainte, la Jordanie
affirme que les activites d'Israel dans cette zone sont
illegales. Si nous ordonnions la suspension des activites,
nous prononcerions par la meme que ces activites
sont reellement illegales. Qui plus est, nous creerions
un dangereux precedent. Chaque fois qu'une des parties
deciderait faire suspendre les activites de l'autre,
il lui suffirait d'adresser une plainte au Conseil et de
formuler des accusations devant luL

108. Therefore, in making the proposal that it did,
the delegation of the Philippines did not envisage the
suspension of the activities of Israel, as interpreted
by the representative of Iraq. It seems to me that there
would be no need for any report if we decided that
these activities are illegal. It is precisely because we
want to know the facts that we wish to have this
report. That is the design of the delegation of the Philippines as the author of this proposal.

108. En presentant sa suggestion, la delegation des
Philippines n'envisageait donc pas une suspension
des activites d'Israel, comme l'a interprete le representant de I'Irak. Aucun rapport ne serait necessaire,
me semble-t-il, si nous decidions que ces activites
sont ilIegales. C'est precisement parce que nous desirons elucider la situation que nous desirons disposer
de ce rapport. Tel est le sens de la proposition des
Philippines.

109. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist Repub[translated from Russian]: I have already stated
the Soviet delegation's position on this question quite
clearly, but I should like to comment on what the
President and the Philippine representative have just
said. As I see it, the President's explanation cannot
possibly be interpreted to mean that the Security Council has given its approval or sanction to the activities
which were undertaken by Israel in the "neutral
zone" and which were the reason for the complaint
by Jordan. I wish to forestall any such interpretation;
it should be made perfectly clear that neither the
explanation of the President nor that of the Philippine
representative in any way implies endorsement of those
activities by the Security Council.

109. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russe] : J'ai deja expose
tres clairement la position de la delegation sovietique
sur cette question. J e voudrais toutefois dire quelques
mots au sujet de ce que le President et le deIegue des
Philippines viennent de dire. Je pense, en ce qui me
concerne, que l'explication donnee par le President
ne saurait en aucune maniere etre interpretee comme une
approbation ou une justification par le Conseil de
securite des actions entreprises par Israel dans la zone
neutre et qui ont donne lieu a la plainte de la Jordanie.
Je desire mettre en garde le Conseil contre une telle
interpretation; il faut bien faire entendre que les
explications du President et du representant des
Philippines ne sauraient d'aucune fa<;on impliquer
que le Conseil approuve ces activites.

110. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
Before calling on the ,,;presentative of China, I should
like to make it clear that nothing I have said should
be taken as implying that the Council is sanctioning
acts committed by Israel. In my view - and that is
also the view of the representatives of the Philippines,
the United Kingdom and Australia - all that the
Council has so far done is to make a preliminary
examination of the question and to discuss the possibility of requesting reports to enable it to take action.
The proposal implies nothing but what it says; it merely
proposes to request reports and to urge the parties to
refrain from any action which may aggravate tension
in that part of Palestine.

110. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol) : Avant
de donner la parole au representant de la Chine, je tiens
a preciseI' qu'en aucune maniere on ne saurait conclure
de ce que j'ai dit que le Conseil enterinait les activites
d'Israel. Avec les representants des Philippines, du
Royaume-Uni et de I'Australie, j'estime que le Conseil
s'est borne jusqu'ici a examiner la question d'une
fa<;on toute preliminaire et n'a fait qu'envisager la
possibilite de demander des rapports qui lui permettront de se prononcer. Il ne faut pas voir dans la proposition ce qui ne s'y trouve pas. Elle tend a demander
des rapports et a inviter les parties interessees a eviter
de faire quoi que ce soit qui puisse aggraver la tension
dans cette partie de la Palestine.

111. Having made that clarification, which I believe
to be necessary, I now call upon the representative of
China.

111. Apres cette precision que je jugeais necessaire,
je donne la parole au representant de la Chine.

112. Mr. TSIANG (China): I am very much afraid
that we have found ourselves in another difficult
dilemma. It would seem very difficult to decide upon a
course of action. The difficulty, is in the first phce,
that we do not know what the activities are which

112. M. TSIANG (Chine) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je
crains vraiment que nous nous trouvions encore devant
une alternative embarrassante. Il parait difficile de se
prononcer sur la conduite a suivre. La difficulte vient,
tout d'abord, de ce que nous ignorons la nature des

li~s)

have given rise to the complaint; that is a point to be
determined. We were told this morning by the representative of Israel that these activities consist of planting tress. If that is all there is to it, we can look upon
the matter with more ease, but there still remains a
question. Planting trees is a good activity, but not
everybody is allowed to plant trees everywhere. The
question is whether Israel has a right to plant trees
on the exact spot where it has been planting them.

activites incriminees; c'est un point qui doit etre
eclairci. Le representant d'Israel nous a dit ce matin
qu'il s'agit de la plantation d'arbres. S'il n'y a rien
d'autre, nous sommes plus a l'aise pour etudier la question, mais elle n'en subsiste pas moins. Planter des
arbres est une activite louable, mais n'importe qui
n'est pas autorise a planter des arbres n'importe ou. Il
s'agit de savoir si Israel a le droit de planter des arbres
a l'endroit precis oil il le fait.

113. It has been held that that question of right is
still undetermined. If we say that Israel could continue
to plant trees, do we or do we not acknowledge Israel's
right to do that very thing? Of course, if we say that
Israel should stop, people will interpret it to mean that
the Council has prejudged the question, that Israel
has not the right. What the Council wants to do at this
moment is avoid deciding on that point.

113. On a soutenu que ce droit pouvait etre conteste.
Si nous disons qu'Israel peut continuer a planter des
arbres, ne reconnaissons-nous pas, par la meme, son
droit a le faire ? Il va de soi que si nous disons qu'Israel
doit s'arreter de planter ces arbres, on en conclura que
le Conseil a prejuge la question et qu'Israel n'a pas ce
droit.Ce que le Conseil veut en ce moment, c'est eviter
de se prononcer sur ce point.

114. I have a typical Chinese reaction to this. It is
illogical, but a practical way out of. this. In the first
place, I do not think that the Council should lay down
whether it is r~ght or wrong for Israel to plant trees
at that spot. That is a question to be settled. In the
second place, I think that delaying the planting of
trees for two or three weeks cannot do much damage.

114. Ma reaction devant ce probleme est typiquement
chinoise. La solution que je propose n'est pas logique,
mais elle est pratique. Tout d'abord, je ne pense pas
que le Conseil doive decider si Israel a le droit ou n'a
pas le droit de planter des arbres en cet endroit. C'est
la une question qui sera tranchee plus tard. D'autre
part, je pense qu'il n'y a pas grand mal a interrompre
la plantation pendant .deux ou trois semaines.

115. The representative of the Philippines made the
point that if that procedure were adopted, any country
could stop another country from acting by lodging a
complaint. Of course, it has that effect, but in this
particular case we are happy that time is limited. We
would limit it to two weeks, or at most three weeks.

115. Le representant des Philippines a dit que si le
Conseil adoptait cette procedure, tout pays pourrait
empecher tout autre pays d'agir ; illui suffirait de deposer une plainte. C'est juste, mais, en l'occurrence, nous
avons la chance de pouvoir fixer un delai. Il serait de
deux semaines, ou, au plus, de trois semaines.

116. With regard to the planting of the trees, let
us not be too logical about that matter. To be brief,
I would say this. I hope that you, Mr. President, will
find it possible to make a personal appeal to Israel
to refrain from planting trees during this interim
period before the Council comes to a decision. Bu t
if our friend from Iraq asks the Council to determine
the issue today by stating that Israel shall stop planting trees as of now, I feel that we shall be undertaking
too much.

116. Quant a la plantation des arbres, n'essayons pas
d'etre trop logiques. J'espere - et je me resume que le President pourra adresser personnellement un
appel a Israel lui demandant de s'abstenir de planter
des arbres d'ici le moment ou le Conseil prendra une
decision. Si le representant de l'Irak demandait au
Conseil de statuer aujourd'hui meme et de decider
qu'Israel doit cesser, a partir de maintenant, de planter des arbres, je lui repondrai que ce serait aller beaucoup trop loin.

117. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, the summation which you gave a few moments
ago represented the view of my delegation and, I
believe, of the majority of the member of the Council.
I was happy to note that a moment ago the representative of the Philippines accepted your summation, and
that was particularly valuable because your summation was based on his summation.

117. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais] : Monsieur le President, les conclusions que

118. As I see it, the position is that, having heard
the complaints of Jordan and Israel, we as a Council are
proposing to ask for reports from the Acting Chief of
Staff on the two complaints, and we expect to receive
the report on the Jordan complaint within a matter
of a couple of weeks. That was the interpretation which
the Secretary-General kindly gave us as to what was
the time that might be expected in the circumstances
to elapse for the production of a report which, it was
understood, was to be produced urgently.

vous avez tirees dans votre resume de tout a l'heure correspondent bien a l'opinion de ma delegation et, je pense, a
celle de la majorite des membres du Conseil. Je me suis
felicite de constater que le representant des Philippines
acceptait votre interpretation, ce qui etait d'autant
plus heureux que vos conclusions se fondaient sur les
siennes.
118. A mon avis, la situation se presente comme suit:
ayant entendu l'expose des plaintes de la Jordanie et
d'Israel, le Conseil se propose de demander au Chef
d'etat-major par interim des rapports sur ces deux
plaintes ; il espere recevoir dans deux ou trois semaines
le rapport sur la plainte jordanienne. D'apres l'explication du Secretaire general, c'est le temps que, dans les
conditions existantes, demandera l'etablissement d'un
rapport qui - la chose est entendue - doit etre prepare d'urgence.

. 25,

119. I would expect that after listening to this discussion both parties would respect fully the views of
the Council which have been widely expressed, that
nothing should be done to aggravate the situation. I
would also expect that the parties would interpret
the Council's expression in a responsible manner and
in good faith.

119. Je compte qu'a,pres avoir entendu les debats,
les deux parties se conformeront en tous points aux vues
du Conseil qui ont ete exprimees par un grand nombre
des membres, et que, par consequent, elles ne feront rien
qui puisse aggraver la situation. Je compte aussi qU'elles
interpreteront l'avis du Conseil en toute conscience et
bonne foi.

120. Mr. JAWAD (Iraq): I apologize for asking to
speak once more. By doing so I hope to state the views
of my Government regarding this particular matter.

120. M. JAWAD (Irak) [traduit de l'anglais] : Je
m'excuse de demander une fois de plus la parole. C'est
parce que j'espere pouvoir presenter les vues de mon
gouvernement sur ce point particulier.

121. After listening to the different observations
I was impressed by the fact that there is an attempt,
whether conscious or unconscious, to over-simplify
the matter and to put in terms of trees. This is a very
dangerous way of looking at a matter of this nature. As
you know, over-simplification always leads to very
risky consequences.

121. Ecoutant les diverses observations qui ont ete
presentees, j'ai ete frappe de constater que l'on s'efforgait, consciemment ou non, de simplifier a l'exces la
question en la ramenant a une question d'arbres. C'est
une fagon tres dangereuse de considerer une question
de cet ordre. Comme vous le savez, a simplifier une
question a l'exces on court toujours de graves risques.

122. The matter, as was stated this morning
[787th meeting], arose out of the fact that Israel entered
a no man's land - and the implications of such an
act must be obvious to everyone - and started digging
and ploughing in the ground under the protection of
armed forces. The matter was raised with the Mixed
Armistice Commission, and no action was taken. The
act by itself has increased the tension between the two
parties.

122. L'affaire, comme on l'a dit ce matin [787e seance],
a pour origine la penetration d'Israel dans un no man's
land - et on connalt toutes les consequences que peut
avoir un tel acte - oil il a entrepris de faire creuser et
labourer le sol sous la protection de forces armees.
L'affaire a ete portee devant la Commission mixte
d'armistice, oil aucune suite n'y a ete donnee. Cela
seul a suffi pour augmenter la tension entre les deux
parties.

123. Therefore the statement that it is only a matter
of planting trees and that trees will grow neither taller
nor broader in two weeks is a dangerous interpretation
of this matter.

123. Aussi, dire qu'il ne s'agit, en somme, que de la
plantation de quelques arbres et que deux semaines ne
feraient pas grand-chose en l'affaire, c'est donner du
probleme une interpretation dangereuse.

124. Israel has admitted its activities, and its activities, as you know, are in violation of the Armistice
Agreement. On the other hand, the Council is asking
the two parties to refrain from any activities that would
lead to the increase of tension. Well, the tension has
arisen out of the fact that Israel has gone into this area
and started doing unlawful acts.

124. Israel a admis s'etre livre a certaines activites.
Or, vous le savez, ces activites constituent une violation
de la Convention d'armistice. Par ailleurs, le Conseil
demande aux deux parties de s'abstenir de toute action
qui serait de nature a accroitre la tension. Or, la tension
vient precisement de ce qu'Israel a penetre dans cette
zone et y a entrepris illegalement certains travaux.

125. What I tried to interpret in the words of the
representative of the Philippines was a provisional
suspension of these activities. In this case we are not
prejudging the matter of the complaint one way or the
other. This matter, as I said before, has already been
raised in the question of the waters of the Jordan. Here
I have been advised that at the 631st meeting of the
Council, when the complaint by Syria against Israel
concerning the work on the west bank of the River
Jordan in the demilitarized zone was raised, the President suggested that a provisional suspension should
be observed. Here, the representative of Israel stated:

125. Ce que j'ai crn comprendre dans l'expose du
representant des Philippines, c'est qu'il fallait suspendre provisoirement ces travaux. Et en demandant
la suspension, nous ne prejugeons ni dans un sens Ili
dans l'autre la question qui fait l'objet de la plainte.
Le meme cas, je le repete, s'est presente a propos des
eaux du Jourdain. On vient de me rappier qu'a la
631 e seance du Conseil, lorsqu'a ete examinee la plainte
de la Syrie contre Israel au sujet des travaux sur la rive
occidentale du Jourdain dans la zone demilitarisee, le
President avait propose un arret provisoire des travaux. A cette seance, le representant d'lsrael a declare:

" I am empowered to state that the Government
of Israel is willing to arrange such a temporary suspension in the demilitarized zone for the purpose of
facilitating the Security Council's consideration of
this question. This is, of course, as we all understand,
without prejudice to the merits of the case itself."
[631st meeting, para. 4.]
Another speaker went into the matter and explained
that this was a step taken in the right direction.

«Je suis habilite a declarer que le Gouvernement
israelien est dispose a faire le necessaire pour assurer
l'arret temporaire des travaux dans la zone ctemilitarisee, afin de faciliter la tache du Conseil. Nous
sommes tous d'accord, bien.entendu, pour considerer
que l'interruption des travaux ne prejuge pas le
fond de la question elle-meme.» [631 e seance, par. 4.]
Un autre orateur, parlant de la question, a indique que
c'etait bien la decision qu'il convenait de prendre.

126. The second paragraph of a draft resolution
considered by the Security Council on 27 October 1953
reads:
"Desirous of facilitating the consideration of the
question, and without prejudice to its merits."

126. Le deuxieme paragraphe d'un projet de resolution examine par le Conseil de securite le 27 octobre
t{'53 a le libelIe suivant :
«Desireux de faciliter I'examen de la question sans
toutefois prejuger le fond de celle-ci ». [S/3125/Rev.1.}

[S/3125/Rev.1. ]

127. This, then, has been the practice of the Council.
It is only logical that the matter which led to the tension should be suspended at least for the time being until
a report on the spot is submitted to the Council. This
is the point of view of my delegation.

127. TelIe est la pratique qui s'est etablie au Conseil
de securite; d'ailleurs, il n'est que logique que I'activite
qui a provoque la tension soit suspendue au moins
provisoirement jusqu'a ce que le rapport fait sur place
soit soumis au Conseil. TelIe est I'opinion de ma
delegation.

128. Mr. BARCO (United States of America) : It is very
clear to the United States delegation that there are
legal and practical considerations with which we are
confronted here. We have already urged that the parties do their utmost to avoid any action between the
armistice lines that would increase tensions there. It
seems to us that it is quite clear that the Council, while
not wishing to take a decision on the legal issue and
wishing first to have a report on the situation there, at
the ~ame time does not feel that the activities which
have been going on there are wise in the circumstances.

128. M. BARCO (Etat~-Unis d'Amerique) [traduit
de I' anglais] : Aux yeux de la delegation des EtatsUnis, il ne fait aucun doute que, en I'occurrence, des
considerations d'ordre juridique et d'ordre pratique
s'opposent. Nous avons dejA demande aux parties de
faire tout leur possible pour ne rien entreprendre dans
la zone situee entre les lignes de I'armistice qui puisse
accroitre la tension. Nous pensons que le Conseil, qui,
avant de prendre une decision sur I'aspect juridique,
desire etre saisi d'un rapport sur la situation qui s'est
creee sur place, n'en estime pas moins que les activites
exercees dans cette region ne sont pas judicieuses, da.ns
les circonstances presentes.

129. We feel that we can expect that the parties will
heed this feeling and ~ense of the Council, and we would
include in our feelings that Israel would heed this view
of the Council. Therefore, it seems to us that the continuation of the tree planting at this time for this short
period that is involved is something which very clearly
may not be desirable.

129. Nous pouvons escompter, croyons-nous, que les
parties comprendront ce desir du Conseil, et qu'Israel
tiendra compte de l'opinion du ConseiI. Il semble bien
qu'il soit evident qu'il serait peu souhaitable que la
plantation d'arbres se poursuivre, pour l'instant, pendant le bref laps de temps prevu.

130. While we do not wish to take the decision, which
the representative of China has said so well, we would
think that as a practical matter this view would be
given the most serious consideration by the Governments concerned.

130. Nous ne demandons pas que le Conseil se prononce formellement en ce sens, mais nous voudrions,
comme le representant de la Chine I'a si justement
exprime, que dans leurs actes les gouvernements interesses .accordent la plus grande attention a cette
opinion.

131. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish):
I should like to say for the record, first, that at no time
during the debate did I express a personal opinion on
the substantive issue, with regard to which I have no
information whatsoever; secondly, that I cannot change
the views of the representatives on the Council: I can
only endeavour to interpret them. I tried to interpret
the proposal of the representatives of the Philippines,
the United Kingdom and Australia as accurately as I
could and I am gratified that the three representatives
have confirmed that my interpretation was correct.

132. In accordance with the suggestion of the representatives of China and the United States, I would
suggest that the Council decide to request the two
reports - one of them to be submitted not later than
two weeks from now - and that copies of the verbatim
record of our debate be sent to Jordan and Israel so
t~at both Governments may be duly informed of the
Vlews expressed in the Council.
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

(c·-.

131. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'espagnol): Je tiens

a declarer tout d'abord qu'it aucun moment, pendant le
debat, je n'ai exprime une opinion personnelIe sur le
fond de la question; je n'aurais d'ailleurs pas pu le
faire, ne disposant d'aucune des donnees necessaires
pour cela. Ensuite, si je ne peux rien changer aux opinions exprimees par les representants au Conseil, je
dois m'efforcer neanmoins de les resumer et de les
interpreter. J'ai interprete du mieux que j'ai pu la proposition des representants des Philippines, du RoyaumeUni et de l'Australie, et j'ai ete tres heureux d'entendre
ces trois representants dire que j'avais correctement
interprete leurs vues.
132. Comme les representants de la Chine et des
Etats-Unis d'Amerique, je suggere que le Conseil decide
de demander les deux rapports - dont l'un dans deux
semaines au plus tard - et de faire envoyer des exemplaires du compte rendu stenographique des debats a la
Jordanie et a Israel pour que les gouvernements de ces
deux pays soient a meme de prendre connaissance des
opinions exprimees au Conseil.
II en est ainsi decide.
La seance est levee a 18 h. 10.

SALES AGENTS FOR UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
FRANCE
ARGENnNA·ARGENTINE
Editions A. Pedane, '13, rue Soufflot,
Editorial Sudamerlcana S.A., AI.ina 500,
Paris (Ve).
lu.nos Aires.
GERMANY·AllEMAGNE
AUSTRALIA·AUSTRAlIE
R. Elsenschmidt, Kaiserstroue 49, FrankH. A. Goddard, A.M.P. Bldg., 50 MiII.r
furt/Main.
St., North Sydney;
Elwert &.Meurer, Haupstrasse 101. Berlin'0 Queen St•• Melbourne.
Melbourne Universily Pr.... Carltan N.3. SchSneberg.
Alexander Horn, Spiegelgasse 9. Wi.
Vidoria.
baden.
AUSTRIA·AUTRICHE
W. E. Saarboch, Gereonstra... 25-29,
Gerold & Co., Graben 31. Wien, 1.
Koln (22c).
B. Wijllerstorff, Markus Sittiku..traue 10.
GREECE-GRECE
Solzburg.
Kauffmann Bookshop, 28 Stadian Street.
IELGIUM.BELGIQUE
Athenes.
Agence et Messageri•• de I. Pre..e S.A.,
GUATEMALA
14-22, rue du Persl!, Bruxelf•••
Scciedad Economico Financiera, Edificio
W. H. Smith & Son, 71·75, boulevard
Briz.
Despacho 207. 60 Avenida 1.01-33.
Adolphe-Max, Bruxelles.
Zona 1, Guatemala City.
BOllVIA·BOllVIE
HAITI
Librerla 5ole«ione., Casilla 972, La Po••
Librairie "A la Carave1le", Boite postale
BRAZIL·BRESIL
111·B, Port-au-Prince.
tivraria Agir, Rio de Janeiro, SQo Faulo
HONDURAS
and Sero Horizonte.
Libreria Panamericana, TegucigQlpa.
CAMBODIA·CAMBODGE
HONG KONG.HONG·KONG
Papeterie-L1brairie Nauvelfe, Albert Par· The Swindon Book Ca., 25 Nathan Road,
tail, 14, avenue 8oulloche, Pnom~Penh.
Kowloon.
CANADA
ICELAND.ISLANDE
Ryersan Press, 299 Queen St. West,
Bakaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundssonar H.
Toronto.
F., Austurstraeti lB, Reykjavik.
CEYlON·CEYLAN
INDIA·INDE
Lake House 800kshop, The Associated
Orient Longmans, Calcutta, Bombay, MaNewspapers of Ceylon, Ltd., P. O. Box
dra. and New Delhi.
244, Colombo.
Oxford Buok & Stationery Co., New
CHIlE-eHllI
Delhi and Cafeutla.
Editorial del Pacifica, Ahumodo 57,
1'. Varadachary & Co., Madras.
Santiago.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE
libreria Ivens, Casilla 205, Sontiago.
"embangunan, Ltd., Gunung Sahari 84,
CHINA·CHINE
Djakarta.
IRAN
.
The World Book Ca.. Ltd•• 99 Chung
King Road, 1st Section, Taipeh, Taiwan. J'Guity", 482, avenue Ferdow.i, T.heran.
The Commercial Press lid•• 211 Honan
IRAQ.IRAK
Rd•• Shanghai.
Mackenzie's Bookshop, B.ghdad.
COLOMBIA·COLOMBIE
ISRAEL
libreria America, Medellin.
Blumstein's Bookstores Ltd., 35 Allenby
Libreria Buchholz Galerra, Bogot6.
Read, Tel·Aviv.
Libreria Nacianal ltda., Barranquilla.
ITALY·ITAlIE
COSTA RICA·COSTA·RICA
Libreria Commissionaria Sansoni, Vi.
Traias Herm!'nos, Apartado 1313, San
Gina Capponi 26, Firenze.
Jose.
.
JAPAN·JAI'ON
CUBA·
Maruzen Company, Ltd., 6 Tori~Nichome,
La Caso Belga, O'R,\iIly 455, La Habana.
Nihonba.hi, Tokyo.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA·TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
LEBANON·lIBAN
Ceskoslovensky Spisovatel, Narodni Trida
Librairie Universelle, lSeyrouth.
9, Praho 1.
lI8ERIA
DENMARK.DANEMARK
J. Momolu Kamcira, M.nrovia.
Einar Munksgaard, Ltd., Nerregade 6,
LUXEMBOURG
KGbenhavn, K.
Libroirie J. Schummer, Luxembourg.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
. MEXICO·MEXIQUE
REPU8l1QUE DOMINICAINE
Editorial Hermes S.A., Ignacio Marlscal
Libreria Dominicana, Mercedes 49, Ciu41, Mexico, D.F.
dad Trujillo.
NETHERLANDS.PAYS·BAS
ECUADOR·EQUATEUR
N.V. Martinu. Nijhoff, Lange Voorhaut
libreria Cientifica, Guayaquil and Quito.
9, 's-Grovenhage.
EL SALVADOR·SALVADOR
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVEllE·ZELANDE
United Nations Asseciation of New ZeaManuel Navas y Cia., la. Avenida sur
37, San Salvador.
land, C.P.O. 1011, Wellington.
FINLAND-FINLANDE
NOIlWAY·NOIlVEGE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa, 2 Kesku.katu,
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag, Kt. Au..
Helsinki.
gustsgt. 7A, 0.10.

Orders and inquiries from countries where sales agents have
not yet been appointed may b. sent to: Sale. and Circulation
Section, Uniled Nations, New Yorle, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,

United Notions Office, Palais·clas Nations, Geneva, Switzerland.

Printed in France

PAKISTAN
The Pakislan Co-operative Book Society.
Dacca. East Pakistan (and at Chittallanll).
Publishers United Ltd•• La""re.
Thomas & Thomas, KarRhi. 3.
PANAMA
Jos& Menendez, Plaza d. Arang.. P.·
.noma.
PARAGUAY
Agencia de librerlas d. Solvador Niua.
Calle Pte. Franco No. 39-43. Asuncion.
PERU.PEROU
libreria InternacionaJ del Peru, S.A.,
Lima and Arequlpa.
PHILIPPINES
Alemar's Soak Store, 749 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
Livraria Rodrigues, 186 Ru. Aure., lis
boa.
SINGAPORE·SINGAPOUIl
The City Soak Slore. Ltd., Winchester
House, Collyer Quay.
SPAIN·ESPAGNE
libreria Bosch. 11 Ronda Universidad.
Barcelona.
librerio Mundi.Prensa, Lagasca 38, Ma.
drid.
SWEDEN·SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Hovbokhandel A.B,
Fredsgoton 2, Stockholm.
SWITZERLAND·SUISSE

Librairie Payot S.A., lausanne, G.neve.
Hons Raunhardt, Kirchgosse 17. Zurich 1.

THAILAND.THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit Ltd•• 55 Chakrawat Road.
Wat Tuk, Sangkok.
.
TURKEY·TURQUIE
Librairi. Hachetla, 469 Istiklal Caddesi,
Seyoglu, Istanbul.
UNJON OF SOUTH AFRICA.
UNION SUD·AFRICAINE
Van Schaik'. Baakstora (Ply.), lid., Box
724, Pretoria.
UNITED ARA8 REPUBLICREPU8l1QUE ARASE UNIE
Librairie "La Renaisscmc. d'Egypte"l ,
Sh. Adly Pasha, Cairo.
Librairie Universelle, Damas.
IJNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Stationery Offic., P.O. Box 569.
London, S.E.l (and at ti.M.S.O••hop.).
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS·UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International· Documents Service, Columbia University Press, 2960 Broadway.
New York 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Representaci6n de Editariales, Prof. H.
D'Elia, Av. 18 de Julia 1333, Mont..
video.
VENEZUELA
libreria del Este, Av. Miranda, No. 52.
Edf. Galipan, Caracas.
VIET·NAM
Papeterie.Librairie Nouv.lle, Albert P'or.
tail, Boite postale 283, Saigon.
YUGOSLAVIA·YOUGOSLAVIE
Cankarjeva Zalozba, Ljubljana, SI~veni.:
Orzavno
Preduzece,
Jugeslovenale..
Knjiga, Terazije 27/11, leolrad.
(5112)
Les commanJes et clemancIes J. renseign.ments eman.nt ••
pays ou iI n'existe pas encore Je clepositaires peuvent etr.
aclressees -a ta Section des ventes at da la tlisfriltufi.n,
Organisation clet Nations Unies, New~York (Efats~Unil cl'Am'riqua), ou er la Section cles ventes;, Organisation
Noliens
Un;." Palais des Nations, Genev. (Suissa). .

Price : $ V.S. 0,25 ; 1/9 stg. ; Sw. fr. 1.
(or equivalent in other currencies)

d.,

13254-August 1958-1,800
