S/2021/520

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 June 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 1 June 2021 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2531 (2020) on the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
(MINUSMA), by which the Council requested me, addressing perspectives from all
relevant actors, including my Special Representative for Mali, in consultation with
the Force Commander, to provide the Council with a letter focused on: (a) information
on progress in Mission operations, to include security challenges, implementation of
the adaptation plan as well as an update on discussions within the Instance de
coordination au Mali; (b) information on performance and rotations of uniformed
personnel, including information on undeclared caveats and their impact on the
Mission; and (c) an update on the implementation of the integrated strategic
framework and the related transition plan.
Progress in Mission operations
As outlined in my report (S/2021/519), security incidents continued to occur in
northern Mali, where extremist groups continued to operate and target national and
international forces, in increasingly complex attacks. The threat has grown in the
centre, where civilians remain direct and indirect victims of intracommunity and
intercommunity violence and terrorist activity.
Within this highly complex environment, MINUS MA has continued to play a
central role in supporting the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the political transition, as well as stabilization efforts in
the centre. The Mission continues to exercise good offices, including during the most
recent period of political upheaval, following the forcible resignation of the President
and Prime Minister. The Mission’s presence and security support remain vital for
efforts to provide space to address the political crisis in Bamako, for the peace process
to unfold and for enabling the Malian authorities to increase their presence in northern
and central Mali in order to ensure the provision of basic services to the population,
in close cooperation with other partners.
MINUSMA has further scaled up the tempo of its operations and stepped up
efforts to protect the civilian population and to support the redeployment of the
Malian Defence and Security Forces. In Gao region, Operation Seka of MINUSMA
is under way to secure, protect and stabilize the road between Gao, Ansongo and
Labézanga, a key strategic trade and travel route that connects the largest population
centres in Gao region with the Niger. The area had been increasingly infiltrated by
Islamic State in the Greater Sahara, and MINUSMA operations have contributed to
an improved security environment, allowing the local population to conduct business

21-06844 (E)

030621

*2106844*

S/2021/520

and to socialize, even if for limited periods of time. The deployment of a formed
police unit detachment from Gao to Ansongo in December 2020 further reinforced
Operation Seka by increasing the number of patrols in Ansongo town. These efforts,
among others, have contributed to a reduction in the number of reported protection of
civilians incidents in Ansongo in the “quartier hydraulique” (from 10 to 2 per week),
and along the Ansongo-Bara Highway, where most incidents had been reported.
Between 8 April and 19 May, the mobile task force conducted the first phase of
Operation Meerkat, west of the Niger River, focusing on the Ansongo, In-Tellit and
Tessit “triangle”. In this highly contested area, where the civilian population is often
caught in crossfires between Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and Jama’a Nusrat
ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin, the 20-day patrol from Gao to Tessit enabled MINUSMA
civilian personnel and regional state representatives to visit the town and enhance
engagement with communities. In addition, the mobile task force patrol conducted
civil-military cooperation activities in close coordination with the local counterp arts,
including the Malian Armed Forces that have a garrison in Tessit town, further
contributing to increased trust by the local population.
In Kidal region, several operations, including Operation Galileo, in the vicinity
of Tessalit, Galaxy, in the vicinity of Kidal, and Copernic, in key areas in Tessalit and
Aguelhok, were conducted to deter indirect fire and improvised explosive device
attacks against MINUSMA and to gather intelligence to protect the local population
from attacks by armed groups. In addition, the MINUSMA military component
conducted Operation Arer, which also incorporated civil-military cooperation
activities, and was designed as a show of strength around Mission camps, in response
to the attack against the camp at Aguelhok on 2 April.
Operation Farrier, launched in November 2019, is another operation focusing
on Northern Mali to monitor and verify the compliance of signatory armed
movements. In order to restrict and limit the circulation of arms in the north and
reduce the risk of clashes between signatory armed groups, the Technical Commission
on Security decided that it must receive prior notification regarding the deployment
of any convoy that comprises more than five vehicles and/or includes heavy weapons.
The past months were marked by a significant decline in notifications, which
indicates a lack of adherence by the armed movements and the need for further
measures to ensure compliance.
In the Timbuktu region, MINUSMA conducted several operations and patrols in
Ber, Timbuktu and Goundam areas. Operation Winner around Niafunké, Soumpi and
Echefell created conditions to enable the Malian defence and security forces to
redeploy to the area. It also allowed the Mission to enhance its interaction with
communities in these areas.
In central Mali, Mopti region, MINUSMA conducted Operation Buffalo, aimed
at protecting the local population in areas of concern resulting from violence along
community lines. As part of Operation Buffalo, the Mission conducted short range
patrols in the vicinity of Sokoura and Tori. MINUSMA also conducted three
integrated missions, in Ogoussagou, Tori and Sokoura. This allowed MINUSMA to
support local reconciliation and social cohesion initiatives and carry out human rights
investigations. Coordinated efforts and patrols involving MINUSMA military and
police components enhanced community engagement and the gathering of
information. They served as a deterrent to violence in some hotspots, including on
25 April, when MINUSMA police effectively interrupted the hijacking of a minibus
between Douentza and Sévaré.
Operation Mongoose continued to demonstrate the flexibility and ability of the
uniformed components of MINUSMA to deploy effectively from one sector to another
in response to threats to the local population, a key objective of the Mission’s
2/7

21-06844

S/2021/520

adaptation plan. This was demonstrated by the relocation of a detachment from Sector
East to Sector Centre in late January and the deployment of a special operatio ns force
from Sector West to Sector Centre for a limited period in January.
Implementation of the adaptation plan
While the timeline for implementation of the adaptation plan has required
adjustment owing to delays, the generation and expansion of Mis sion infrastructure
stemming from restrictions due to the coronavirus disease (COVID -19) pandemic and
the August 2020 coup, the objective of the plan remains valid: to enhance Mission
proactivity and flexibility, starting with scaling up the agility of the MINUSMA
military component and progressively integrating and amplifying the efforts of the
civilian and police components.
Additional medical, engineering and intelligence, reconnaissance and
surveillance capabilities are planned to deploy or relocate to Sector Centre and Sector
West in the second half of 2021. The expansion of the Mopti camp is progressing.
Additional ground units will deploy to the new 16-hectar camp between June and
November 2021, while the 11-hectar camp designated for air assets will be completed
in the first quarter of 2022.
Outstanding capability gaps include military medium utility helicopter units,
armed and attack helicopter units, an infantry quick-reaction force, mobile surgical
capabilities, a fixed-wing intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit and an
unmanned aerial system unit. Where possible, in the interest of time, the Mission is
considering both military and civilian-contracted (commercial) assets.
The full operationalization of the Mission mobile task force, a core piece of the
adaption plan, will require addressing conditions outside the United Nations
framework posed by some troop-contributing countries, including with regard to
casualty evacuations, which significantly restrict the areas of deployment of th e
contingents.
Coordination of security presences
The Instance de coordination au Mali continues to be an important forum for
coordinating the activities of the Malian defence and security forces, the Joint Force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the French forces, the European Union training
mission in Mali, the European Union capacity-building mission in Mali and
MINUSMA. The forum has been effective in strengthening coordination among
partners, including in supporting the Malian security forces in their security planning
for the upcoming referendum and elections foreseen in the transition road map.
Mission performance
In spite of the increasingly challenging environment in which MINUSMA
continues to operate, MINUSMA performance has improved; t his can be attributed in
part to a gradual change in mindset of the military leadership (commanders at both
the sector and contingent levels) and their proactivity. The rank and file of the
contingents are also demonstrably motivated and well prepared.
In the 2 April attack on the camp in Aguelhok, Kidal region, MINUSMA
peacekeepers robustly repelled a complex attack by over 200 extremist elements. The
temporary deployment of several units in operating bases in Timbuktu and Mopti
regions under difficult circumstances enhanced mandate implementation and
community engagement in those areas.
Notwithstanding, significant challenges remain that have an adverse impact on
performance. In the absence of pledges for light mobile surgical modules from troop21-06844

3/7

S/2021/520

contributing countries, the Mission amended the requirements in favour of smaller
forward surgical teams. However, several units of the mobile task force still lack such
teams, restricting their mobility and flexibility.
The uniformed personnel of MINUSMA continue to face constraints due to
inadequate equipment or a lack of equipment, in particular armoured personnel
carriers and mine-protected vehicles, many of which have been damaged in operation
and have not been replaced, or were not fit-for-purpose in the first place. For instance,
out of 40 armoured personnel carriers or mine-protected vehicles belonging to two
combat convoy companies based in Gao, 22 are unserviceable, with 16 having been
damaged by explosive incidents; 2 of the 16 were damaged in 2021 an d the rest in the
period between 2018 and 2020. The unavailability of equipment, including vehicles,
can also be attributed, to a certain degree, to inadequate maintenance arrangements.
MINUSMA is working to address the issue by ensuring adherence to sched uled
maintenance plans and the timely replacement of unserviceable equipment.
An additional limitation for MINUSMA police is the incomplete deployment of
the second formed police unit based in Mopti: since March 2020 only the 20-member
advance team has been present in the Mission, with the deployment of the rest of the
team held up as a result of its equipment having been grounded in Dakar owing to a
financial dispute between the contractor and the subcontractor.
Evaluations of the Mission’s military and police components
Since January 2021, four military units have been evaluated, including three
infantry battalions (645, 650 and 849 strong) and one combat convoy battalion (525
strong), and have been found to be performing satisfactorily, except for one sub-unit,
in which issues were identified in relation to intelligence, logistics, execution of
duties and protection of civilians. Mitigating measures were put in place to improve
performance in those areas. The COVID-19 pandemic hindered the regular conduct
of evaluations.
MINUSMA police have conducted 20 performance assessment and evaluation
reports since 1 January, with performance improvements plans, as necessary, to
ensure that operational capacity in the field is maintained or improved. Twenty
contingent-owned equipment inspections have also been conducted during the period.
No formed police unit or contingent of MINUSMA police is operating with
undeclared caveats.
The Secretariat has not registered any declared caveats; therefore, MINUSMA
considers all caveats as undeclared. These include limitations such as units not being
allowed to deploy to different locations within the same sector. Undeclared caveats
hinder the Mission’s operations and have been reported to Headqu arters, which has
made efforts to mitigate their impact by directly engaging troop -contributing
countries. In parallel, the MINUSMA Force Commander has undertaken visits to
major troop-contributing countries to discuss specific operational requirements in
Mali.
Challenges
Notwithstanding the flexible, robust and proactive posture that MINUSMA has
adopted, the security situation has continued to deteriorate, especially in the centre. In
addition, MINUSMA has faced a variety of situations that have hinde red freedom of
movement, in particular Bandiagara and Douentza Cercles, where the local population
and dozos (traditional hunters) have protested against the Mission by blocking roads.
These hostilities against MINUSMA are being addressed through the Mi ssion’s
engagement in a structured dialogue with local populations and self -defence groups.
As a result of these dialogue efforts, the blockages that MINUSMA patrols had been
4/7

21-06844

S/2021/520

facing since December 2020, in particular in Bandiagara region, have been lifted and
MINUSMA has resumed its patrols.
The successful completion of the adaptation plan will depend on the availability
of capable and efficient enablers, including airlift capability, enhanced medical
support facilities and qualified uniformed personnel wi th the appropriate mindset. I
call upon all Member States to actively contribute to the generation of such
specialized capabilities.
Improvised explosive devices continue to have an impact on the civilian
population and on national and international forces and remain a major threat to
MINUSMA. Furthermore, during the attacks on the temporary operating base in
Kerena and the camp in Aguelhok, terrorists used explosives as part of complex
attacks, in contrast to the more improvised explosive device attacks o n supply routes.
There was also an increasing number of unidentified drones observed flying over
MINUSMA installations. The Mission has continued to take measures to adapt to the
evolving threat of improvised explosive devices through an integrated respons e that
addresses situational awareness, the use of technology, predeployment and in -mission
training, and medical evacuations, which has been particularly effective. Since
January 2021, over 68 improvised explosive devices have been used in Mali,
including 25 against MINUSMA (12 were collected and neutralized by MINUSMA;
13 were detonated).
The Mission observed a decrease in the number of civilians injured or killed by
explosive incidents (34 per cent decrease in 2021, compared with the first four months
of 2020). While United Nations protection measures in Mali have contributed to
increased risk awareness and the resilience of the populations at risk, further
monitoring is required to identify causalities or whether the current trend will
continue.
In January 2021, a task force to counter improvised explosive devices was
established by the Mission, with the participation of the Malian Armed Forces, the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the French forces and the European
Union training mission in Mali. A common strategy is under development.
Troop rotations
COVID-19-related limitations have led to clustered rotations. In order to
mitigate the negative impact of troop rotations, the Mission adjusted the rotation plan
to ensure continued availability of uniformed personnel and limit the number of
rotations during “high” operational time frames. Notwithstanding, additional
challenges continue to result from troop-contributing countries and policecontributing countries not adhering to rotation plans, which, during the reporting
period, led to simultaneous rotations by two battalions that resulted in significantly
reduced operations.
Implementation of the integrated strategic framework and transition plan
MINUSMA and the United Nations country team continued to coordinate and
collaborate with regard to maintaining momentum in the implementation of the
Agreement and stabilization efforts in central Mali, while also integrating activities
to support the post-coup political transition. As such, there have been delays in the
completion of the gender- and human rights-sensitive conflict analyses, in the analysis
of environmental risks and in the United Nations country team capacity mapping
exercise. Longer-term transition planning, as identified in the second phase of the
long-term road map submitted to the Security Council in March ( S/2021/300, annex),
will be informed by the capacity mapping results and will be initiated as the
benchmarks and conditions set out in the first phase of the road map are achieved.
21-06844

5/7

S/2021/520

The aim of longer-term transition planning should be understood as strategic
collaborative processes with the host Government and other partners to consolidate
peacebuilding gains and prevent future conflict. Hence, it should not be
conceptualized as a linear process aimed at handing over mission tasks to the United
Nations country team or the Government but rather as a process aimed at working
with partners. It is against this background that the implementation of a revised
integrated strategic framework is foreseen for the second phase of the road map.
As noted in the road map, the first phase – corresponding to the period set for
the political transition in Mali – is aimed at the delivery of results through the
implementation of an integrated transition support plan developed over the reporting
period between MINUSMA and the United Nations country team. The plan is
designed not only to ensure integrated planning and “Delivery as one” efforts on
transition support and mandate priorities between the Mission and the United Nations
country team, but also to improve cross-component alignment of strategic and
operational planning within the Mission.
In the context of support for the transition period, the comparative advantages
and delineation of responsibilities identified under the previous integrated strategic
framework continued to be leveraged in support of mandate delivery in an integrated
and comprehensive manner. The projects implemented in Ansongo and Gao,
described in the following two paragraphs, serve to illustrate how recent joint
programming has been facilitated by the integrated approach, aligning comparative
advantages and effective division of labour and resource ma nagement. A case in point
is the coordinated security support actions under Operation Seka, described above,
led by the MINUSMA military component, with MINUSMA good offices, social
cohesion and reconciliation activities, and with technical expertise and p rogramming
by the United Nations country team, agencies, funds and programmes.
In the Gao region, MINUSMA, the World Food Programme and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, cooperated to support increased
food production, improve livelihoods and build the resilience of vulnerable
communities, including returnees. The project also included joint efforts to reduce
intercommunal conflicts and address the root causes of local recruitment into armed
groups, notably south of Gao. In close collaboration with local authorities,
MINUSMA provided security, political, technical and logistical support, and the
World Food Programme provided capacity development and financial support for
women, youth and local authorities. These integrated efforts were complemented by
sensitization sessions on peacekeeping and cohabitation through the creation of a
framework for dialogue by MINUSMA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.
In Ansongo, MINUSMA and the United Nations country team undertook
integrated actions to restore state authority and the provision of basic social services,
through environmental and sanitation-related projects. These joint efforts served to
build local resilience against flooding, strengthen social cohesion among community
members and enhance the engagement of civil society with recently deployed state
authorities, as well as prevent future intercommunal conflict related to water and
sanitation in the area.
MINUSMA has also worked closely with the United Nations country team to
ensure an integrated response to the COVID-19 pandemic and continues to leverage
comparative advantages in the planning, coordination and establishment of the
COVID-19 pandemic task force and support, as relevant, for immuniza tion
programmes and United Nations COVID-19 vaccination efforts.
In conclusion, MINUSMA, in cooperation with the Malian authorities and
diverse partners, has made a difference in support of efforts to prevent violence,
6/7

21-06844

S/2021/520

protect civilians, build community resilience and promote dialogue at the national,
regional and local levels. However, much remains to be accomplished, including
ending the continued spread of violence, strengthening State capacity in the
peripheries and promoting intercommunal harmony. For the progress achieved so far,
I wish to commend the tireless efforts of the men and women in MINUSMA who have
continued to ensure mandate implementation in spite of an increasingly complex
threat environment and COVID-19 restrictions. Although insecurity has spread
further, MINUSMA has managed to increase the tempo of its operations through
innovative integrated approaches that have produced results in a number of areas with
regard to the protection of civilians and engagement with local communities in
northern and central Mali. The role of MINUSMA in Mali remains critical, as the
country implements its political transition and advances in the implementation of the
Agreement and the stabilization of central Mali. The Mission’s exercise of good
offices jointly with regional mediators from the Economic Community of West
African States has been indispensable to efforts to address political upheaval in
Bamako and to prevent further escalation of tensions.
I would be grateful if you could bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

21-06844

7/7
