UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1296
30 December 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 29 DECEMBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In my letter to the President of the Security Council dated
12 December 1997 (S/1997/994), I informed the Council of my decision that
Mr. Berhanu Dinka should serve as my Representative and Regional Humanitarian
Adviser for the Great Lakes Region. The Security Council concurred with my
decision (S/1997/995).
In his capacity as my Representative, Mr. Dinka has represented me in
meetings held in the region, monitored developments and their implications for
peace and regional security, and sought to contribute to regional efforts in the
prevention or peaceful settlement of conflicts with specific emphasis on
Burundi.
With respect to Burundi, the designation of former President Nelson Mandela
as the new facilitator is expected to reinvigorate the peace process. In view
of this, it is desirable to raise the profile of the United Nations within the
overall efforts of the international community to address the current
deteriorating political and humanitarian situation in Burundi.
I have, accordingly, decided to appoint Mr. Dinka as my Special
Representative for the Great Lakes Region, at the assistant secretary-general
level. In this capacity, he will, inter alia, sound out the views of countries
in the region regarding the proposed organization of an international conference
on the Great Lakes; represent me at meetings and deliberations under the Arusha
peace process on Burundi; and address the regional dimensions of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo through, among other steps, close
interaction with my Special Representative in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It is my intention to extend his mandate, as revised, until the end of
December 2000.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.

(Signed)
----99-40380 (E)

301299

Kofi A. ANNAN
