S/PV.9327

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9327

th meeting
Tuesday, 23 May 2023, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Berset/Mrs. Baeriswyl/Mr. Hauri. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Vieira
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Dery
Mr. Ishikane
Mr. Vella
Mr. Nyusi
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. Almheiri
Lord Ahmad
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Ensuring the security and dignity of civilians in conflict: addressing food
insecurity and protecting essential services
Letter dated 1 May 2023 from the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2023/307)
Report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2023/345)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-14544 (E)
*2314544*

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Ensuring the security and dignity of civilians
in conflict: addressing food insecurity and
protecting essential services
Letter dated 1 May 2023 from the
Permanent Representative of Switzerland
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2023/307)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict
(S/2023/345)
The President (spoke in French): I would like to
warmly welcome the Secretary-General, the Presidents,
Ministers and other high-level representatives to the
Security Council and thank them for their presence
today, which underscores the importance of the subject
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Croatia, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nepal,
the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, San Marino,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Spain, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine, Uruguay,
Viet Nam and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Mirjana
Spoljaric Egger, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Aïchatou
Mounkaïla, President of the Network of Women-led
Organizations of the Lake Chad Basin.
2/31

23/05/2023

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Maciej Popowski, Director-General
for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid
Operations of the European Commission, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/307, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 May 2023 from the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration, and to document S/2023/345,
which contains the report of the Secretary-General on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
It is my pleasure to give the floor to His Excellency
Secretary-General António Guterres.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I thank
the Government of Switzerland for convening this
important debate and President Spoljaric Egger and
Ms. Mounkaïla for joining us.
Less than six weeks have passed since war erupted
in the Sudan. In that time, hundreds of civilians have
been killed, including United Nations personnel. Some
250,000 people have fled the country. Hospitals have
been occupied and attacked. The price of goods is
reported to have quadrupled in parts of the country, and
aid warehouses have been looted on a massive scale.
As terrible as the current reality is, it is far from
exceptional. My report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict in 2022 (S/2023/345) shows that war
is devastating lives throughout the world. Explosive
weapons continue to wreak havoc, especially in urban
areas. Last year, 94 per cent of those in populated areas
who fell victim to such weapons were civilians. The
women and men who were able to flee the fighting did
so in record numbers. The total number of refugees
forced from their homes, owing to conflict, violence,
human rights violations and persecution reached
100 million. Health-care facilities and schools were
devastated, and their workers were injured, kidnapped
or killed. At least 2,000 schools were destroyed in
three regions of Ethiopia alone. Humanitarian workers
also faced regular threats. Their work was hampered
by violence, bureaucracy, political considerations and
overly broad sanctions and counter-terrorism measures.
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In Afghanistan, the ban by the de facto authorities on
women working in the humanitarian aid sector is having
life-threatening consequences for women and girls.
(spoke in English)
War means hunger. Armed conflict is a key factor
driving food insecurity around the world. Last year,
more than 117 million people faced acute hunger
primarily because of war and insecurity, and this is
an outrage. Damage to critical infrastructure hampers
food production, blocks distribution and deprives
people of safe water. Syria now has 40 per cent less
drinking water than it did at the start of the conflict.
Fighters destroy crops and steal livestock. Explosives
contaminate fertile land. Markets cannot function,
and prices skyrocket. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has
contributed to the rise in the price of food, energy and
fertilizer globally, with terrible effects for the world’s
poorest. And when conflict combines with the climate
crisis, harvests shrink and people go hungry. I saw that
for myself during my recent visit to Somalia. After
years of war, Somalis have been experiencing their
worst drought in decades. An estimated 43,000 people
died as a result in 2022 alone, half of them children, and
millions were forced from their homes.
There has been action over the past year to alleviate
the impact of conflict on civilians. Some parties to
conflicts have taken steps to protect children, allow
humanitarians to gain access to those in need and more.
My newly appointed United Nations Famine Prevention
and Response Coordinator is leading a system-wide
response to rising food insecurity, and our Action
Agenda on Internal Displacement outlines a plan to
respond to the record number of displaced persons and
prevent further crises.
The Black Sea Initiative and the memorandum of
understanding to promote Russian food and fertilizer
to global markets has helped to stabilize markets, bring
down prices and ease the food crisis. Ukraine has been
able to export more than 30 million metric tons of food.
That includes life-saving grain transported by the World
Food Programme to support humanitarian operations
in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia and Yemen.
I welcome the Russian Federation’s confirmation that it
will continue to participate in the Black Sea Initiative
for another 60 days. But outstanding issues remain, and
the representatives of Russia, Ukraine, Türkiye and the
United Nations will continue to discuss them. Looking
ahead, we hope that exports of food and fertilizers,

S/PV.9327

including ammonia from the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, will be able to reach global supply chains
safely and predictably. That is foreseen in both the Black
Sea Initiative and the memorandum of understanding,
the implementation of which the United Nations is fully
committed to support.
In November 2022, States adopted the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas. I urge
all States to join this initiative and turn the Declaration
into meaningful action.
In December 2022, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2664 (2022), aimed at preventing United
Nations sanctions from harming civilians and
obstructing humanitarian action. I urge all States to
implement it and to exclude humanitarian and medical
activities from their own counter-terrorism and
sanctions measures.
Those modest steps are welcome, but the terrible
truth is that the world is failing to live up to its
commitments to protect civilians — commitments
enshrined in international humanitarian law. The 1949
Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional
are the cornerstone of that legal framework. I pay
tribute to the work of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), the guardian of those treaties.
Its personnel meet danger and brutality with bravery,
compassion and humanity, and they will always have
my full support. The ICRC’s role is unique, it has
the mandate to respond, and that mandate must be
respected by every Government, every armed group
and every fighter.
We must never lose sight of the meaning and purpose
of international humanitarian law. It is the difference
between life and death, between restraint and anarchy,
and between losing ourselves in horror and retaining
our humanity. But law overlooked is law undermined.
We need action and accountability to ensure that it is
respected, and that depends on political will. Peace
is the best form of protection. We must intensify our
efforts to prevent conflict, protect civilians, preserve
peace and find political solutions to war.
In the coming weeks, I will issue a policy brief on
New Agenda for Peace in preparation for next year’s
Summit of the Future, which will offer a holistic
approach for Member States to consider, tuned to
the times, in order to address peace and security in a

23-145443/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

changing world. Where war continues, all countries
must comply with international humanitarian law, and
members of the Security Council have a particular
responsibility. Governments should incorporate
international humanitarian law into national laws
and military rules and training. Humanitarians must
be ensured safe access. Attacks against them must
cease, and their work must be facilitated, including
by the removal of deadly bureaucratic barriers. It is
unconscionable that vital aid languishes in ports and
warehouses as people die. The Security Council has a
special role to play in urging States to respect the rules of
war. Governments with influence over warring parties
should engage in political dialogue and train forces on
protecting civilians. Countries that export weapons
should refuse to do business with any party that fails to
comply with international humanitarian law.
Those who commit war crimes must be held to
account. States must investigate alleged war crimes,
prosecute perpetrators and enhance other States’
capacity to do so. We must also do everything in our
power to break the deadly cycle of armed conflict and
hunger, addressing the underlying causes of hunger
by strengthening vulnerable countries’ economies,
honouring commitments to support countries on
the front lines of the climate crisis and increasing
contributions to humanitarian operations, which are,
shamefully, just 15 per cent funded globally.
Civilians have suffered the deadly effects of armed
conflict for too long. It is time we live up to our promise
to protect them.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Spoljaric Egger.
Ms. Spoljaric Egger: For the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the issue of the
protection of civilians lies at the core of our mandate.
As we meet, countless civilians in conflicts around the
world are experiencing a living hell. At any minute,
the next missile can obliterate their homes, schools and
clinics and everyone in them. On any day, their loved
ones might be abused, raped, detained or tortured.
On any week, they might run out of food or medicine.
Everywhere I look, I see a rapidly deteriorating
humanitarian situation. In my short time as President
of the ICRC, I have visited conflict-affected countries
in Africa, Europe and the Near East. Entire regions are
trapped in cycles of conflict without an end in sight.
4/31

23/05/2023

The ICRC’s figures show that, over the past 20
years, the number of non-international armed conflicts
has more than tripled from less than 30 to more than
90. Many of those are protracted conflicts, bringing
ceaseless suffering that is compounded by climate
shocks, food insecurity and economic hardship.
Civilians are gravely unprotected because they suffer
a relentless accumulation of attacks, threats and
destruction, as well as political stalemates. When
conflicts are characterized by widespread destruction
and violations of international humanitarian law,
development and peace become an unachievable
ambition. In other words, the protection of civilians is a
precondition for peace, stability and recovery.
My calls to States today are urgent.
First, States must protect civilians and critical
infrastructure in urban areas. The widespread and
often indiscriminate destruction of homes and critical
infrastructure disproportionately raises the cost of war.
Across the places I visited in the past months, I saw how
the shock of losing one’s home is compounded by the
interruption or prolonged absence of essential services
such as water, electricity, health care and education.
As fighting envelops towns and cities, including in the
Sudan, Syria, Ukraine and Yemen, the ICRC is seeing
large-scale and compounding patterns of harm. We
need to break the pattern of violations, and that can be
done through strong political will and sustained action.
State and non-State parties must do more to
prevent, reduce and mitigate the damage that armed
conflict causes in urban centres. In adopting resolution
2573 (2021), more than two years ago, the Security
Council demanded parties to armed conflicts to do
more. I echo that call today. The ICRC urges all parties
engaged in urban warfare to ensure that the protection
of civilians is prioritized in urban settings; comply
fully with international humanitarian law, especially
the principles on distinction, proportionality and
precaution; refrain from the use of heavy explosive
weapons in populated areas and endorse and faithfully
implement the Political Declaration on Strengthening
the Protection of Civilians from the Humanitarian
Consequences Arising from the Use of Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas; and to ensure that the
protection of essential services encompasses the
infrastructure, people and consumables that keep
hospitals and water and power facilities functioning.
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Secondly, States must step up to prevent and mitigate
food insecurity in conflict-affected areas. During my
visit to the Horn of Africa earlier this year, I saw how
conflict and climate shocks are having a devastating
impact on already vulnerable communities. In Somalia,
more than 7 million people are in urgent need of food
and water. The combination of drought, the lack of
investment in climate adaptation in conflict zones and
the knock-on effects of the international armed conflict
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine is gravely
affecting people in conflicts around the world.
The ICRC therefore calls on States and other
actors to respect, and ensure respect for, international
humanitarian law, including the rules on the conduct of
hostilities, in order to reduce the risk of food insecurity
and famine, and to invest in practical solutions and
adaptation measures to mitigate the effects of climate
change in conflict-affected regions.
Thirdly, I call on States to enable neutral and
impartial humanitarian access. That means access
to civilians in need, especially those in besieged
communities; access to overcrowded detention facilities
in which we continue to see worrisome trends in relation
to ill-treatment and torture; and access to the estimated
175 million people who live in areas fully or partially
controlled by armed groups. That requires enabling a
humanitarian dialogue with non-State armed groups,
no matter where they are — for instance, through
the implementation of the humanitarian carveout for
sanctions regimes adopted by the Council in resolution
2664 (2022). That is critical for an organization like the
ICRC, which maintains a dialogue with more than 300
armed groups worldwide.
In today’s operating environment, misinformation
and disinformation also present a threat to populations
and hinder humanitarian operations. Misinformation
can fuel dangerous community divisions and
undermine community acceptance of humanitarian
organizations. We urge States and other actors to take
all necessary measures to prevent and mitigate the
impact of harmful information on the safety, dignity
and rights of civilians and to preserve the space for
neutral, impartial humanitarian action and to protect it
from political instrumentalization.
Finally, I must underscore that the protection of
civilians means protection for all. There is no chance
of enduring stability or security until international
humanitarian law is upheld for all genders. The ICRC

S/PV.9327

urges States to ensure that all persons, regardless
of their gender, are protected in conflict and equally
benefit from humanitarian assistance; ensure that the
clear prohibition of sexual violence under international
humanitarian law be integrated into national laws,
military doctrine and training; and to commit to
applying a gender perspective into the application and
interpretation of international humanitarian law.
The ICRC continues to insist on the preventive and
protective effects of international humanitarian law.
Compliance with the law protects civilians. It prevents
violations and abuses. It reduces the cost of war, while
maintaining a pathway to ceasefire agreements and
eventually to lasting peace, functioning economies
and a healthy natural environment. I call on all States
to uphold the Geneva Conventions, including through
their influence over others. In times of compounding
global trends and geopolitical tensions, compliance
with international humanitarian law must become a
political priority. I want to thank you, Mr. President,
as well as the Secretary-General, for your strong and
unwavering support to the ICRC.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Spoljaric Egger for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mounkaïla.
Ms. Mounkaïla (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to thank the Secretary-General and the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross for their remarks, and Switzerland for inviting me
to brief the Security Council today as it considers the
very urgent issue of conflict and hunger in the world.
I am speaking as a woman from the Niger, a country
located in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel.
Before 2015, Diffa, one of the eight regions of
the Lake Chad basin affected by the Boko Haram
conflict, was our leading area for pepper cultivation
and marketing, and I was one of the leaders of the
organizations that supported women in rural areas
in processing agricultural and seasonal products. In
addition to its legendary peppers, Diffa is also the
Niger’s leading oil-producing region. The region
was not developed. There were challenges, but we
had the most important thing, the foundation of all
development — our security.
Since 2015, the entire Lake Chad basin region has
been facing a humanitarian crisis as a result of the attacks
perpetrated by Boko Haram and other armed groups.

23-145445/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In just two years, from 2020 to 2022, an additional
7 million people have been identified as being in need
of humanitarian assistance and protection, bringing the
total number in need of urgent humanitarian assistance
in the seven countries of the Lake Chad basin and the
Group of Five for the Sahel to nearly 34 million. In
addition to the armed conflicts that are undermining
people’s livelihoods, the climate crisis is escalating. In
2022, heavy rains and flooding had an enormous impact
on human lives, property, farmland and livestock in the
Lake Chad basin, affecting 5.5 million people, killing
nearly 1,000 and putting 1 million hectares under
water, 70 per cent of which was agricultural land. That
lost productivity could have fed 5 million people. In
the Lake Chad basin, the humanitarian crisis, whether
climate- or security-related, has a female face — more
than 80 per cent of the people living in poverty are
women and children. Fighting among armed groups and
various law-enforcement bodies has left thousands of
schools and hundreds of health facilities closed, while
opportunities for decent employment and livelihoods
are increasingly scarce.
In the light of that bleak picture, women are
struggling day and night to give hope to their families.
They make sacrifices so that their children do not go
to bed hungry and can stay in school, and in order to
care for their loved ones and their communities more
generally. They demonstrate exceptional courage and
resilience every day. Others, like me, have organized
and mobilized to try to break these vicious cycles. I
am a founding member and the current President of
the Network of Women’s Organizations of the Lake
Chad Basin. But the women’s movement, like other
areas on the development, peace and humanitarian
fronts, remains poorly resourced and is unlikely to
be considered when planning solutions. Women are
the primary victims and at the same time the first to
provide solutions in every crisis situation.
In 2021, women-led organizations from four Lake
Chad basin countries that were grappling with the
devastation caused by Boko Haram — Chad, Cameroon,
the Niger and Nigeria — organized the Network to
address the challenges we were all facing. Our belief
that the voices of women and girls must be heard and
taken into account united us and gave us the courage
to chart our own path through prevention, mediation
and peacebuilding. That experience could be leveraged
to address the current influx of Sudanese refugees
and build peace. As an African woman, I would like
6/31

23/05/2023

to address the Security Council today with a collective
message from my sisters across the Lake Chad basin
that I hope will define the Security Council’s approach
to ending conflict and hunger. On their behalf and my
own, I offer the following five-point message.
First, the Security Council should encourage
the donor community to allocate more funding to
rebuilding gender-sensitive livelihoods such as
sustainable agriculture, in which women play a central
role, reviving economic opportunities and access to
financial services so that women survivors of violence,
including sexual violence, can have a chance to rebuild
their own lives and communities. Local organizations
and communities must be more genuinely empowered
to respond to multiple crises.
Secondly, our communities are very fragile, with
the result that there is very little difference between
host communities, internally displaced persons and
refugees in terms of fragility. We should promote only
inclusive responses and sustainable solutions based
on local responses that draw on the know-how of
communities, in particular women.
Thirdly, in line with the 10 resolutions on women
and peace and security that the Council has adopted and
the related joint commitments that many representatives
around this table have signed, I urge the Council to
emphasize the full, equal and meaningful participation
and leadership of women and girls in humanitarian
responses, as well as community dialogues,
peacebuilding and peace negotiation processes at
every level. Women have a key role to play in those
processes. Sustainable peace is not possible without
them. And in doing so, the Council will also help to
build future women leaders. Mediation by women and
girls in the Lake Chad basin has greatly contributed to
the restoration and stabilization of the region.
Fourthly, I would like to revisit the issue of
climate change. The Council and countries that are
major contributors of greenhouse gases have to take
responsibility for the extent of the climate effects that
regions such as mine are experiencing. I ask the Council
to support our calls for climate-change adaptation
programmes in the agricultural sector, in which more
than 80 per cent of women in my country are involved,
not only to ensure our agricultural security but also
to support our transition to a green economy that is
sustainable, respectful of the environment and that
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

recognizes the role of women, so that our young people
today and our generations to come can live in dignity.
Lastly, I am asking the Council to ensure that any
of its decisions or actions, including any interventions
that it requests and any reports it commissions,
include a robust and intersectoral gender analysis,
with data specifying sex, age, disabilities and other
characteristics as necessary in the context, in particular
when implementing resolution 2417 (2018). The Council
should insist on gender analyses of conflicts so that it
can address the rights and needs of women and girls,
who are always the worst affected. That will ensure
that commitments undertaken based on the women and
peace and security agenda are in line with the Council’s
responsibility to end conflict and hunger.
I should not conclude without asking representatives
to spare a thought for the communities, the displaced
women and young people and the refugees who are
living in conditions that we can hardly comprehend.
All the women of my country and my region are
standing alongside me before the Council today. I ask
the members of the Council to help us to educate our
daughters, to be protected, organized, funded and
represented, and to participate equitably in all areas of
society, including in humanitarian and conflict-related
coordination and decision-making structures. By doing
that, they will build lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Mounkaïla for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Swiss Confederation.
First of all, I thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and
Ms. Aïchatou Mounkaïla for their remarks.
As we have just heard, armed conflicts are all
different from one another, but they all have one thing in
common, one common denominator — the suffering of
civilians. That is now the case, for example, in Ukraine.
So far this year, as the Secretary-General underscored
in his report (S/2023/345), half of the civilians killed in
conflict zones throughout the world were in Ukraine.
Their deaths are unacceptable.
The lives of civilians are in constant danger. In
conflict zones, it is difficult for them to access food,
health care, clean water and other essential services.
Civilians’ lack of access to essential goods and services

S/PV.9327

during armed conflict costs more lives in the short
and medium term than the direct impact of hostilities.
And it is the most vulnerable groups, such as children,
people with disabilities and the elderly, who bear the
brunt of that.
In that context, respect for international
humanitarian law is a priority for all of us around
this table. As the depositary State of the Geneva
Conventions and headquarters of the ICRC, we feel all
the more bound by this humanitarian imperative.
The work that the ICRC does to protect civilians
is of immeasurable value. We are therefore concerned
about the recent accusations concerning the ICRC’s
impartiality. Ms. Mounkaïla’s account is a reminder of
the key role played by civil society and of the need to
include civil society stakeholders in our deliberations
and actions.
Behind the statistics are the lives of families and
individual human beings. In preparation for today’s
debate, I visited several regions directly affected by
problems and instability. For example, I visited Mueda
and Pemba, in northern Mozambique, with President
Nyusi in order to understand the situation and see
the population live in a context that poses various
risks. I note that Mozambique has just announced the
disarmament and demobilization of the last zone and
rebel military base, in the centre of the country. I take
this opportunity to thank President Nyusi and the head
of the Resistência Nacional Moçambicana, Ossufo
Momade, for their peacebuilding efforts in Mozambique.
They showed the world that the most powerful weapon
for achieving peace is always dialogue.
Like the Special Representative, I also visited
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. I went to
Goma and Bukavu, where I met with civilians who had
witnessed the murder of a member of their family and
whose property had been looted. I met with women
who, in a situation of great vulnerability, had been
raped. Despite their difficult ordeals, all the people I
met were defiant and optimistic about the future.
But we cannot solely rely on the resilience of people.
International humanitarian law imposes clear and
unambiguous obligations on all parties to conflicts and
on us all, the States parties to the Geneva Conventions.
Conflicts are the main drivers of hunger.
They exacerbate food insecurity, as the SecretaryGeneral aptly detailed in his report. More and more

23-145447/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

people — some 260 million — are facing extreme
hunger. That is 30 times the population of New York
City. Two thirds live in conflict zones, such as the
Democratic Republic of the Congo or the Sudan or in
areas rife with violence, such as Haiti, with confirmed
and direct consequences — crops destroyed, lands
made barren, grain stores razed and markets closed
down. But there are also indirect consequences. For
example, the water supply can be threatened, the lack
of electricity or energy jeopardizes food stores, and
the displacement of people results in the abandonment
of crops.
We are currently witnessing how Russia’s military
aggression against Ukraine is driving up prices
dramatically around the world. In that connection,
Switzerland commends all those who enabled the
recent extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative. We
welcome the good offices of the Secretary-General and
stand ready to offer our full support, including in our
capacity as a host State.
The Security Council has recognized the link
between conflict and food insecurity, and it has
condemned unlawful attacks that deprive civilians
of supplies that are essential to their survival. In that
connection, I mention resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573
(2021). To uphold our obligations under international
humanitarian law, in addition to those resolutions,
we have robust strong legal, political and operational
instruments to protect civilians from conflict-related
food insecurity. We must now all do a better job of
implementing them in the current situations that we
all know.
To that end, I would like to propose five lines
of action.
First, of course, all parties to conflicts must stop
carrying out unlawful attacks and misusing resources
that are essential to the survival of civilians. Human
rights are enforceable and must be inviolable, even in
conflict situations. In that regard, one measure proposed
by the Secretary-General is to reduce the humanitarian
consequences of the use of explosive weapons in densely
populated areas. Last year, Switzerland signed the
Political Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of
Civilians from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising
from the Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas,
and I call on other States to do the same.
Secondly, full, prompt, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all persons in need must always
8/31

23/05/2023

be ensured In that regard, I thank all humanitarian
organizations working to save lives.
Thirdly, all parties to a conflict who use the
starvation of civilians as a method of warfare must be
held directly responsible. Starving civilians is a war
crime — nothing more, nothing less.
Fourthly, under the women and peace and security
agenda, women must participate fully, meaningfully
and safely at all levels of decision-making and in all
processes aimed at protecting civilians.
Fifthly, United Nations peace operations play a
key role in protecting civilians, and it is essential that
we strive to maintain that level of protection even
when those operations are in a transitional phase. I
am alluding here to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, which I visited in Goma last month and is
operating in a very difficult situation.
In conclusion, the protection of civilians is an urgent
matter, and it is imperative that we ensure respect for
international humanitarian law. We must work together
to ensure the protection of civilians — not only on
paper, but in practice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the President of Mozambique.
President Nyusi (spoke in Portuguese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): May I begin
by congratulating my dear friend, His Excellency
Mr. Alain Berset for the Swiss presidency of the
Security Council during this month of May.
The suggested theme for today’s debate, ensuring
the security and dignity of civilians in conflict, with
a focus on addressing food insecurity and protecting
essential services, is of the utmost importance in
promoting international peace and security.
The sensitivity of this matter, brought by the
Swiss Confederation for consideration in this organ
today, touches the hearts of many people, including the
people of Mozambique, who at this very moment are
experiencing that reality.
Ensuring security, respect for human rights and
human dignity are the foundations of international
humanitarian law, deeply rooted in the 1949 Geneva
Convention, its Protocols Additional and the Universal
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Declaration of Human Rights. We are committed to
that premise. Yesterday in Geneva we reaffirmed that
commitment at a meeting with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Volker Türk.
We commend the Swiss Confederation for its
historic role in the establishment of a legal and
institutional framework of international reference
to relieve human suffering in conflict situations and
other humanitarian crises, especially through the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
The ICRC is present in Mozambique. It is one of the
most important humanitarian assistance organizations
in different types of crises and strictly adheres
to the principles of humanism and impartiality in
its operations.
In the just struggle for Mozambique’s
national independence; the war of aggression and
destabilization waged by the then racist regimes of
Rhodesia and apartheid South Africa, which claimed
more than 1 million human lives and caused about
5 million refugees and internally displaced persons;
the subsequent military and political tensions which
alone created defenceless civilians; and the recurring
cyclones and droughts, there has always been a need
for the protection of civilians with a focus on food
security and the protection of goods and essential
services. During those difficult moments experienced
by Mozambican victims of violence resulting from
conflicts, food security for survival was guaranteed
by engaging the people themselves in food production
under extremely challenging conditions.
In March, during our presidency of the Security
Council, we had the opportunity to explain in depth
the process of dialogue for peace (see S/PV.9299),
the final phase of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, which, as President Alain Berset has
rightly pointed out, might be completed in June with
the closure of the last camp of the Resistência Nacional
Moçambicana (RENAMO). We therefore commend
RENAMO and the leadership of RENAMO.
In that regard, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, through his Personal Envoy for Mozambique,
who has provided a great deal of support, which
will be very important, because we are moving to
a phase of paying pensions. I had said that, as a way
of striking a balance in terms of the sustainability of
peace in Mozambique, my Government has decided
to pay pensions for former combatants and, since that

S/PV.9327

is a new process, the team working on that process
should be maintained for some time to ensure that it
is implemented.
Therefore, our remarks today will be focused on
Mozambique’s efforts to protect civilians with a view to
ensuring food security and providing essential services
in the context of combating terrorism.
Since October 2017, terrorist groups have carried
out armed attacks in Cabo Delgado province, which
have caused the death of more than 2,000 civilians, the
injury of many people and much psychological trauma,
the separation of families, kidnappings and violence
against women and children.
As in other parts of Africa and the world, in
Mozambique, terrorists act outside the principles of
international humanitarian law, without respect for life
or human dignity. In their modus operandi, terrorists
seek to inflict the greatest possible suffering on their
victims to increase terror and fear within the population.
In addition to forcing a massive displacement of people,
terrorist groups settle in areas of higher agricultural
and fishing production, depriving populations of access
to indispensable resources and undermining their
food security.
For that reason, the main concern of our
Government and our defence and security forces has
been the protection of the life and dignity of civilians,
including the social reintegration of those terrorists
captured or who flee from their ranks. At the moment,
it is estimated that, of the total of 800,000, about
300,000 have already returned to their places of origin
owing to the improvement of the security situation in
recent months.
In February, President Alain Berset visited
Mozambique, as was rightly pointed out, and had the
opportunity to travel to Mueda district, where the
headquarters of the military command for counterterrorism is deployed. In Cabo Delgado province,
President Alain Berset, owing to his interest in
defending civilians in conflict, was able to witness
first-hand our efforts to protect civilians and provide
essential services. He spoke with internally displaced
persons undergoing psychosocial rehabilitation
and attending empowerment programmes, mostly
for women. Mozambicans are grateful for the
encouragement and solidarity expressed during his
interaction with civilians.

23-145449/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Actions to protect civilians in my country are
the subject of open, shared and concerted debate
through a multisectoral commission comprising
members of the Government and United Nations
agencies. Those are the International Organization for
Migration, the World Food Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, as well as the International Committee of
the Red Cross and other national and international
non-governmental organizations.
The Mozambique Defence Armed Forces and
security forces, in their turn, and those supporting us
in the fight against terrorism, namely, Rwanda and
the Southern African Development Community, have
prioritized the protection of and socialization with
civilian populations through joint participation in
productive and reconstruction activities, donations,
cultural and sports activities, among other activities,
and through compliance with the rules of international
humanitarian law. We therefore see that people are
socializing and soldiers are welcomed in the community,
and they participate together in social activities.
In that process, in addition to armed combat
of terrorist acts, we have concomitantly adopted a
multidimensional approach, taking into account several
key dimensions in the resilient protection of civilians in
conflict situations, namely, socioeconomic development
programmes that are focusing more on the youth, as well
as international cooperation efforts. The megaprojects
that are operating those projects are also contributing by
training young people and women for self-employment.
There are also humanitarian assistance programmes
and capacity-building of the Mozambique Defence
Armed Forces and security forces for sustainable
protection of the population and defence of national
territorial integrity, even at a time when the countries
that support us withdrew from our country. Therefore,
in Cabo Delgado province, we have established more
than 50 resettlement centres to accommodate internally
displaced civilians who cannot be accommodated in
the households of members of their families. Upon
arrival at the resettlement centre, newcomers undergo
a screening process to assess their health situation and
ensure adequate assistance as needed.
In order to mitigate food insecurity, in addition
to reviving agriculture, we have set for ourselves,
as a Government and as a country, the challenge of
implementing a programme of rebuilding infrastructure
destroyed or vandalized by terrorists in Cabo Delgado
10/31

23/05/2023

and the replacement of essential public services, such
as health facilities, schools, water supply systems,
communication and energy, among other infrastructure.
Indeed, we have been making inputs available for
agricultural production and fisheries to ensure food
self-sufficiency and the ability to generate one’s own
income. The language we have used is that we prefer to
give a fishing hook to make it possible to fish forever,
rather than giving a fish that has already been caught.
In so doing, we are ensuring greater sustainability for
those families.
We would therefore like to appeal for international
support, given the scale of the destruction imposed
and the suffering currently experienced by the
affected civilian populations in the northern region of
Cabo Delgado
As a non-permanent member of the Security
Council, Mozambique reaffirms its commitment
to continue contributing to the strengthening of
international peace and security. We call on the
Security Council to continue with efforts to achieve
a cessation of hostilities in all conflicts throughout
the world that continue to claim human lives, placing
thousands of innocent civilians in a perpetual situation
of extreme vulnerability.
No one would be right if he or she could not prevent
the loss of human life. That is extremely important.
Therefore, this week, we shall continue our engagements
with all stakeholders of the conflict in Maputo and next
month as well at the international level because we
know that it is so painful when someone dies and later
excuses are made for those conflicts.
Mozambique’s mandate in this body is also founded
on the nexus between peace and the climate. For this
reason, we urge all States to channel all scientific,
technological, human and financial resources to
counter all types of threats that affect populations,
such as human-caused wars, pandemics, hunger and
the devastating impact of natural disasters arising from
climate change.
I conclude by once again commending the Swiss
Confederation in particular, President Alain Berset,
for this opportunity to share experiences on the farreaching topic that is the protection of civilians in
conflict situations, with a focus on food security and
essential services.
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.9327

The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
President of Malta.

continue to heighten tensions and exacerbate an already
perilous situation.

President Vella (Malta): Let me begin by
expressing my gratitude to the Swiss presidency of
the Security Council for convening today’s meeting
on the protection of civilians and extend my thanks
to the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. António
Guterres, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, and all of
the other previous speakers for their inspiring briefings
this morning.

The war in Ukraine continues to severely affect the
civilian population both in Ukraine and beyond and is
compounding already-existing global food insecurity.
We are now witnessing a renewed period of violence
in the country that will yield yet more deaths and
destruction on an industrial scale.

The lives of millions of civilians worldwide
continue to be impaired by a multitude of crises,
including conflict-induced hunger, targeted violence,
displacement and climate change. From the Central
African Republic to Afghanistan, from Myanmar
to Ethiopia, the correlation between conflict and
hunger is evident. Millions are battling crisis levels of
hunger resulting from the scourge of war and armed
conflict, which is a grim reality that the Security
Council acknowledged when it unanimously adopted
resolution 2417 (2018).
Since 15 April, more than 700,000 people have fled
the Sudan in fear. The direct cause of fear is the use
of explosive weapons in populated areas. People also
fear that hospitals are being deliberately targeted in
conflict zones, and they also fear being denied access
to desperately needed humanitarian assistance.
In Haiti, extreme levels of gang violence have
worsened existing underlying crises, with 600 people
killed in Port-au-Prince last month alone. Increasing
numbers of women and children have become victims
of homicide, sexual and gender-based violence
and kidnappings.
In Syria today, protracted conflict has reduced the
basic and essential infrastructure — which populations
rely on to survive — to rubble. The conflict has pushed
children out of school and into early forced marriages.
Cholera is widespread. Clean water sources have
been defiled, agricultural land contaminated, and the
electricity supply cut.
The number of civilian deaths, including those
of women and children, in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territories including Gaza, remains
unacceptable. The indiscriminate firing of rockets
and the killing of civilians are also unacceptable.
Demolitions, evictions and other violent incidents

In all of those crises and complex humanitarian
emergences, the protection of civilians and sustained
humanitarian access and support must be safeguarded
by the Security Council. Arbitrary, discriminatory
and bureaucratic impediments that hinder the rapid
delivery of vital aid are unacceptable, since, without
timely humanitarian access, there can be no meaningful
humanitarian response. In that regard, given that
sanctions, unless targeted, may have adverse and
unintended humanitarian consequences, directly or
indirectly, on innocent civilian populations, we welcome
the recent adoption of resolution 2664 (2022), which
provides for a humanitarian exemption for all United
Nations sanctions. Monitoring to ensure civilians do
not inadvertently pay the price by suffering unintended
consequences for the actions of the sanctioned, is our
collective responsibility.
The restrictions on Afghan women’s mobility and
from working and giving their services to the United
Nations and non-governmental organizations have
severely affected humanitarian operations across the
country. Discriminatory requirements placed on female
Yemeni aid workers have also delayed and suspended
critical missions and programmes. We must ensure
that throughout these times of unspeakable, irrational
horror, the fundamental respect for human rights and
human dignity remains.
Malta reiterates that in all of these crisis settings
around the globe, civilians are not and should never
be a target. The humanitarian workers, helpers and
volunteers who aid them are not a target. Objects
and services that are indispensable to the survival of
civilian populations are not and should not be a target.
These distinctions are clear. Never can it be said that
we did not know.
Malta welcomes the news of an agreement reached
by the parties to renew the Black Sea Grain Initiative
for a period of another two months, and I thank the
Secretary-General for his dedicated efforts in this
regard. Unfortunately, we have already witnessed the

23-1454411/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

impact caused by the disruption of agricultural exports
from this region on vulnerable markets far away in the
Horn of Africa and the Levant. It is crucial that this
lifeline is guaranteed and remains in place as long
as it is intended and needed. The world should not
be blackmailed by hunger. Hunger should never be
brandished as a weapon in any conflict.
Looking to the future, I would like to make the
three following points. First, the Security Council must
take seriously its obligations to ensure accountability
for those who have violated international law, and in
particular, those who have ordered or participated in
the destruction, or prevented the functionality of,
civilian infrastructure that is critical for the production
and availability of food. White notes, as detailed in
resolution 2417 (2018), must be issued in a swift manner
for them to be acted upon at the Security Council. We
must stop conflict-induced hunger before it becomes
too late.
Secondly, the United Nations can work more closely
with warring parties, particularly if they are States, to
ensure the adequate deconfliction of infrastructure, be
it products or services, which is indispensable to the
survival of the civilian population. Such deconfliction
programmes can act as an additional layer of protection.
However, they must not be treated as a substitute for
the parties’ adherence and due diligence to their own
obligations under international law.
Thirdly, it is not enough to rely solely on emergency
humanitarian food assistance in the crises of our
times. We know that early, time-sensitive support
and interventions with farmers, fishers, herders
and foresters, whose basic means of survival have
been affected by conflict or climate, have enormous
positive impacts on the availability of nutrition in such
emergencies. We must seek to scale up both emergency
food assistance and protect agricultural production in
emergencies for the maximum benefit of populations.
Finally, we must increase funding for humanitarian
responses. The world’s military expenditure is at an alltime high of $2.24 trillion in 2022, while the United
Nations humanitarian response plans, which require
$51 billion for 2023, are struggling to be funded. That
is a poor reflection of our global multilateral system
and of the values we are meant to uphold. Besides, we
must avoid seeing arms and ammunition continuously
and regularly arriving in conflict zones, while civilians
in those zones are threatened by hunger, if not death,
12/31

23/05/2023

because humanitarian convoys cannot reach them. The
pain, cries and laments of so many men, women and
children must be heard and heeded. The world relies on
the work and leadership of the Council to protect the
most vulnerable from harm, suffering, or worse.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I would like to thank
Switzerland and you, Sir, for organizing this year’s
debate on the protection of civilians. I am very pleased
to take part in this discussion under your presidency. I
would like to thank the Secretary-General, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
civil society representative for their insightful remarks.
At the outset, let me express that Brazil associates
itself with the statement to be delivered by the State
of Kuwait on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict.
The choice of topic of this year’s debate could
not be timelier. Unfortunately, after more than 150
years of progress in the development of international
humanitarian law, belligerents have not consistently
prioritized efforts to reduce harm to civilians and
safeguard essential civil infrastructure during conflicts.
The Secretary-General’s 2022 report on the protection
of civilians (S/2022/381) provides harrowing examples
of the need for parties to conflicts to step up efforts to
protect civilians.
After lessons painfully learned in places such as
the Balkans and Rwanda, the Security Council finally
included the protection of civilians on its agenda in
1999. Since then, it has adopted a number of documents
that join the robust framework provided by international
humanitarian law to protect civilians. Despite the
existence of that vast body of norms, civilians remain
largely vulnerable in contexts of war, and their lives
have not been spared in most instances — indeed, the
loss of one civilian life is one too many. The contexts
may change, but the actions remain largely the same: the
indiscriminate use of explosive weapons in urban and
other densely populated areas; attacks against civilian
infrastructure, schools and medical facilities; the
disruption of agriculture and trade; hostilities against
medical and humanitarian personnel; conflict-related
sexual violence; and increased vulnerabilities faced
by women, children, refugees, internally displaced
persons and persons with disabilities.
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

This month marks the fifth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), which acknowledged
the vicious cycle of armed conflict and food insecurity.
Its adoption was only the starting point — much more
needs to be done. The increase in food and nutrition
insecurity in the world is a multi-factor issue, with
conflict being one of its main causes. Today a vast
majority of the world’s population experiencing
acute hunger is located in conflict areas. Conflicts,
especially protracted ones, contribute to long-term food
insecurity. They erode social and economic networks,
reduce resilience and disrupt markets, supply chains and
infrastructure. They also lead to diminished production
and yields, often causing barriers to the achievement
of three of the main pillars of food security: stability,
availability and access. Therefore, we must translate
the provisions of the resolution into meaningful action.
Among the many important recommendations
listed in the Secretary-General’s report, I would like to
highlight the need to find political solutions to conflicts,
to support the economies of vulnerable countries and to
safeguard livelihoods. Political solutions to conflicts
are one of the raisons d’être of this organ and a
necessary tool to address the interplay between armed
conflict and food insecurity. Even when the prospects
of peace are not yet on the horizon, practical measures
to ensure access to food supplies and the delivery of
humanitarian assistance are essential to save lives.
Many of the conflict-affected countries were
previously net food importers. The aggravation of
hostilities deepens even further their already vulnerable
situations. The truce and subsequent facilitation of
exports to Yemen, supported by the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen, or
the opening of new humanitarian corridors in Syria, are
powerful examples of how political solutions can yield
significant benefits for the food security — and even
the survival — of affected populations. We hope that
those initiatives will also play a part in rebuilding trust
among parties and paving the path for peace.
It is also crucial to acknowledge that the delivery
of humanitarian aid through in-kind food transfers
can potentially harm countries that still have some
production capability. We know that in-kind food
assistance to countries that still have functioning
markets can distort prices and displace local producers.
When feasible, providing aid through cash transfers
empowers people to address their essential needs and
helps local producers to thrive.

S/PV.9327

We cannot forget that displacement caused by
conflicts often forces people to leave behind their land
and livelihoods. This puts them in a very vulnerable
situation and exposes them to various forms of food
insecurity. The implementation of resilience measures
is even more crucial in times of conflict. We recognize
the various initiatives that the Rome-based agencies,
in partnership with other United Nations agencies and
international organizations, are putting in place in
countries facing armed conflicts.
In 2022, the conflict in Ukraine sent food and
energy prices soaring. Although food prices are back
in line with levels similar to those before the conflict
began, the scourge of inflation, which is especially
harmful to the poor and needy, still hovers over the
world. Developing countries have dramatically suffered
the repercussions of the conflict in Ukraine owing to
their structural vulnerabilities to fluctuations in the
prices of food and agricultural inputs. The renewal
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative is a key step to limit
uncertainties surrounding the global supply of grains
and fertilizers.
As the Secretary-General acknowledges in his
report (S/2023/345), conflict is a primary driver
of acute food insecurity, but it is not the only one.
Conflicts, coupled with inflation, trade bottlenecks
and other macroeconomic challenges affect access to
food supplies, particularly in developing countries.
Therefore, it is imperative to pursue responses to food
insecurity in all relevant forums.
Unilateral coercive measures, as well as marketdistorting subsidies and other forms of protectionism,
hamper the ability of developing countries to build
resilient agrifood systems and to participate fully
in international markets. Without addressing such
pervasive practices, they will continue to bear the brunt
of global inequities. In that regard, we welcome the
adoption of resolution 2664 (2022) in December 2022.
It will play an important role in ensuring the delivery
of impartial humanitarian assistance, including food
and medical supplies, to the millions of civilians who
have the misfortune of living under sanctions regimes.
Domestic implementation of the resolutions will be
crucial for its effectiveness.
As one of the largest food suppliers in the world,
Brazil has a significant interest in ensuring food
security, both domestically and as a foreign policy goal.
Brazil will remain a reliable international supplier to

23-1454413/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

help complement local production efforts and ensure
adequate nutrition in an accessible manner. The
Brazilian Constitution recognizes the human right to
adequate food, reflecting the country’s commitment
to addressing food insecurity. President Lula da Silva
himself is a notable advocate for the eradication of
poverty and hunger, both within Brazil and beyond
its borders.
We are also giving due attention to the subject in
our current tenure as an elected member of the Council.
We are proud to be, together with Switzerland, the focal
point for food security and conflict in this organ. As we
know, eradicating hunger is of paramount importance for
the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In
the light of the significant advancements in agricultural
production technology, hunger is entirely preventable
and, more important, unacceptable. Societies that are
able to feed their populations and offer them economic
opportunities are more resilient and less vulnerable
to conflict. Reaching that goal is feasible. It is also a
moral imperative for all of us.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister of Climate Change and Environment of the
United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Almheiri (United Arab Emirates): I thank our
briefers for their insightful remarks today, and I thank
the Swiss presidency for convening this important
open debate.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2023/345) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. It is a vital resource for
understanding the trends across more than 100 armed
conflicts that continue worldwide. In 2022, more
than a quarter of a billion people faced acute hunger
in 58 countries and territories, many of which were
in armed conflict. Meanwhile, the effects of climate
change and escalating prices for food and fuel have
compounded the urgent needs of civilians. Basic
services are essential to the survival, security and
dignity of civilians. In resolutions 2417 (2018) and 2573
(2021), the Security Council makes clear demands for
parties to conflict to implement their obligations under
international humanitarian law. Yet the briefers today
rightfully highlighted a matter that is regrettably all too
familiar. A key reason that civilians continue to suffer
from conflict-induced food insecurity is the gap in the
implementation of clearly stated rules. That is why it
14/31

23/05/2023

is so important that we collectively recommit today to
upholding international humanitarian law.
The United Arab Emirates would like to emphasize
three points today.
First, in order to address food insecurity, we must
rise to meeting the existential challenge of our time,
which is climate change. As a risk multiplier, the
adverse effects of climate change, such as heavy floods
and acute droughts, are already exacerbating food
insecurity. Science tells us that, with a business-as-usual
approach, natural disasters will occur more frequently
and with greater intensity. They risk affecting not
just crops but also the infrastructure essential to food
systems, in addition to their dire impact on human life.
In conflict situations, the capacity of fragile States to
recover from such shocks is far lower. And the cost of
failing to recognize and prepare for the risks associated
with climate change is too great to bear. At the twentyeighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, which will
be hosted in the United Arab Emirates later this year,
both food and water systems, as well as how climate
change impacts the ability of nations to recover from
disasters, will be high on the agenda.
Secondly, whatever their motives, sanctions cannot
be allowed to inadvertently exacerbate food insecurity
in situations of armed conflict. That includes the flow
of food and agricultural inputs and the maintenance
of essential services. Resolution 2664 (2022) was a
landmark moment in establishing a carveout from
United Nations sanctions to preserve the provision
of humanitarian assistance and basic human needs.
We call on all Member States to fully implement the
provisions of the resolution and encourage them to
make similar efforts to ensure that national sanctions do
not negatively affect the essential needs of vulnerable
civilians. They include the operation, maintenance and
repair of essential civilian infrastructure, such as water,
electricity and food facilities.
Thirdly, national humanitarian organizations
and their women staff must be further supported.
Humanitarian aid succeeds in its goal when deployed
in a timely and targeted manner. By their very nature,
conflict zones are volatile environments where
humanitarian work is challenging. The safety of aid
workers and civilians’ access to humanitarian aid
must be guaranteed by parties to the conflict. That is
particularly true about women, who form a significant
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

part of humanitarian organizations and also have a
vital role to play in engaging with the community
meaningfully. The current situation in the Sudan is
the most recent example of such challenges. Fighting
in urban areas has prevented international aid actors
from reaching civilians, and most aid is now provided
by national actors. Those organizations provide
life-saving medical assistance and emergency shelter
and are critical to the provision of essential services
and reducing food insecurity. It is critical to support
national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, among
other agencies, that are embedded in the communities
they support. If it is gender-responsive, the delivery
of humanitarian aid will reach a wider audience and
alleviate suffering. We call on all actors to ensure
that women can do their work unhindered. That is
why last month we came together (see S/PV.9314)
and underlined our demand for full, rapid, safe and
unhindered access for humanitarian actors, both men
and women, in Afghanistan. The United Arab Emirates
remains committed to supporting the vital work done
by Afghan women aid workers.
The international community must step up its
response. Our actions must include both supporting
humanitarian efforts and protecting essential
life-sustaining services. Only then will we meet our
collective responsibility and see more effective action
for the protection of civilians caught in the crossfire
of conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister of the Interior of Ghana.
Mr. Dery (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
you personally, Mr. President, for Switzerland’s
choice of the topic for this open debate and for your
able leadership of the Security Council’s proceedings
today. I convey the warm regards of President Nana
Addo Dankwa Akufo-Addo, who is unable to be here
in person today owing to pressing matters of State. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his statement and
note with appreciation the additional briefings by the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the civil society representative.
The need to maintain food security and preserve
access for civilian populations to essential services
is fundamental to the stability and well-being of any
society. In normal times, that objective is difficult to
achieve for many States but, in violent situations, it can
become an almost impossible task for any State. In that

S/PV.9327

regard, we continue to emphasize the need to prioritize
the global actions that preserve peace, prevent conflicts
and trigger the early deployment of pacific means for
the resolution of disputes before they lead to violence
between or within States. Indeed, as noted in the
concept note, the World Food Programme and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
reported in 2020 that,
“70 per cent of the world’s population experiencing
acute hunger is in conflict-affected areas.”
(S/2023/307, p. 2)
That grim reality is affirmed by the Global Report
on Food Crises 2023, which outlines the scale and
dimension of the problem of conflicts causing hunger,
particularly in African countries affected by conflicts.
For many such persons, the right to food, which is
acknowledged under the 1948 Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and expressed in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, is
an illusion, as their capacity to have physical, social
and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious
food is severely impaired.
As we reflect on more than five years of the
implementation of resolution 2417 (2018) and the
important contribution it has made in establishing
the interlinkages between conflict and hunger, as
well as the need for global respect for norms relating
to a population’s right to food, Ghana believes that
the most important task before us is breaking those
destructive links, even in the midst of ongoing conflict,
and ensuring that food systems promote peace and its
associated positive effects on the supply of safe and
nutritious food to civilians. In that regard, we continue
to urge the international community to implement
a series of emergency measures and simultaneously
pursue long-term development investments to break the
vicious circle of hunger and conflict. More specifically,
we would like to share some priority areas of global
action with respect to global emergency measures.
As a first measure, we must act with urgency, and
at scale, to respond to the acute food insecurity and
nutrition needs of the millions of vulnerable people
in conflict situations around the world, especially
in Africa, which is the hardest hit. The vulnerable
populations in places such as Burkina Faso, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mali, the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia
and Haiti can no longer wait until there is a perfect

23-1454415/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2023

outcome among all the parties to their conflicts. Amid
the prevailing challenges, we must press on to remove
barriers obstructing food systems, particularly humanmade obstacles, and deliver assistance where it is
most needed.

African States’ Regional Food Security Reserve; and
fourthly, the effective and full implementation of the
$1.5 billion African Emergency Food Production Plan
facility of the African Development Bank to boost food
security, nutrition and resilience on the continent.

Next, we encourage the strong deployment of
diplomatic, political, legal and humanitarian tools to
reverse the rapid and dramatic deterioration in food
security observed in conflict-affected settings and
urge the international community to make unified
calls demanding that parties to conflict comply with
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Such demands, where necessary,
must also specifically request the parties to refrain
from targeting food systems and other livelihood
support infrastructure.

Secondly, support for the accelerated and full
implementation of the African Continental Free
Trade Area is critical in averting food supply chain
disruptions on the African continent, especially for
regions that may be experiencing drought conditions
and the impact of climate-change-induced situations
that could aggravate conflict triggers.

As a third measure, we urge the strengthening of
prepositioned assets, including global humanitarian
hubs such as the International Humanitarian City in
Dubai and regional humanitarian hubs such as the
one in Accra, to be able to interconnect food stocks
quickly and effectively with humanitarian needs. The
international humanitarian community must also deepen
its national and regional coordination mechanisms for
programming and responding to humanitarian crises
and work to align its interventions with national and
regional response plans. In addition, major donors must
cooperate to shift funds out of separate silos to enable
integrative work, in a manner that does not prioritize
food distribution to vulnerable communities over the
sustainable approach of helping them to reconstruct
their food systems.
As we know, short-term actions to respond to crises
are not sufficient. Long-term development investment
is key to breaking the vicious circle of hunger and
conflict. In that regard, and with a focus on the African
continent, which is acutely aligned with food insecurity
and conflict concerns, I would like to make three
brief points.
First, our actions must focus on building resilience
in economies and food systems. That calls for support for
initiatives including, first, the African common position
on sustainable food systems; secondly, the further
implementation of the African Union’s Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme and its
results framework; thirdly, regional food security
facilities, such as the Economic Community of West
16/31

Thirdly, we advocate the need to integrate
peacebuilding objectives into the creation of resilient
food systems, with a backward interlock of food
security objectives into peacebuilding programmes
and activities.
In conclusion, I would like us to recommit to acting
with urgency, at scale and in concert, to respond to the
urgent food security and nutrition needs of the millions
of vulnerable people around the world, whose situation
has been exacerbated by conflicts. Let us also recommit
to providing immediate humanitarian assistance,
building the resilience of the most vulnerable and
strengthening sustainable, resilient and inclusive food
systems, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Sustainable Development Goals.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): It is a pleasure
to join today’s open debate under your stewardship,
Mr. President, and I thank you and Switzerland, for
convening this important debate at this important time
and acknowledge your contribution and those of His
Excellency the President of Malta and His Excellency
the President of Mozambique. Seeing stewardship at
the Head-of-State level also indicates the importance
of this particular subject. I was also particularly
moved by the quite specific contributions of Minister
Dery of Ghana, who outlined quite specifically the
requirements of Member States regarding how we can
do more in resolving conflict. Of course, I acknowledge
the valuable insights of our expert briefers. The
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, highlighted some
of the practical steps and challenges she faces and the
responsibilities of coordinated responses with member
States. Ms. Mounkaïla provided unique insights from
Africa, which are extremely valuable, as we see drivers
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of climate change as a key consequence, which then
drives conflict itself.
The Secretary-General himself paints a bleak
picture, and rightly so, of the conflicts that rage
around the world. More than 20 major live conflicts
are currently gripping the globe, from across all
continents — in Myanmar, Mali, Ukraine, the
Sudan, Nigeria, Afghanistan and Somalia, to name
but a select few. As we heard from SecretaryGeneral Guterres, the numbers of affected civilians
suffering and dying from disease, malnutrition and
impoverishment are larger than those who succumb to
military operations. This is what is going on in 2023,
and all of it can be avoided. As we have already heard,
the destruction of infrastructure, health care, economies
and food production causes untold suffering — a point
well outlined by the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
This year a quarter of a billion people are
experiencing the most acute levels of hunger, caused by
conflict. Together with Her Royal Highness the Duchess
of Edinburgh, I, like others, saw that recently when we
visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And a
great many of those suffering are women and girls. It
is women who tend to eat last and eat least, or who end
up not eating at all. In conflict, tragically, women and
girls are also exposed to high levels of gender-based
violence, including abhorrent sexual violence. As the
United Kingdom’s Special Representative on Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict, I assure the Council that
I shall never accept it as an inevitable consequence of
war, and nor should anyone. Working with our partners
and friends, we will continue to support the survivors
of sexual violence and help them secure justice and
rebuild their lives.
Mr. Putin’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine has
also unleashed other consequences, such as inflation
and shortages of food, as we heard just now from the
Minister for the Interior of Ghana. And that has had
an impact on food security far beyond the continent of
Europe. We therefore once again urge Russia to end its
occupation and enable life-saving Ukrainian exports to
continue in the future. The Black Sea Grain Initiative
is an important part of that, and it must continue
to operate.
There are three areas that the United Kingdom
believes should be prioritized. First, we must do more
to improve compliance with international humanitarian

S/PV.9327

law. And we must do more collectively to show that
non-compliance is truly a red line. Parties to conflict
must be held to account. We welcome initiatives in
countries such as Somalia, where the Government is
showing true leadership by strengthening the focus
on civilian protection and stabilization and planning
predeployment training in humanitarian law for its own
troops. Even in the Sudan, where we have immense and
grave concerns, we welcome the fact that the parties
to the conflict are recognizing their responsibilities
under international law and committing to allowing
and facilitating humanitarian assistance. The United
Kingdom reports voluntarily on its own compliance
with humanitarian law, and we are encouraged to see
many other States doing the same. To tackle conflictinduced hunger, we also need a greater focus on the
relevant aspects of international humanitarian law. In
that respect, we are also developing a legal handbook to
achieve part of that objective.
Secondly, we can make better use of our earlywarning systems. As we have already heard, resolution
2417 (2018) is our warning system for conflict-induced
hunger, and reporting under it needs to be much quicker.
The Security Council must act more promptly on the
information it provides in order to save lives.
Thirdly, we must ensure coherence and coordination
among our diplomatic, humanitarian, development and
peace initiatives. Ultimately, we can deliver peace
only with efficient and sustained diplomacy. And we
will not be able to deliver sustainable peace without
ensuring humanitarian support to guarantee sustainable
livelihoods. For its part, the United Kingdom is
steadfast in its commitment to supporting countries in
recovering from conflict. In that regard, in London next
month we will host the Ukraine Recovery Conference,
which will also be engaging the private sector in terms
of reconstruction.
Our well-intentioned words must be followed
by swift action. Civilians caught up in conflict need
protection now. They need food now. They need essential
services, not tomorrow but today. And they need them
to be delivered promptly. I assure the Council that the
United Kingdom remains committed to supporting
those facing the brutal effects of climate change, as
we heard about from Ms. Mounkaïla, and which drives
conflict in many parts of the world. We have seen that
quite starkly around the Lake Chad basin. Tomorrow,
the United Kingdom will join the United States, Italy,
Qatar and the Organization for the Coordination of

23-1454417/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Humanitarian Affairs to also focus attention on the
crisis in the Horn of Africa. We must raise urgent
humanitarian funds to save lives now. And we must
also invest in long-term solutions to build resilience for
the future, as we have again heard today from a number
of representatives, including, importantly, those from
across Africa.
But ultimately, together, as the United Nations, we
have the tools and the means at our disposal to prevent
and end conflicts today, restore stability, deliver
accountability and justice, give hope back to civilians
and give civilians their lives back. It is our moral
imperative to do just that.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
Member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I particularly want to thank Switzerland for
making the pressing issue of conflict-induced food
insecurity a centrepiece of its presidency. It is also a very
high priority for the Government of the United States.
I thank Secretary-General Guterres for being here with
us today and for his sobering report to the Council. I
also want to express my deep appreciation to President
Spoljaric Egger of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and Ms. Aïchatou Mounkaïla, President of
the Network of Women-led Organizations of the Lake
Chad Basin, for their presence with us today. I welcome
the many Heads of State and Ministers to the Chamber.
Their presence reflects the importance of the issue to
all of us.
Today’s briefing paints a dire picture of life for too
many around the world — a world in which civilians
continue to bear the burden of conflict. Earlier this
month, I read this year’s annual report on the protection
of civilians (S/2023/345). It is a heartbreaking reminder
of the enormous responsibility that the Council has to
protect those in harm’s way. In 2022, the United Nations
recorded nearly 17,000 civilian deaths across 12 armed
conflicts, a 53 per cent increase compared with 2021.
Those numbers, of course, will go up in 2023, owing
to the situations in Ukraine and the Sudan. In Ukraine
alone, the United Nations recorded almost 8,000
civilian deaths, although the actual number is likely
higher. That is the human cost of Russia’s unprovoked
brutal war of aggression in Ukraine, and we must never
become numb to the senseless violence that one man,
President Putin, has wrought.
18/31

23/05/2023

Of course, the war has also had a devastating
impact on vulnerable populations in countries far
from Ukraine. Millions more people have been pushed
into food insecurity as a result of that conflict. Why?
Because Russia has used food as a weapon of war in
Ukraine. And for months and months, Ukrainian grain
was blocked from leaving the Black Sea. It is grain that
many countries, especially in Africa and the Middle
East, rely on. That is what makes the Black Sea Grain
Initiative such a critical arrangement — one that has
been a beacon of hope to the world.
Last year, the Black Sea Grain Initiative facilitated
the safe export of more than 15 million tons of food,
including wheat, used for humanitarian operations in
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Somalia and Yemen. We must
ensure that this life-saving aid continues to flow to
those in need, including women and girls, older adults,
disabled persons and other marginalized groups that
are disproportionately affected by food insecurity. And
I particularly want to thank the Secretary-General for
his efforts to keep this channel open.
The protection of civilians report also tells the
bleak story of those who have been forced from their
homes, unsure when or if they will be able to return.
More than 100 million people have been forcibly
displaced as a result of conflict, violence, persecution,
human rights violations and abuses. Burkina Faso,
Somalia, Burma and Ukraine face some of the fastestgrowing displacement crises. And according to the
United Nations Refugee Agency, fighting in the Sudan
could displace an additional 1 million people.
This past weekend, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
the United States announced that the Sudanese security
forces have again agreed to a short-term ceasefire and
humanitarian arrangement. We call for both parties to
fulfil their commitments under the seven-day ceasefire
and allow for unhindered humanitarian access. Aid
workers must be guaranteed safe passage. I take note,
sadly, that at least six humanitarian workers have
senselessly been killed since this war started. Parties
to the conflict must remove bureaucratic impediments
in the Sudan that are delaying aid, and humanitarian
cargo arriving in Port Sudan must be expedited and
responsive to United Nations needs. The stakes could
not be higher.
Five years ago, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2417 (2018) in response to growing levels of
conflict-induced hunger. As a result of that resolution,
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

we now receive reports on instances where conflict is
causing acute food insecurity or famine. But let us be
clear. We are not getting all the information we need.
The white notes the Council receives are irregular.
Too often they are delayed. Now, more than ever, it is
critical that we receive the white notes of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs twice a year.
There must be a regular reporting cycle. That could
depoliticize the issue and ensure that we have timely
information to act on. Conflict and hunger must be at
the top of the Council’s agenda. That is why, when I
started this job two years ago, I made that issue my
country’s first signature event in the Security Council
(S/2021/250). A year later, after Russia’s further
invasion into Ukraine, we held an open debate on
conflict and hunger during our May 2022 presidency
(S/PV.9042). We must all do more to stamp out hunger
and to save lives.
For our part, the United States remains the largest
donor to the World Food Programme, providing
more than half of all contributions. And tomorrow
I am looking forward to joining the Horn of Africa
Conference 2023 to shine a brighter light on the dire
situation in the Horn.
At the same time, we must all recognize that no
amount of aid will meet the needs of the world’s most
vulnerable if it cannot reach them. Too often, warring
parties intentionally block humanitarian access, and
too often the very people who dedicate their lives to
saving others are targeted. Last year, more than 250
humanitarian and health-care workers were killed.
Many others were injured, assaulted or kidnapped.
The kidnapping of medical personnel continues across
conflicts. Targeting aid workers is a clear violation of
international humanitarian law and must be roundly
and universally condemned.
We must do more together to protect civilians facing
armed conflict. We must encourage regional actors to get
more involved in peacebuilding efforts. We must build
on the work of resolution 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021)
and hold those who violate international humanitarian
law to account. We must see our common humanity in
those that are suffering. Let us do everything in our
power to alleviate that suffering and to secure a more
peaceful and just future for all.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Alain Berset, President of the Swiss
Confederation and President of the Security Council

S/PV.9327

for convening this debate. I acknowledge the presence
of Heads of State and Government as well as Foreign
Ministers and other high-level representatives. I thank
Secretary-General António Guterres, the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric Egger, and the President of the
Network of Women-led Organizations of the Lake Chad
Basin, Ms. Aïchatou Mounkaïla, for their briefings.
I associate myself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Action on Conflict and Hunger, which
Ecuador has the honour to co-chair.
In another year, we will commemorate the seventyfifth anniversary of the Geneva Conventions. What
better way to do so than by stepping up efforts to protect
civilians around the world now? Sadly, 2022 and, so far,
2023 reflect decline rather than progress. But that can
be reversed, and the Security Council has a primary
responsibility and role to play in those efforts.
Likewise, what better way to celebrate the fifth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018),
on hunger and conflict, than by strengthening its
implementation? With more than 250 million people
suffering from severe hunger as of 2022 in nearly 60
countries — about one-third of the States Members
of the United Nations — focusing on food security
is central.
Most of these cases involve crisis scenarios and
armed violence, which is evidence of the link between
conflict and food insecurity. We therefore reiterate the
obligation of all parties to make every effort to ensure
the proper functioning of food systems and markets,
protecting food production, storage and distribution
assets, as well as the water supply.
The Council must implement and ensure compliance
with resolution 2573 (2021), on the protection of essential
goods, co-sponsored by my country in 2021. We also
reiterate the prohibition of attacking, destroying,
removing or rendering useless agricultural goods and
crops. We condemn the practice of starving populations
as a tactic of war, as well as the practice of blocking or
attacking providers of humanitarian assistance.
During the Regional Conference for Latin America
and the Caribbean of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, which took place
in Quito from 28 March to 1 April 2022, the Director-

23-1454419/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2023

General warned about the increase in hunger and food
insecurity in my region.

renewing the initiative and ensuring its unhindered
implementation for the duration of the conflict.

That brings me to an issue that requires greater
efforts on the part of the Council and the United Nations,
as is the case of Haiti, which the President and other
representatives have already mentioned this morning.
Until relatively recently, Haiti was self-sufficient in
food and even exported significant amounts of fruits,
vegetables and proteins to other Caribbean islands until
the 1980s. However, environmental devastation and now
climate change have eroded its ability to produce food.

Ecuador reiterates its commitment to continue
supporting the efforts of the United Nations, the
ICRC and civil society to promote the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law
and to alleviate the impact and suffering caused by
conflicts. We also support the role of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
World Food Programme. We will continue to defend
in the Council the decisions that are necessary, such
as humanitarian access at border crossings and within
countries in conflict, as well as the full and effective
participation of women in humanitarian efforts.

In addition, there is the violence of the gangs
that have taken over areas essential for agricultural
production in the Artibonite valley, which is known
as the breadbasket of Haiti. The blocking of the transit
of food trucks, the collecting of taxes and the stealing
merchandise disrupt the city’s markets, as do the
harassment and rape of women who work in the sale
and supply of food.
With 4.9 million Haitians — that is, half of its
population — in conditions of acute food insecurity
and the majority without access to essential services,
if the Security Council does not decide to support the
sending of a specialized force to support the Haitian
National Police, regardless of which country leads
it and regardless of whether it is carried out without
the United Nations or in the form of a peacekeeping
mission, the repercussions in Haiti and in the Latin
American and Caribbean region will be unprecedented,
including in terms of displaced persons and other
precarious conditions of movement.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s annual
report on the protection of civilians (S/2023/345), the
number of people forcibly displaced as a result of conflict,
human rights violations and abuses exceeds 100 million
people, including from the Sudan, Myanmar, Yemen,
Syria, Ethiopia, the Democratic Republic of Congo,
Burkina Faso and, recently, Ukraine, just to name a
few countries. I reiterate the obligation of all parties
not to hinder and instead to protect and provide access
to essential services, such as health care, especially
mental health care.
Today’s meeting provides an opportunity for
delegations and the Security Council itself to express
their support for the Secretary-General’s efforts to
strengthen the Black Sea Grain Initiative, with the
objective of improving, expanding and automatically
20/31

We stress the role of small-scale food producers as
the backbone of food systems and call for the avoidance
of trade restrictions and the release of strategic food
reserves to alleviate food insecurity.
Every five seconds at least one person dies of acute
hunger. That is almost 100 people since I began my
speech, and more than 5,000 will have lost their lives
by the end of today’s debate, most of them in situations
of violence and armed conflict.
I must therefore recall that the responsibility
conferred on the Security Council by the Charter of the
United Nations to act on behalf of the Member States
of the Organization is justified in Article 24.1 of the
Charter, with the sole objective of ensuring “prompt
and effective action by the United Nations”. Let us
therefore strengthen the Council’s efforts to overcome
the challenges we are discussing today with concrete
and effective actions.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I congratulate
Switzerland on the initiative of this important debate,
and convey the compliments of His Excellency Ali
Bongo Ondimba, President of the Gabonese Republic.
I welcome the participation in this important meeting
of the President of the Republic of Mozambique and
the President of the Republic of Malta. I thank the
Secretary-General for taking stock of the situation of
civilians across the world. I also would like to thank
the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) for her exemplary commitment, within
the mandate of the ICRC, to protecting civilians in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank Ms. Aïchatou
Mounkaïla for her enlightening briefing.
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The persistence and scale of attacks against
civilians in armed conflicts is reflected in the
multiplicity of contemporary wars, which have become
asymmetrical and urban, making it difficult to gather
data on the number of dead and injured civilians. They
are often caught up in the violence of armed groups
and the response of national armies, and civilians are
the primary victims of conflicts which are constantly
increasing in different regions of the world, in particular
in Africa.
In the Sahel, in the Great Lakes region and in
the Horn of Africa, the figures from the barometers
measuring security during conflict are alarming. In his
annual report for 2018 (S/2019/373), Secretary-General
António Guterres recorded the figure of 22,800
civilians killed or injured, based on figures from six
countries at war, namely, Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali,
Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen, while indicating
those figures were almost certainly underestimates of
the actual number of civilian deaths and injuries. Today
those figures have been utterly shattered by the chronic
nature of numerous conflicts and the emergence of new
deadly crises marked by the use of explosive devices
in urban and rural areas, most of whose victims are
civilians. The most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/345) indicates a 53 per cent increase in
2022 compared to the previous year; while the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights estimated last year that 306,000 civilians had
been killed in 10 years of conflict in Syria.
That distressing fact is repeated on the battlefields
without making a dent in the use of aerial bombardments
or explosive devices, whose indiscriminate and
devastating effects are well known and feared by all,
and despite the clarity of the provisions of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 which protects civilians
during conflicts or in occupied territories.

S/PV.9327

forcibly recruited into armed groups. Schools and
hospitals are destroyed or abandoned as the deadly
fighting displaces millions of people within their own
country or across the region.
The interaction between conflict and hunger has
seen the threat of famine re-emerge in many areas,
creating an exponential increase in people facing
unsustainable levels of food insecurity. It is essential
that the international community mobilize to take more
effective action to address the problem comprehensively
by tackling the root causes of conflict that disrupt food
systems and markets and perpetuate the vicious cycle
of hunger.
Combatants in every conflict must change their
choice of weapons and tactics and refrain from
obstructing humanitarian assistance, in accordance
with the Geneva Conventions.
States must take concrete steps to protect
medical personnel, including making sure that the
rules of military engagement respect international
humanitarian law. It is important that humanitarian
assistance is never politicized and that the commitment
of all parties, including armed groups, is ensured to
this end. Confidence-building through dialogue is an
effective way to achieve this and to reverse the trend of
mistrust of humanitarians.
In the face of significant deterioration in
belligerents’ respect for humanitarian law, States
must improve training, modernize policies to prevent
harm to civilians, adopt better monitoring of victims,
investigate incidents and hold those responsible for
violations accountable. Accountability for violations
must be systematic and universal.

In the Sahel region, most terrorist attacks target
civilians. Terrorists have two cruel and shameful
strategies: they starve civilians and attack schools.
Attacks on livelihoods are used as a weapon of war by
armed groups who steal and destroy villagers’ property,
burn their homes and steal their crops and food supplies
with the stated objective of creating food shortages in
order to subjugate the population and secure resources
to finance their criminal activities.

The international public order is under
unprecedented strain, standing at the opposite end of
the spectrum from declarations of principle, resolutions
and the proliferation of actors claiming to be engaged
in civilian-protection activities. Clearly, the fine words
and good intentions in forums such as this one are
slow to be translated into reality on the ground. The
reality is that in many parts of the world, men, women
and children are being killed or raped, forced to flee
their homes and abandon everything they own, living
in a state of permanent fear. Hospitals are bombed and
health workers are attacked.

In eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo,
children are killed and maimed when they are not

Beyond the fact that civilians are deliberately
targeted, the reality on the ground is that in wars people

23-1454421/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

disappear and thousands of prisoners of war are tortured
or held in inhuman conditions. The number of missing
persons in 2022 reached a frightening 29,000 according
to the ICRC. In this context, again, international and
subregional mechanisms must be strengthened.
The Security Council has made a number of
important commitments to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict through its relevant resolutions,
including resolution 2417 (2018). We must ensure strict
compliance with these commitments, which include
providing greater access for humanitarian personnel
to civilians in need of assistance; improving the safety
and security of humanitarian personnel; improving
measures to address the security needs of refugees
and internally displaced persons; ensuring that the
special protection and assistance needs of children in
armed conflict are fully met; ensuring that the special
protection and assistance needs of women in armed
conflict are fully met; address gaps in the approach
to disarmament, demobilization, reintegration, and
resettlement activities; address the impact of small
arms, antipersonnel mines and unexploded remnants
of war on civilians; combat impunity; develop further
measures to promote the accountability of armed
groups and non-State actors; and ensure that necessary
resources are provided to meet the needs of vulnerable
populations in forgotten emergencies.
Beyond these flagship commitments, the
international community must continually reaffirm
its commitment to the principles of international law
based on justice, the peaceful resolution of disputes and
respect for human dignity. We must continually reflect
on how to better protect vulnerable civilian populations
at the height of crises or in the immediate aftermath
thereof, while acting decisively to protect civilians in
armed conflict. State actors can take action by removing
administrative barriers that impede humanitarian
action. In this regard, regional organizations have
an important role to play in efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians.
Among the factors that put civilians at risk in crisis
situations is the phenomenon of the proliferation of
non-State armed groups. When armed actors engage in
crime or banditry, it is less easy to tell them about their
obligation to protect civilians. Another factor is the
constant evolution of the means and methods of warfare,
which are sometimes accompanied by a complete
disregard for the protection of civilians. We must work
to ensure that respect for international humanitarian
22/31

23/05/2023

law in situations of armed conflict remains at the heart
of our mandate and mission, as evidenced by the way we
work to protect and assist the victims of armed conflict.
At the same time, we must prevent conflict more
than ever by addressing its root causes. The United
Nations must continue to focus on the protection of
civilians by keeping protection activities at the core
of its peacekeeping mandates and improving the
protection of certain categories of people, including
women, children, and refugees and internally displaced
persons. At the same time, humanitarian organizations
such as the ICRC must be given the cooperation they
need to continue their protection activities for civilians
within their mandate and skills, based on a neutral and
independent approach. In all cases, it is imperative
that men, women and children in need of protection
are placed at the heart of the action taken on their
behalf. Women must be at the heart of strategies to
combat hunger in conflict situations, whether in the
management or distribution of food stocks or in the
post-conflict reconstruction phase.
Translating these words and commitments
into concrete and effective action must remain our
constant challenge wherever the aspirations of civilian
populations to live in safety and dignity are threatened.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): Albania
commends Switzerland and you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s debate, which focuses on conflict
and hunger and the immense challenges related to the
protection of civilians. I thank the Secretary-General
for his remarks and welcome the relevance of his report
on the protection of civilians (S/2023/345). I also thank
Ms. Spoljaric Egger and Ms. Mounkaïla for their
briefings and recommendations on how to better use
the tools available for the protection of civilians and
humanitarian action.
(spoke in English)
In every conflict, in every situation in which lives
are put in danger, it is civilians who pay the price.
Protracted or new conflicts and outbreaks of violence
anywhere serve as grim reminders of a pervasive lack
of meaningful progress in upholding commitments
to protecting civilians in armed conflict. Every time,
the most vulnerable of them — women and children,
people with disabilities and minorities — bear the
brunt of terrible decisions taken by powerful men, by
adults, in total disregard of life, of rights, of laws and
of human dignity.
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

S/PV.9327

This is what is happening every day in Ukraine,
with dramatic consequences for the civilian population,
including civilian death, the destruction of vital
infrastructure and massive displacement, as has been
widely documented, including by the United Nations.
This is what is happening nowadays in the Sudan,
with entire communities trapped in crossfire, with
few options for taking refuge. Elsewhere, in the Sahel,
Yemen, Myanmar and Haiti, ongoing conflicts and
instability continue to claim innocent lives and threaten
the well-being of millions of people. The fragmentation
and proliferation of actors, as we are seeing in
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the
privatization of warfare with private military and the
use of mercenaries, which is a reality in many African
conflict areas, as well as widespread availability of
weapons and a continued disregard for international
law, only exacerbate the enormous challenges to
protect civilians.

destroyed in conflicts, and those responsible know
very well what they are doing and seeking, because
attacks on educational institutions and their military
use result in death, destruction and loss of education,
creating long-term negative consequences for entire
communities. That is intolerable.

The Security Council has considerably advanced the
normative framework on the protection of civilians and
humanitarian space through important resolutions and
mandates. These are indeed important achievements,
but, like everything else, these documents are just
pieces of paper if they are not implemented, because
there is little value in resolutions, mandates and other
commitments when a permanent member of the Security
Council is using missiles and kamikaze drones to hit
residential areas, destroy schools, flatten kindergartens
and demolish power installations, acting with impunity
in broad daylight and for 16 months and counting.

Resolution 2417 (2018) was a landmark step in
recognizing the intersections of conflict and hunger,
condemning the use of food insecurity and starvation
as a tactic of war. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, more than a quarter of a billion people faced
acute hunger in 58 countries and territories in 2022. That
is close to one third of United Nations Member States.

It is not easy to talk about, let alone ensure, the
protection of civilians when civilians are purposely
taken as a target to instil fear with the hope of forcing
them into surrender or submission. There is hardly any
protection of civilians when millions of children are
uprooted from their homes or displaced by senseless
wars or, even worse, when thousands of them are
forcefully deported and given up for adoption in
another country.
Having laws that are disrespected, resolutions
that are not implemented and mandates that exist
only on paper is utterly damaging. It erodes trust in
multilateralism and common efforts and leads to a
loss of legitimacy and effectiveness. We welcomed the
adoption of resolution 2601 (2021) and commend all
States that have endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration.
Schools should be a safe place for children and youth
to learn and thrive. But schools are systematically

Seven years ago, resolution 2286 (2016) demanded
an end to impunity for attacks on health care. It is not
being implemented. In Ukraine alone, more than 800
attacks on hospitals, health workers and other medical
infrastructure have been reported since the beginning
of the Russian invasion. Almost 70 per cent of all
attacks against health-care facilities in the world in
2022 — 763 attacks of 1,149 — have occurred in that
sole country. Even where there is no war, cyberattacks
against health-care facilities, which are on the rise, will
disrupt services, with often dramatic consequences. We
need to do better.

Wars are always violent and harmful, but the
destruction of resources can inflict terrible harm
as well. The plundering of food supplies and the
deliberate destruction of farms, livestock and other
civilian infrastructure can have continued disastrous
consequences for millions of people. When economic
activities are severely disrupted, the very means of
survival of entire populations are threatened. In turn,
food insecurity, a sharp increase in the price of basic
foodstuffs or a sudden lack of availability can trigger
unrest. We are all familiar with the hardship felt
worldwide, in particular in the developing world, after
the beginning of the Russian war in Ukraine until the
Black Sea Grain Initiative brought relief.
Protecting civilians has never been an easy issue,
and there is no quick fix. The best and most secure way
to protect civilians is to stop wars, to end conflicts and
to break the cycles of violence. We are very far from
that, so until we come to that point, we must make sure
we deploy our best efforts to implement our decisions
and respect the law. It demands leadership, strong
political will and concerted actions.

23-1454423/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We cannot just limit ourselves to reiterating calls on
all parties to armed conflicts to respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law. There is no
need to remind parties of their obligations — they are
mandatory. Belligerents must abide by humanitarian
laws or face the consequences. Therefore, we should
do more. In our view, if we want to make a real impact
in protecting civilians, we must enforce accountability
and never tolerate impunity for violations. Failure to do
so will only embolden perpetrators to continue without
fear of consequences — but that is a no-go.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this important meeting. I would also like to
thank the briefers for their insights.
Japan is deeply concerned by the frequent violations
of international humanitarian law, notwithstanding the
repeated resolve of the Security Council regarding the
protection of civilians. Innocent civilians, especially
vulnerable populations, including women, children,
persons with disabilities, refugees and the internally
displaced, should not suffer.
The death of even one civilian in conflict is
intolerable. The number of civilian deaths had been
decreasing for a few years until 2021, yet the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/345) shows
that the number of civilian deaths in 2022 increased by
more than 50 per cent as compared to 2021, with nearly
half of the civilian deaths recorded in Ukraine. One
civilian death is one too many, but it is distressing to
learn that the toll would actually have decreased had it
not been for Russia’s aggression against Ukraine. Japan
is also concerned about the higher toll of deaths and
casualties recorded in Somalia, as well as the expected
increase in civilian casualties in the Sudan.
In armed conflicts, attacks on civilians and their
well-being are not the only issue. The dignity of human
beings must be respected and the scarcity of food
and water, as well as hindered access to health-care
services, must also be fully addressed.
Food insecurity and armed conflict are closely
linked and often give rise to human security concerns.
The recent Global Report on Food Crises 2023
points out that nearly one third of countries in acute
food insecurity have been driven into calamity by
conflicts. Furthermore, food insecurity in conflicts
has often resulted in child malnutrition, which could
be life-threatening and seriously stymie future
development — even if the children survive. Resolutions
24/31

23/05/2023

2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021) comprehensively address
those issues, and Japan calls on all parties concerned to
comply with those instruments.
Japan has been providing assistance through
humanitarian agencies to address that human security
challenge, including in Afghanistan, Somalia, Ethiopia
and Yemen. Recently, we contributed $8 million to
the World Food Programme (WFP) for emergency
food assistance in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which has the highest number of people in acute
food insecurity — Integrated Phase Classification 3 or
above — in the world.
We also note the negative ramifications of the war
against Ukraine, which have aggravated global food
insecurity. Japan would therefore like to welcome the
extension of the Black Sea Grain Initiative in that
respect. We commend the mediation efforts by the
United Nations and the Government of Türkiye and look
forward to the steady implementation of the Initiative.
Ensuring human security means safeguarding the
dignity of people, which will lead to development and
sustainable peace. With that in mind, the Government of
Japan is committed to the humanitarian-developmentpeace nexus. One example of our efforts in that regard is
support for school meal programmes through UNICEF
and the WFP. Continuing school meal programmes
in conflict-affected settings fight food insecurity and
help children to attend school, where children acquire
necessary skills for their own future and develop their
abilities to contribute to development and building
peace in their own countries.
To conclude, let me reiterate Japan’s unwavering
commitment to protect civilians and their dignity,
including through securing food and services
indispensable to their survival.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We express our gratitude to today’s briefers.
Food insecurity is a serious problem for the
international community. Its causes are multifaceted
and began long before the current situation. Not
only armed conflicts, but also unilateral sanctions
imposed by Western countries play an important role
in that regard.
There is no justification for the use hunger as a
method of warfare. That rule was definitively enshrined
in the Protocol Additional I to the Geneva Conventions
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

of War. At the same time, however, it is important to
remember that the emergence of that norm was a direct
result of the blockade of Leningrad by German and
Finnish forces when the city was surrounded with the
aim of starving its millions of inhabitants to death. The
use of starvation as a war tactic resulted in the deaths
of over 600,000 people in Leningrad.
In contemporary armed conflicts, a particular
threat is posed by terrorist and extremist groups that
wage war with no respect whatsoever for the rules. Of
especial concern is the continuing rise of the terrorist
threat in the Sahara-Sahel region, including from
Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan, which
targets members of religious and ethnic minorities.
In Syria and Yemen the situation is stabilizing,
but even there the humanitarian situation remains
difficult, as people still do not have sufficient basic
necessities, including food and medicines. As far
as Syria is concerned, it is clear, including from
the Secretary-General’s report on the protection of
civilians (S/2023/345), that the main problems are
the consequences of the illegal interference in the
country’s internal affairs and of its occupation. And
that is a result of the so-called Global Coalition’s air
strikes and of the terrorist groups that have run rampant
on the territory outside Damascus’s control and that
are responsible for most of the crimes that have been
committed. At the same time, the civilian population
has continued to suffer in the areas of Syria occupied
by the United States and the forces it controls, including
from the plundering of the country’s natural resources.
The horrific situation in the Rukban, Al-Hol and Roj
camps on territory controlled by the United States has
been going on for years. We urge the Secretary-General
to continue to monitor that alarming situation closely
and do more to bring it to international attention.
The grave humanitarian situation in Syria is due
in large part to the fact that the United States and
the European Union (EU) continue to impose illegal
unilateral sanctions on the Syrians, with disastrous
consequences for the civilian population. As the
Secretary-General’s report indicates, the sanctions
continue to have a negative impact on the provision
of humanitarian assistance, which people’s lives in
conflict areas often depend on. And that does not
affect Syria alone. We call on the Secretary-General
to continue investigating the issue. We note that the
country-specific report on the situation in Syria, which
we were promised by January, has not yet been issued.

S/PV.9327

We believe that hunger continues to be a method of the
economic warfare that the West is waging all over the
world. It arbitrarily strangles the possibilities for trading
in foodstuffs. The situation surrounding the Black Sea
Grain Initiative is a clear example of that tactic. We
expressed our view of it at the 15 May Security Council
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Ukraine (see
S/PV.9321), and we will continue to draw attention to
the real situation going forward.
To cite some numbers, the least-developed countries
have received less than 3 per cent of all the shipments
made within the framework of the Black Sea Initiative.
Over the 10 months of its operation out of Ukrainian
ports within the framework of the World Food
Programme’s humanitarian operations, that amounts to
only 600,000 tons of foodstuffs, out of a total volume
shipped of more than 30 million tons, an overwhelming
percentage of which went to developed countries. We
would like to draw particular attention to the ammonia
supplies stipulated in the Istanbul agreements, which
could ensure the shipment of 2.5 million tons of raw
material, enough to produce 7 million tons of fertilizer.
That amount of fertilizer would have the potential to
produce food for 200 million people. Those shipments
should have begun at the same time as the export of the
Ukrainian products, but that has not been happening.
Almost a year after the Black Sea Initiative was agreed,
the supply of ammonia available on world markets is
down by 70 per cent because cargoes have not shipped.
As for the Russia-United Nations memorandum of
understanding on the export of Russian foodstuffs, its
implementation has barely started. While hypocritically
claiming that there are no sanctions on exports of
foodstuffs and fertilizer, the EU and the United States
have refused to unblock SWIFT access to the Russian
Agricultural Bank or to resolve the other logistical
problems created by the sanctions that we have
discussed repeatedly, including for shipping, insurance
and agricultural equipment.
That is how Kyiv and its Western mentors are
blocking exports of foodstuffs and fertilizer while
blaming others for it. For our part, despite the dirty
games being played with the agreements, we intend to
continue to be guided by the importance of contributing
to ensuring international food security, especially for
developing countries, and by overcoming the artificial
barriers erected by the West. Everything that our grain
and fertilizer exporters have achieved is the result of
their own efforts, and neither the United Nations nor

23-1454425/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the West’s so-called exemptions have anything to do
with it. As in the past, our country continues to be one
of the world’s key suppliers of agricultural products.
We have earned our reputation as a reliable and
predictable partner, and we intend to continue to be one
in the future.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Alain
Berset, President of the Swiss Confederation, in today’s
meeting. I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and President Spoljaric Egger for their
briefings. I also listened carefully to the briefing by
Ms. Mounkaïla.
China has stated its position on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict on many occasions in the
Security Council. We appeal strongly to all parties
to conflicts to adhere strictly to international law,
including international humanitarian law, and to fulfil
their obligations to protect civilians.
I will focus today on the issue of food security.
Civilians are the main victims of armed conflict. Food
crises exacerbate humanitarian situations and the
plight of civilians. According to the most recent Global
Report on Food Crises, about 250 million people are
currently food insecure, while two thirds of those in
acute food-insecure situations live in areas affected by
conflict. Food is of primary importance in sustaining
life, and food security relates to the very basic human
right to life. The Security Council and the international
community should therefore pay the greatest possible
attention to the issue and take concerted action to find
an integrated solution.
First, we must strive to achieve political settlements
of hotspot issues. As long as conflicts persist, we
cannot realistically talk about civilian safety and
security, and hunger and poverty will be difficult to
eradicate. We call on parties to conflicts to abide by
resolution 2417 (2018) and 2573 (2021), effectively fulfil
their obligations under international law, including
international humanitarian law, to protect civilians,
prioritize the needs of vulnerable groups, including
women and children, and ensure safe and unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance. All countries should
abide by the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, promote cooperation and reject
confrontation in order to create an environment
conducive to peace. It is vital to persevere in resolving
disputes through peaceful means, including dialogue,
26/31

23/05/2023

negotiation and mediation, and to help countries in
conflict achieve peace and stability without delay in
order to create the conditions necessary for protecting
civilians and ensuring food security.
Secondly, we must increase emergency assistance.
Food crises result from a complex combination of
interwoven factors. Our priority must be to take
effective measures to meet the urgent needs that some
countries are facing. We call on traditional donors
to step up their assistance and provide additional
emergency humanitarian assistance in the form of food
and financing to countries in need. Assistance should
not be seen as a lever for political gain. No conditions
should be attached to it and there should never be
any selectivity in the context of assistance. The
requirements for all countries receiving humanitarian
aid should be treated equally. The humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan also demands our attention.
The United States has for years imposed a freeze on
Afghanistan’s overseas assets, which has exacerbated
the humanitarian crisis in the country. We urge the
United States to listen to the urgent pleas of the Afghan
people and the international community for the assets
to be returned to the people as soon as possible so
that they can be used to help overcome the country’s
humanitarian challenges, including its food shortages.
Thirdly, we must maintain the overall stability
of the supply chain and international food prices.
The renewal of the Black Sea Grain Initiative in the
past few days will help to assure the continued flow
of international food supplies, and China therefore
welcomes that development. We commend SecretaryGeneral Guterres and the relevant parties for their
unremitting efforts to make that happen. We support a
balanced, comprehensive and effective implementation
of the Black Sea Grain Initiative and the memorandum
of understanding on the export of Russian food
products and fertilizer. We support the United Nations
in playing a major role in that regard in order to remove
the obstacles that Russia is facing in terms of its food
and fertilizer exports.
We should point out that as a major international
staple commodity, food has been highly financialized
and monetized. The main driver of the current round
of massive hikes in food prices has been various
countries’ adoption in recent years of extraordinary
quantitative-easing monetary policies. We urge the
relevant countries in designing their monetary policies
to give serious attention to their spillover effects and
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

greater consideration to the interests of developing
countries and to how their policies are received in
order to prevent artificial distortions and abnormal
fluctuations in food prices. We also firmly reject any
weaponizing of economic interdependence, as well as
engaging in unilateral sanctions and decoupling and
disrupting international supply chains with the aim
of harming countries’ enterprises and attacking their
infrastructure. Such actions not only endanger the
security and stability of food markets but also violate
international law, making the world more uncertain
and less stable and plunging it into greater division and
turmoil.
Fourthly, we should create conditions that support
developing countries in solving their food problems.
Many developing countries have rich agricultural
resources and therefore all the potential they need to
feed themselves. However, as long-standing victims
of colonialism, they are plagued by a single-structure
economy that has locked them into the very bottom
of the international industrial chain, leaving them
lacking the resources and conditions they need to be
self-reliant and achieve food self-sufficiency. We
must therefore promote the establishment of a more
equitable and reasonable international economic order
and provide more financial and technical support to
developing countries to help them achieve agricultural
transformation based on their individual situations, in
order to improve their food security.
Developed countries’ agricultural subsidy policies
have severely distorted the international market for
agricultural products and have acted as a disincentive
for farmers in developing countries. We call on the
relevant countries to change their subsidy policies
in order to reduce their impact on the markets for
developing countries’ agricultural products. Major
international food companies should also honour their
social responsibilities by reducing their monopolistic
control of agricultural resources, including seeds and
the pricing of agricultural products. When it comes
to supporting and helping developing countries, what
matters is not who has the loudest slogans but who has
taken more concrete actions.
Fifthly, we should strengthen international
coordination to create synergies. The Security
Council should take a balanced approach to security
and development and pay particular attention to the
agricultural, rural and farming-related issues of
countries that are in the process of peacebuilding, as

S/PV.9327

well as help them strengthen their capacity-building
in order to resolve their food crises at their source.
The international food and agriculture institutions,
United Nations development agencies and international
financial institutions should leverage their respective
advantages, mobilize broad international resources
and deepen international cooperation so as to provide
more support to post-conflict and developing countries
in terms of financing, technology, training and
management to help them to develop agriculture with
their own characteristics based on their own conditions
and create a diversified supply chain.
Climate change has become a major factor in
declining food production. The United Nations should
play its role as a main coordinator for promoting and
deepening international action on climate governance.
The developed countries should honour their
commitments and historical responsibility and fulfil
their financial obligations with regard to addressing
climate change and helping developing countries
enhance their resilience in terms of climate change and
food security.
China has been a long-standing promoter of and
contributor to international food security. In recent
years we have provided emergency food aid to more than
50 countries to alleviate the urgent needs of millions of
people. We take a dual approach of both transferring and
generating sustenance by providing support in terms
of farming technology, grain storage and processing
infrastructures, and along with technologies related to
innovations such as hybrid rice and Juncao technology
that can help developing countries enhance their
overall capabilities in terms of food production, supply
and security. China will continue to work with other
countries around the world to implement China’s global
development initiative and deepen our cooperation in
terms of food security and poverty reduction to build a
world free from war, conflict, hunger and poverty.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General, the President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and Ms. Mounkaïla for
their briefings.
The picture is bleak. Civilian populations are still
paying the highest price in conflicts. The sharp rise
in the number of civilians killed in armed conflicts
in 2022 is very worrisome. The protection of civilians
is at the core of international humanitarian law and
must be respected by all parties to armed conflicts.

23-1454427/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

23/05/2023

Unfortunately, that is not the case. Some States and
armed groups deliberately incorporate into their military
strategies violations of international humanitarian law,
such as attacks on civilians or civilian infrastructure
and the use of hunger as a weapon of war. Violations
of international humanitarian law increase people’s
suffering and multiply humanitarian needs. The
violations committed by Russia in its war of aggression
on Ukraine are tragic examples of that, as well as
those committed by the Wagner Group, especially in
the Central African Republic and in Mali, where the
massacre in Moura in March 2022, documented in a
recent report of the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, could constitute war crimes and
crimes against humanity. Those abuses demonstrate
once again that that militia group’s promises of security
are pure propaganda.

today depend on the ability of peacekeepers to carry
out their missions. We must therefore ensure that the
mandates of peacekeeping operations are adapted to
their context and are respected. They must address all
threats to civilians, including sexual and gender-based
violence and violations against children, and they must
fight impunity. Host States play an essential role in the
implementation of those mandates.

France is also concerned about attacks and
restrictions on humanitarian personnel, as has
happened in Yemen, as well as in Afghanistan,
where the Taliban have banned Afghan women from
working for non-governmental organizations and
the United Nations. Their decisions violate the rights
of Afghan women and humanitarian principles and
prevent populations in need from receiving assistance.
Those practices must stop. The problem is not a
lack of legal norms — an arsenal of legal provisions
exists — but a lack of the political will needed to apply
them. Violations of international humanitarian law
must not go unpunished. Those responsible must be
brought to justice.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.

The parties to a conflict have the primary
responsibility for the protection of civilian populations
and infrastructure. But we collectively, and the Council
in particular, also have a responsibility to ensure that
civilians are protected. France is concerned about the
humanitarian consequences and the destruction caused
by the uncontrolled and indiscriminate use of explosive
weapons, especially by Russia and its supporters in
Ukraine. That is why we have endorsed the Political
Declaration on Strengthening the Protection of Civilians
from the Humanitarian Consequences Arising from the
Use of Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas. We urge
Member States to join the Political Declaration with a
view to achieving its universalization.
The protection of civilians is also inseparable from
peacekeeping. Peacekeeping missions must continue
to take steps to anticipate, neutralize and mitigate
threats to civilians. The lives of millions of people
28/31

In the face of violations of the most basic principles
of international law, it is essential that we reaffirm
our commitment to protecting civilian populations
and property. France will continue to work to ensure
respect for international humanitarian law. I invite all
Member States to join the Call for Humanitarian Action
launched by France and Germany in 2019, which has 53
signatories to date.

Mr. Gevorgyan (Armenia): I would like to express
my appreciation to Switzerland for making the issue
of the protection of civilians one of its priorities for
its Security Council presidency. I thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Ms. Mirjana Spoljaric
Egger, the President of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, for reflecting on the current and
evolving challenges to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, in particular the issues of addressing
food insecurity and the protection of critical civilian
infrastructure in conflict situations. The presence
and the statement of President Alain Berset of
Switzerland at today’s debate demonstrate the high
importance and urgency of those issues. I would like
to acknowledge Switzerland’s outstanding historic
record in humanitarian affairs, as the birthplace of the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement.
Today, 160 years after the founding of the International
Committee of the Red Cross, its role remains even
more pertinent in alleviating the suffering of civilians
trapped in conflicts, bringing home prisoners of war
and ensuring that humanitarian aid is accessible to all
in need.
The deliberate targeting of the civilian population
and objects indispensable for their survival, the
disruption of supplies of essential goods, the denial
of international humanitarian access and the use
of starvation as a method of warfare and collective
punishment constitute war crimes and are a threat to
the lives and welfare of civilians living in conflict
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

zones. In that regard, we would like to underscore
the critical importance of the full and unconditional
implementation of the Geneva Conventions and their
Protocols Additional. The Security Council plays a
key role in ensuring the full adherence of States to
their legally binding obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Since 12 December 2022, Azerbaijan has imposed
a blockade on Nagorno-Karabakh, in blatant violation
of international humanitarian law and the trilateral
statement of 9 November 2020. For six months now, a
population of 120,000 people, including 30,000 children,
has suffered from a critical shortage of essential goods,
including food and medical supplies. The humanitarian
situation has been further exacerbated by a complete
disruption of the gas and electricity supply and the
deterioration of critical infrastructure, as well as the
regular targeting of civilians conducting agricultural
activities, in an attempt to deprive them of their
means of subsistence and make their living conditions
intolerable. For the past six months, people living in
Nagorno-Karabakh have received only 7.5 per cent of
their usual supplies of food and other essential goods,
which means that more than 90 per cent of those
supplies have not been shipped. Instead of adhering to
the legally binding order of the International Court of
Justice, issued on 22 February,
“to take all necessary measures to ensure unimpeded
movement of persons, vehicles and cargo along the
Lachin Corridor in both directions”,
the authorities of Azerbaijan installed a checkpoint on the
corridor on 23 April, thereby openly taking responsibility
for the illegal blockade and non-compliance with the
Court’s order. Furthermore, Azerbaijan has continued
to hinder the activities of the International Committee
of the Red Cross and the peacekeeping forces of the
Russian Federation aimed at addressing the immediate
life-saving needs of the population affected by the
conflict, transferring patients for urgent treatment and
delivering essential goods to remote settlements. So far
it has not been possible to ensure access for the United
Nations and its agencies to get involved on the ground,
leaving Nagorno-Karabakh and its people off the radar
of the United Nations for some time. The collective
pledge to leave no one behind has yet to be fulfilled
for them. All of those unlawful actions on the ground,
accompanied by a decades-long policy of promoting
anti-Armenian hatred and xenophobia, clearly indicate
the genocidal intent of Azerbaijan, with a final goal of

S/PV.9327

the total ethnic cleansing of the indigenous population
of Nagorno-Karabakh.
In
December
last
year,
the
Security
Council discussed the humanitarian situation in
Nagorno-Karabakh caused by the closure of the Lachin
corridor (see S/PV.9228). The situation on the ground
has only deteriorated since then, inflicting further
suffering on civilians. We hope that as the primary body
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Security Council will remain seized of
the matter and ensure the dignity, physical security and
fundamental human rights of the people, in line with its
mandate and with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Ms. Sumuvuori (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the five Nordic countries — Denmark,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and, my own country, Finland.
Today, five years after the adoption of resolution
2417 (2018), armed conflict still continues to be
the main driver of humanitarian needs and food
insecurity, globally. The consequences of Russia’s war
of aggression on global food security are devastating,
especially for those most in need and for those who
were already facing food insecurity.
Safe, rapid and unimpeded humanitarian access
is a prerequisite for effective humanitarian action,
especially in situations of armed conflict. All parties
to a conflict must fully comply with their obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights
law. That includes protecting civilians and civilian
infrastructure and ensuring the safety of humanitarian
workers. For aid to reach those most in need, ceasefires
and security guarantees for humanitarian organizations
are essential.
Addressing food insecurity and protecting essential
services are especially important in protracted conflicts,
in which needs are ever increasing and aggravated by
climate change. Women play an essential role in food
security and often face enormous challenges due to
limited access to resources, information and education,
and because of discriminatory structures and social
norms. Consequently, women are more likely to
experience poverty and income inequality, which can
lead to higher rates of food insecurity.

23-1454429/31

S/PV.9327

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The Nordic countries promote the protection of
women and girls and the full realization of their rights
at all stages of a conflict. We stress the importance of
the prevention and elimination of gender-based and
sexual violence and the promotion of women’s sexual
and reproductive health and rights. Furthermore,
women should play a role in the design and delivery
of humanitarian aid. The international community
must support local groups, including women’s groups
that are the first to respond to conflict. Particular
attention needs to be paid to people in vulnerable
situations, such as women and girls who are subject to
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination, as
well as gender and sexual minorities and persons with
disabilities. Protecting civilians is one of the key tasks
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Providing
training for peacekeeping personnel on how to ensure
the protection of civilians is critical to successfully
implementing that mandate.
Access to water is a prerequisite for the protection
of civilians and food security and for providing essential
services. Modern warfare affects water sources and
supplies by destroying essential infrastructure and
by causing pollution and environmental degradation.
Water is indispensable for the survival of the
civilian population and has special protection under
international humanitarian law. Water also plays an
increasing role in geopolitical strategies, and pressures
on transboundary basins are mounting. In many
contexts, those effects may be exacerbated by climate
change. Transboundary water cooperation often
continues during armed conflict and can act as a driver
for peace. We call on Governments to make necessary
investments in providing access to water, particularly
in areas already marginalized and prone to conflict. We
call on the development community to invest in basic
services and climate adaptation in fragile and conflictprone regions.
Five years after the adoption of resolution 2417
(2018), the impact of conflicts on global hunger
remains strong, and work remains to be done to change
that trend. We welcome the attention of the Security
Council on this important topic and remain committed
to the objectives set forth in resolution 2417 (2018).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. MacDougall (Canada): I thank Switzerland
for convening today’s important open debate, and I
30/31

23/05/2023

thank the briefers for their thoughtful observations
and insights.
Canada welcomes the Secretary-General’s thorough
and sobering report on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2023/345).
Whereas many States follow their international
humanitarian law obligations assiduously in order to
protect the vulnerable from the conduct of hostilities,
others pay lip service to international humanitarian law
as a cover for vengeful tactics aimed at destroying the
fabric of their enemy’s civilian life. Historic cities such
as Mariupol, Aleppo and Sana’a were once thriving
metropolitan centres. Today large parts of them are
reduced to uninhabitable mountains of concrete, steel
and dust.
Civilians have been indiscriminately bombarded,
ill-treated and starved as a weapon of war, and
vulnerable people such as women, children, the elderly,
the wounded and people with disabilities subjected
to sexual violence are left to fend for themselves in
the rubble. Certain parties’ tactics have left millions
food insecure, well beyond their borders. The Russian
invasion of Ukraine is the most egregious example in
all those respects.
However, the measure of success of international
law is how violations are addressed collectively
by States. In cases of grave violations, States have
responded with targeted and effective sanctions,
as well as the diplomatic and economic isolation of
perpetrating parties.
We have witnessed the revitalization of independent
international judicial institutions, including both the
International Court of Justice and the International
Criminal Court.
(spoke in French)
Canada’s approach is forward-looking, working
with parties to armed conflict to strengthen their
mechanisms for compliance with international
humanitarian law. In 2018, Canada drafted a
commitment by the Foreign Ministers of the Group of
Seven to take practical steps to promote the effective
implementation of international humanitarian law by
State and non-State partners. The goal was to work
with them to incorporate that commitment into their
laws, education, field training and rules of engagement
and to help them put in place structures to effectively
address violations of same. Canada has put this into
23-14544

23/05/2023

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

practice in its dealings with parties to armed conflict
in Iraq and Ukraine.
As the Secretary-General and the International
Committee of the Red Cross have pointed out, the
problems of food insecurity in armed conflict and
the destruction of essential civilian infrastructure are
rooted in the failure to respect that right.
United Nations Member States must make
a concerted effort to ensure that international
humanitarian law is systematically integrated into
the operational practice of parties to armed conflict,

S/PV.9327

protecting the most vulnerable. If the principles of
distinction, proportionality and precaution in attack
were respected in good faith, the worst consequences
of armed conflict on the civilian population would
be avoided.
The President (spoke in French): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting. Given the lateness of the hour, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 12.35 p.m.

23-1454431/31
