A/68/910–S/2014/420*

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
18 June 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2145 (2014), by which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since my previous report was issued on 7 March 2014 ( A/68/789S/2014/163). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events related to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
The presidential and provincial council elections dominated the political,
security and economic environment of Afghanistan during the reporting period. A
stable presidential succession will represent the first democratic transition of
executive authority in the nation’s history. The contest has so far been hard-fought
but respectful of the legal framework and mandated authorities of electoral
institutions. The enthusiasm with which voters participated in the first round of
polling on 5 April was widely seen as a demonstration of support for the democratic
process, even as risks and challenges remain. The second round of polling took
place on 14 June, after the end of the reporting period, and its final results are
scheduled to be announced on 22 July. The President of Afghanistan, Hamid Karzai,
has publicly stated that the inauguration date foreseen for his successor is 2 August.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 25 June 2014.

14-55297* (E)

250614

*1455297*

A/68/910
S/2014/420

4.
Announcements during the period under review have provided greate r clarity
on the timeline of the ongoing international military drawdown, with the United
States of America seeking to conclude its military presence by the end of 2016. All
such planning, however, remains contingent on the establishment of the necessary
legal frameworks with the next Afghan administration.
5.
Both my Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and my
Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator visited Afghanistan during the reporting period, the latter amid
landslides and flooding, which were another stark reminder of the country ’s chronic
vulnerabilities.

A.

Political
6.
The sixteenth legislative term of the National Assembly was inaugurated on
15 March. In addressing the Assembly at its opening session for the last time,
President Karzai emphasized that government authorities and security institutions
would do everything possible to ensure that the upcoming presidential and
provincial council elections would be credible and fre e of official interference. The
President was adamant that the formal commencement of a peace process was a
precondition to signing a bilateral security agreement between Afghanistan and the
United States, and called on political leaders to preserve nation al unity, freedom of
expression and women’s rights. One of the first acts of the lower house of the
National Assembly (Wolesi Jirga) was to confirm President Karzai ’s appointment of
the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mohammad Younus Qanooni, to the p ost of
First Vice-President following the death, on 9 March, of Marshal Mohammad Qasim
Fahim.
7.
Technical preparations for the elections were completed on schedule. On
28 March, the Independent Election Commission’s voter registration top-up exercise
was concluded, with 3,746,755 new voter cards issued, of which 35 per cent to women.
An attack by insurgents on the Commission’s Kabul headquarters on 29 March
interrupted work only briefly, as the most sensitive materials had already been
distributed to the provinces. The campaign period in February and March was marked
by large-scale rallies and, for the first time, a series of television debates between
presidential candidates. These debates, together with local mobilization efforts around
the provincial council polls, were seen to have contributed to civic awareness and
voter turnout. All the campaign teams addressed women’s issues as part of their
platforms; three of the teams included female vice-presidential candidates on the
ticket. During the final days of the campaign, 3 of the 11 presidential candidates
withdrew: Abdul Qayum Karzai, Abdul Rahim Wardak and Sardar Mohammad Nader
Naim. In the course of an assessment of the eligibility of provincial council
candidates, the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission disqualified a further
114 candidates, mainly for not meeting age and education criteria. After resignations
and withdrawals, the final number of aspirants in the provincial council elections
was 2,591, of whom 296 were women.
8.
Afghan security institutions oversaw the planning and implementation of
election security, with the Ministry of the Interior in the lead. Two major operations,
involving over 35,000 personnel, were conducted in the south and south -east of
Afghanistan at the beginning of March as a prelude to the countrywide security

2/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

operation for the first round of voting. In order to better secure women ’s
participation, the Ministry of the Interior trained 581 women police officers and
2,245 civilians and recruited 13,690 “female searchers” (women who search women
voters) for polling day. In March and April, the Taliban issued a number of
statements declaring its intent to violently disrupt the electoral process and
threatening participants. Complex attacks on the Kabul and Laghman prov incial
offices of the Independent Election Commission, on 23 and 26 March respectively,
were followed by the assault on the Commission’s headquarters. The Kabul
provincial office attack killed three civilians and injured four more, including
election workers and a provincial council candidate.
9.
On 5 April, voting took place in 6,082 polling centres (the total number of
polling stations was 19,784). The Commission reported that 15 per cent of the 7,173
polling centres that had been planned originally were closed owing to security
concerns or logistical issues, including 341 that were unable to open on election day.
There were 7,018,849 votes recorded on election day, of which 36 per cent in
women’s polling stations. The most pressing technical issue on election day proved
to be ballot allocation. The higher-than-expected turnout in some areas, mainly
urban centres, highlighted the difficulties in accurately predicting population
movements in the absence of polling centre-specific voter lists. Contingency ballots,
pre-positioned by the Commission as a precautionary measure, were released in all
34 provinces. Overall, the Afghan public and media reacted positively to the
performance of the national security forces, which was widely praised by Afghan
and international partners.
10. On 26 April, the Commission released the preliminary results of the
presidential elections, the final outcome being subject to the resolution of objections
raised during a so-called “complaints period”. The Complaints Commission ’s
adjudication process included the holding of five open sessions in the presence of
the media and the submission of its decisions on 14 May. The Commission released
the final results, based on 6,604,546 votes assessed as valid, on 15 May. The final
results changed little from the preliminary outcomes: Abdullah Abdullah (45 per
cent); Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai (31.6 per cent); Zalmai Rassul (11.4 per cent); Abdul
Rab Rasul Sayyaf (7.3 per cent); Qutbudin Hilal (2.8 per cent); Agha Sherzai
(1.6 per cent); Daud Sultanzoy (0.5 per cent); and Hedayat Amin Arsala (0.2 per
cent). With no candidate gaining more than 50 per cent of the vote, a second round
of polling between the two front-runners is required under the Constitution. On the
same day, the Commission published the electoral timetable for the run-off.
11. On 15 May, Mr. Abdullah and Mr. Ghani held separate press conferences
announcing their respective intention to contest the run-off poll and thanking the
citizens of Afghanistan for participating. Both candidate s demanded technical
improvements by the electoral management bodies prior to the second round.
Political realignment continued throughout the period, with, for example, former
candidates Mr. Rassul and Mr. Sherzai, as well as Mr. Sayyaf ’s running mate,
Mohammad Ismail Khan, publicly backing Mr. Abdullah. Mr. Ghani received the
support of Mr. Sultanzoy and of Mr. Rassul’s first vice-presidential nominee, Ahmad
Zia Massoud.
12. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar’s armed opposition group, Hezb-e Islami, announced on
10 May that it would boycott the second round of voting given both front -runners’
commitment to signing a bilateral security agreement with the United States. The

14-55297

3/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

Hezb-e Islami leadership, however, stated that the group would not target the
electoral process or citizens who participated in voting. The Taliban continued to
publicly condemn the elections: in a statement dated 2 June, it again threatened
electoral workers and polling sites and warned citizens to avoid polling locations.
13. On 20 May, preliminary results for the 458 seats on the 34 provincial councils
were released by the Commission. A total of 588 polling stations had been
disqualified. Of the preliminary winners, 97 were women (legislation requires that
20 per cent of provincial council seats throughout the country be held by women).
The Complaints Commission held open hearings between 31 May and 5 June.
Owing to the large volume of complaints — 1,283 relating to the election and 1,635
to the preliminary results — the announcement of final results, originally scheduled
for 7 June, was delayed.
14. The transparency of elections was enhanced by the presence of observers and
party and candidate agents. Observation efforts largely depended on 67 national
organizations, which sent 14,585 observers across the country for the first round. In
addition, 362,780 party and candidate agents were registered, for the first round, of
whom 23 per cent were women. International observers, while modest in number,
supported the process with technical assistance and exp ertise.
15. Within its mandated support role, the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) maintained close contact with candidates, campaign teams
and the electoral institutions. Throughout the electoral process, and notably amid a
rise in rhetoric prior to the release of the preliminary tally and final results, my
Special Representative for Afghanistan, Ján Kubiš, urged all parties to act
responsibly and respect the two mandated electoral bodies, which should, in turn,
cooperate closely in ensuring transparent decision-making and a timely, credible
process. Through the second phase of the electoral support project entitled
“Enhancing legal and electoral capacity for tomorrow” (ELECT II), the United
Nations continued to provide technical and financial assistance to the electoral
bodies.
16. Preparations for a second round of voting remained on track, although, with
the launch of the campaign period on 22 May, the two candidates ’ rhetoric was
noticeably sharper than during the first round. UNAMA continued to encourage a
respectful campaign in the interests of national unity. The Commission ’s distribution
of ballot papers and sensitive material to the provinces was completed by 25 May
and district-level delivery commenced on 2 June. A “lessons learned” exercise based
on experience gained during the first round sought to ensure improvements in the
administration of the process, as did the blacklisting of some 5,000 (of 100,000)
electoral workers for suspicion of engagement in irregularities. On 4 June, following
the conduct of security risk assessments by the Ministry of the Interior, the
Commission announced that it planned to open 6,272 polling centres with a total of
22,879 polling stations. Security planning for the second round included a one -day
meeting, hosted by the Minister of the Interior, of all provincial police chiefs in
Kabul on 21 May and six regional security briefs for senior security and electoral
personnel and provincial governors from 3 to 7 June. On 6 June, two suicide
bombers attacked the convoy of Mr. Abdullah in the west of Kabul. The presidential
candidate was unharmed, although 13 civilians were killed and 43 were injured in
the blasts, which took place on a busy road in the capital.

4/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

17. UNAMA continued to promote local dialogue and peace initiatives that were
focused, during the reporting period, on managing tensions and on potential fault
lines around the elections. Ten initiatives have been launched in 2014 covering
12 provinces. They have included forums to promote dialogue among diverse local
political stakeholders from Farah, Herat, Kandahar, Kunar, Laghman, Nangarhar,
Nuristan and Paktya provinces. The role of ulema in supporting the peaceful
conduct of elections through gatherings of clerics from Balkh, Kapisa and
Samangan provinces was also recognized. Separately, between 12 and 15 May, at
the request of the parties, UNAMA hosted a traditional assembly of elders in
Jalalabad to seek an end to a century-old conflict between two tribes in the remote
neighbouring province of Nuristan. More than 70 representatives agreed to stop
planting landmines and explosives, to rebuild homes destroyed in the conflict and to
establish a mechanism by which to resolve land and property disputes. UNAMA
also continued to provide assistance for the Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace, a
civil society initiative that facilitated the finalization, in April, of 30 provincial
“road maps” for peace. On 10 June, a report summarizing the main findings of the
second phase of the initiative was launched. Proposed conflict-mitigation measures
included tackling corruption, which is widespread, including through reform and
oversight of local institutions, disempowering and disarming militias, promoting
human rights, equitable development and access to ser vices, and making the peace
process more inclusive.
18. There were no significant developments with regard to the peace process
during the reporting period. A former Taliban-era official, Agha Jan Mutasim, who
had sought to launch an “intra-Afghan dialogue” in the United Arab Emirates, was
said by Afghan authorities on 14 April to be missing. He subsequently arrived in
Kabul and indicated that he would soon seek to restart his efforts. Shifts within the
Taliban movement during the period appear to have resulted in more hard-line
elements coming to the fore, including through the replacement of the head of the
Taliban’s Military Commission. In a statement dated 26 April, the Taliban confirmed
the move while denying speculation that it was related to dissatisf action at the
failure to disrupt the first round of polling to a meaningful extent. On 31 May, it was
announced that a United States soldier in Taliban captivity had been released in
exchange for five senior Taliban detainees. In a statement, the President of the
United States, Barack Obama, hailed the exchange as having the potential to “open
the door for broader discussions among Afghans about the future of their country by
building confidence”. On 1 June, a statement purportedly from the leader of the
Taliban, Mullah Mohammad Omar, welcomed the transfer of the detainees to Qatar.
On 2 June, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan published a statement
expressing dissatisfaction with the manner of the release. Separately, the joint
secretariat of the High Peace Council reported that as at 25 May 8,551 individuals in
33 provinces had joined the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme, which
is aimed at drawing lower-level fighters off the battlefield.

B.

Security
19. Between 1 March and 31 May, the United Nations recorded 5,864 securityrelated incidents relevant to the work, mobility and safety of civilian actors in
Afghanistan, particularly those events that affect the delivery of mandated activities
and programmes. That represented an increase of 22 per cent over the same period

14-55297

5/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

in 2013, an increase of 45 per cent over 2012 and a decrease of 6 per cent over
2011, the most violent year since the fall of the Taliban regime. Of the total number
of incidents, 23 involved United Nations personnel, mostly national staff, 11 were
incidents of intimidation and 1 consisted of an abduction. The high number of
security incidents is mainly attributed to the electoral period, given clearance
operations by Afghan security forces and attempts by the Tali ban to disrupt the
electoral process. On 5 April, polling day, the United Nations recorded 476 security
incidents nationwide, of which at least 271 were directly related to polling,
compared with 488 recorded on the day of the 2010 parliamentary elections and 310
on the day of the 2009 presidential elections. The east was the site of 30 per cent of
the incidents on 5 April while the south reported unprecedentedly low levels of
violence. Tactics differed from previous elections, as there were fewer incidents of
indirect fire and no successful suicide attacks.
20. Armed clashes accounted for 45 per cent of security incidents between
1 March and 31 May and improvised explosive devices for 29 per cent. In seeking to
exert influence through fear and intimidation, targeted killings continued at a high
level. Between 1 March and 31 May, 229 assassinations and failed assassination
attempts were recorded, which represents an increase of 32 per cent over the same
period in 2013. There was also a major spike in suicid e attacks in the run-up to the
first day of polling, with 12 incidents, including five in Kabul, recorded between
20 March and 3 April. In total, there were 32 suicide attacks between 1 March and
31 May — up from 25 in the same period in 2013. High-profile incidents in the
period included a complex assault on a luxury hotel where families were celebrating
Nawruz (the Afghan New Year) on 20 March, in which 10 civilians died, and the
attack on the Indian consulate in the western city of Herat in the early ho urs of
24 May, where the rapid actions of security personnel helped prevent fatalities. The
targeted killing of foreigners, by a variety of perpetrators, was a prominent feature
of the period. On 11 March, a Swedish journalist was shot dead in the diploma tic
area of the capital by parties unknown; on 4 April in Khost, a police officer shot two
journalists, one of whom, a German photographer, fatally; and, on 24 April, three
foreign citizens were killed when a police officer opened fire at a hospital in the
capital.
21. Incidents in the south, south-east and east of the country accounted for 3,917
of the total number of incidents during the period. Particularly notable has been the
increase in incidents in the east, where several Al-Qaida affiliates, including Tehrike-Taliban Pakistan, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba, Lashkar-i-Jhangvi and the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan, regularly carry out attacks on Afghan security forces in
parallel to the efforts of the Taliban and armed wings of Hezb -e Islami. On 8 May,
the Taliban announced in a statement that its 2014 spring operation, “Khaibar”,
would target senior government officials, members of parliament, security officials,
attorneys and judges that prosecute “mujahideen”, as well as “gatherings of foreign
invading forces, their diplomatic centres and convoys”. The announced launch date,
12 May, saw a complex assault on the Department of Justice in Jalalabad in which
eight civilians were killed. On 20 May, in the north-eastern province of Badakhshan,
around 300 insurgents captured the Yamgan district administrative centre. The
Government regained control of the centre on 23 May. The attack was perceived to
have been a show of strength at the start of the fighting season, with local power
struggles over access to resources fuelling a complex, fluid conflict.

6/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

22. As at 11 May, the Afghan National Army numbered 185,131 personnel,
including 7,013 members of the air force, against a ceiling of 187,000. Overall
attrition rates are understood to have decreased somewhat, while re -enlistment rates
remain low. With only 1,138 female personnel, the Ministry of Defence continued
its efforts to recruit women, including through television advertisements. The
challenges encountered included a lack of female recruiters and facilities for
women, a risk of abuse and cultural or family prohibitions. The capabilities and
confidence of the armed forces to plan and conduct operations have increased, but
issues remain regarding coordination with other agencies and medical evacuation
and airlift capabilities. With respect to policing, the United Nations-administered
Law and Order Trust Fund for Afghanistan supported 145,939 police personnel and
5,600 Central Prison Department guards as at the end of May. Women accounted for
1,741 police officers and 273 guards. The police academy’s training school for
countering improvised explosive devices and disposing of explosive ordnances,
which opened in January, had trained 100 people and established 88 teams
countrywide by the end of May.
23. Separately, the security initiative of the Afghan Local Police continued to
expand in the south-east and north-east of the country. As at 29 May, 26,698
personnel of an authorized total of 30,000 were present in 149 districts in
29 provinces; the balance of 3,302 personnel were either preparing for or in training.
UNAMA continued to document allegations of human rights violations and
impunity involving the Afghan Local Police, particularly in Kunduz Province. In
other locations, the police performed to the satisfaction of the local population,
including by providing security for election day.
24. On 27 May, President Obama set forth plans for future United States troop
levels in Afghanistan, which currently stand at around 32,000, down from a peak of
100,000. At the beginning of 2015, there should be approximately 9,800 troops, to
be reduced by half during the year and to be consolidated at Bagram military base,
outside Kabul. By the end of 2016, a normal embassy presence with a security
assistance component is planned. President Karzai released a statement the
following day welcoming the decision, while a number of members of the National
Assembly and civil society expressed concern about the readiness of Afghan
security forces and the impact on the broader international co mmitment to
Afghanistan. The Taliban, in a statement dated 30 May, dismissed the move as an
“extension of occupation until 2016”. On 4 June, a meeting of defence ministers at
the headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) reviewed the
progress made by the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), the mandate
of which will end on 31 December 2014. A follow-up training, advice and assistance
mission is planned, although it has been emphasized that international military
commitments remain contingent on reaching agreement on the necessary legal
frameworks.

C.

Regional cooperation
25. During the reporting period, Afghanistan continued to actively engage with its
neighbours and promote regional cooperation. China, India, Iran (Islamic Republic
of) and Pakistan were among the countries in the region to welcome the conduct of
the first round of polling and to recognize the importance of a smooth political
transition in Afghanistan for regional stability.

14-55297

7/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

26. On 26 March, the President of Tajikistan, Emomali Rahmon, met with
President Karzai in Kabul, where several agreements on cooperation were
concluded, including between the ministries of the interior. On 27 March, on the
sidelines of the regional Nawruz festivities hosted by Presiden t Karzai, the
presidents of Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan and Tajikistan held a
quadrilateral summit. In a joint statement, they reiterated the importance of
constructive regional cooperation. This included support for ongoing Afghan -led
regional efforts within the framework of the Istanbul Process on Regional Security
and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan, as well as infrastructure
projects to strengthen regional connectivity. The same day, the World Bank Group
approved $526.5 million in grants and credit financing for the Central Asia South
Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA-1000). This will put in
place, in Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan and Tajikistan, the infrastructure and the
commercial and institutional arrangements required for a sustainable electricity
trade.
27. On 19 May, the Chief of Army Staff of Pakistan, General Raheel Sharif,
visited Kabul to attend the thirty-seventh trilateral security meeting between the
heads of the Afghan and Pakistani armies and NATO. In the period that followed,
Afghanistan and Pakistan exchanged mutual allegations of cross -border incursions.
On 28 May, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan summoned the
Ambassador of Pakistan to express strong objections to shelling in Kunar and
Nuristan provinces and to the construction of military installations on what it claims
is Afghan territory. On 31 May and 4 June, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan stated that insurgent groups based in Afghanistan had mo unted attacks on
checkpoints it claims were within Pakistan, and that three of its soldiers had been
killed in the incidents. The Afghan authorities, in turn, stated that the Pakistani
response to the incident of 31 May had included helicopter strikes insi de
Afghanistan that had resulted in civilian casualties. In protest, Afghanistan
boycotted a regional security summit scheduled to take place in Islamabad on
4 June.
28. On the sidelines of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence -building
Measures in Asia, President Karzai met with his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, on
19 May. President Jinping hailed the smooth conduct of the first round of elections
and, in looking to increase stability and economic self-reliance in the future,
encouraged international investment in Afghanistan. President Karzai highlighted
the common threat posed by terrorism and fundamentalism. In my meeting with
President Karzai in Shanghai, I welcomed the continued progress in the electoral
process and extended condolences on the recent flooding and landslides. On
26 May, President Karzai attended the swearing-in ceremony in New Delhi of the
new Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, and had a bilateral meeting, during
which development and the threat of terrorism were discuss ed. On 30 and 31 May,
the new Foreign Secretary of India, Sujatha Singh, visited Kabul and Herat, meeting
with President Karzai and the two presidential candidates. Ms. Singh reiterated her
Government’s resolve to reopen its consulate in Herat following the attack of
24 May.
29. During the reporting period, activities and technical meetings took place with a
view to making progress on three of the confidence-building measures identified in
the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Sec ure and Stable
Afghanistan: a counter-improvised explosive device workshop, held in Kabul on

8/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

8 and 9 March, under the counter-terrorism confidence-building measure; an
international conference on sharing experiences and developing a regional picture
on hazards and risks for joint action plans, held in Islamabad on 12 and 13 May,
under the disaster management confidence-building measure, followed by a regional
technical group meeting; and a regional technical group meeting on trade, commerce
and investment opportunities, held in New Delhi on 15 May, under the trade
facilitation confidence-building measure, at which an action plan for 2014-2015 was
developed. Preparations continued for the fourth Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference, to be held in China in August 2014.
30. The International Contact Group on Afghanistan and Pakistan held a meeting
in Tokyo on 15 May. Discussions focused on the status of the 2014 elections,
arrangements for the upcoming Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework ministerial
review meeting, to be held in London in late 2014, and continuing international
support for Afghan security forces.

III. Human rights
31. As at 31 May, UNAMA had documented 1,143 civilians killed and 2,214
injured by armed conflict in Afghanistan in 2014. This represents an increase in
civilian casualties of 11 per cent compared with the same period in 2013. UNAMA
attributed 78 per cent of those casualties to anti-government elements and 8 per cent
to pro-government forces. Another 8 per cent of the casualties were due to
unattributed crossfire during ground engagements between the parties to the conflict
and 6 per cent were undetermined, resulting mostly from explosive remnants of war.
Among the casualties were 79 civilian deaths and 219 civilian injuries caus ed by
anti-government elements targeting election workers, polling centres, voters, electoral
convoys and compounds between 1 January and 31 May. UNAMA also documented
122 instances of anti-government elements carrying out serious acts of intimidation
against civilians, including threats of death or of cutting off fingers (inked as proof of
voting) — although to date there is no evidence that these were carried through. On
5 April, UNAMA documented 33 civilian deaths and 126 injuries, mostly from
attacks by anti-government elements at or near polling sites.
32. Improvised explosive devices remained the main cause of civilian casualties.
They accounted for 32 per cent of the total and resulted in 331 civilians killed and
734 injured between 1 January and 31 May, an increase of 3 per cent over 2013. Of
those casualties, 50 per cent occurred in the southern provinces of Helmand and
Kandahar. Remote-controlled devices accounted for 38 per cent of civilian
casualties from improvised explosive devices, down 10 per cent from 2013. The
proportion of civilian casualties from pressure-plate (or victim-operated) improvised
explosive devices, however, increased by 44 per cent compared with the same
period in 2013. The casualties included 12 civilians who were killed, in Ghazni
Province on 31 May, while travelling to a wedding party in two minivans that hit
such devices planted in the road; most of the fatalities were women and children.
For the first time, the number of civilian casualties caused by ground engagements
was almost on par with the number of civilian casualties caused by improvised
explosive devices: 310 civilians were killed and 752 were injured between 1 January
and 31 May, an increase of 39 per cent in casualties caused by ground engagements
compared with the same period in 2013. UNAMA also documented an increase of

14-55297

9/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

20 per cent in female civilian casualties, with 102 women killed and 189 injured in
the first five months of the year.
33. The Country Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting on Children and Arme d
Conflict continued to receive reports of incidents of grave violations of children ’s
rights. Between 1 February and 30 April, 123 children were killed and a further 301
were injured by armed conflict in Afghanistan; 88 of the incidents occurred in the
southern region. Improvised explosive devices were the leading cause of child
casualties, responsible for 42 deaths and 82 injuries. Unexploded ordnance,
explosive remnants of war and landmines claimed the lives of a further 27 children
and injured another 46. Other grave violations of children’s rights recorded
included: 11 attacks against locations providing health-care services, 83 incidents of
attacks against schools and education personnel, 6 incidents of underage recruitment
by anti-government elements and Afghan local police, 2 incidents of sexual abuse
within the Afghan security forces, 3 incidents of abduction by anti -government
elements and 17 incidents of denial of humanitarian access by the Afghan Local
Police and the Taliban and other anti-government elements.
34. On 24 April, the Government of Afghanistan submitted to the United Nations its
third report on the implementation of the children and armed conflict action plan. The
report highlighted progress in 2013 to prevent underage recruitment and included
annexes reporting on killing, maiming and sexual violence against children. Activities
included a number of training workshops and seminars and the identification and
removal of 16 underage persons from service in provincial police headquarters in
2013. In seeking to no longer have Afghanistan included in my annual report on
children and armed conflict, a road map to enhance implementation of the action plan
has been developed through consultation between the Government and the United
Nations, but awaits final endorsement. On 12 May, after several round -table
discussions with Islamic scholars and legal experts, UNAMA launched a booklet
entitled “Protecting Afghanistan’s children in armed conflict”, which focuses on six
grave violations of child rights. Designed as an advocacy tool, the booklet is based
on national and international law and on fundamental tenets of Islam.
35. The new Criminal Procedure Code was published on 5 May and came into
effect on 5 June. On 17 May, the Wolesi Jirga ratified the President’s legislative
decree, whereby article 26 of the Code was amended to reinstate previous legal
provisions enabling women to continue to testify against relatives, thereby
facilitating the prosecution of suspects in cases of domestic violence. Othe r
provisions in the new Code, including the mandatory presence of a defence lawyer
during investigations and proceedings in felony cases and the right to challenge the
extension of pretrial detention before a court, strengthen legal protections for
detainees. Despite improvements, concerns remain that permitting persons to be
detained for up to 18 days before being brought before a judge is a contravention of
international obligations. UNAMA and other United Nations entities continued to
support efforts to distribute the new Code to justice institutions throughout the
country.
36. UNAMA continued to visit Afghan-run detention facilities to observe the
treatment of persons detained for their involvement in conflict. During the reporting
period, UNAMA visited 20 places of detention, in 10 provinces, run by the National
Directorate of Security, the Afghan National Police, the Central Prisons Directorate
and the Afghan National Army.

10/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and coordination of
development assistance
37. In ensuring continued progress against the benchmarks established in the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework in a period dominated by electoral
competition and awaiting political transition, the Government and international donors
focused on technical deliverables. On 10 May, the Minister of Finance hosted a
gathering of members of parliament and representatives of the international
community, relevant ministries, civil society and the private sector to highlight
progress made by the Government on its Framework commitments. Achievements set
forth by the Minister included: promoting implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women with the release by the Ministry of Women ’s
Affairs of its baseline report on 8 March; the Wolesi Jirga’s endorsement of the laws
on minerals and value-added tax on 3 May; and the introduction to the National
Assembly of the laws relating to anti-money-laundering and combating the financing
of terrorism on 24 May and the law on tax administration on 29 May. The law on
value-added tax was later passed by the upper house (Meshrano Jirga) on 3 June.
Discussion on the laws on minerals and money-laundering is expected to continue,
however, with a number of concerns still to be addressed in ensuring complia nce by
Afghanistan with international obligations.
38. The economic situation of Afghanistan remains of concern. Economic outlooks
released in April by both the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank
indicated declining growth, largely because of consumer and investor uncertainty,
which is due to the political and security transitions and is further compounded by
rising security expenditure and declining revenue. The World Bank projected that the
economy would grow by 3.2 per cent in 2014, against an estimated growth of 3.6 per
cent in 2013 and of 14.4 per cent in 2012. Lower-than-expected government revenue
collection is seen to be the result of weak enforcement by tax and customs
administrations. A report by the International Monetary Fund released on 1 6 May
reached the same conclusions and highlighted the Treasury’s tight cash situation. The
need for the Government to reduce expenditure, increase revenue collection,
strengthen tax and customs enforcement and enact a sound financial regulatory
framework was emphasized. The impact of such reduced economic activity and
revenue has meant that government commitments to development activities at a
provincial level are currently suspended.
39. On 6 May, the Government endorsed in principle the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework for 2015-2019, which, it recognized, was
aligned with government programmes and development plans. A stronger focus on
infrastructure and job creation was requested, and it is understood that the incoming
administration may revisit the document. The Framework supports key areas of the
Afghan development agenda focused on the licit economy, basic services, social
equity, the rule of law and governance.

V. Humanitarian assistance
40. A series of emergencies in northern Afghanistan, the result of heavy seasonal
rains and above-average snow-melt, again highlighted the chronic vulnerabilities to
natural disasters of what remains one of the world’s poorest countries. On 2 May,

14-55297

11/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

significant landslides in Badakhshan Province killed an unconfirmed number of
people. Altogether, the floods and landslides that occurred in 132 districts
throughout May were estimated to have affected 150,000 people and damaged and
destroyed 16,471 homes. On 6 June, more large flash floods hit Baghlan and initial
reports indicate a significant loss of life and the destruction of hundreds of homes.
The provinces of Jawzjan, Saripul, Faryab, Balkh and Baghlan were the most
severely affected. Contingency planning meant that provisions were pre -positioned
based on the flooding patterns of 2013, which had affected 204,000 people and
damaged and destroyed 22,000 homes. Relief stocks proved sufficient, with the
major constraints being physical access where infrastructure was damaged and
security challenges in contested areas.
41. On 5 and 6 May, my Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
visited Kabul and Badakhshan Province. She called for continuing support to
vulnerable communities affected by conflict and natural disasters and warned that
any significant reduction in aid during the transition period could be devastating. As
at 31 May, overall humanitarian funding received in Afghanistan, including by the
Red Cross and Red Crescent family of organizations, reached $244 million for 2014.
Humanitarian funding aligned with the United Nations strategic response plan stood
at 40 per cent of the appeal requirement. The first standard allocation of $20 million
of the newly established common humanitarian fund was finalized in May with
priority interventions aimed at providing up to 800,000 Afghans with access to
essential health services and at addressing the needs of up to 400,000 severely
malnourished children, mainly in southern and south-eastern Afghanistan.
42. On 26 March, the Internally Displaced Persons Task Force, co-chaired by the
Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation and the United Nations, approved a road map
for the implementation of the national policy on internally displaced persons.
Between 1 February and 30 April, the Task Force recorded 6,779 displacements
owing to conflict, most of which in Faryab, Balkh, Farah, Ghor, Kabul, Nangarhar,
Kapisa and Badghis provinces. This brings the national total to some 660,000 persons
internally displaced owing to conflict. On 30 April, a portfolio of projec ts proposed
under the Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to Support Voluntary Repatriation,
Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host Countries was launched in Pakistan
by the Federal Minister for States and Frontier Regions and the United Natio ns High
Commissioner for Refugees. Ranging from emergency assistance to long-term
development interventions, the projects aim to foster the sustainable return and
reintegration of refugees to Afghanistan. The project to renew proof-of-registration
cards, which was launched in February, will continue until 30 December 2015.
Around 75 per cent of the 1.6 million refugees registered in Pakistan completed the
process by the end of May. Between 1 February and 30 April, 3,535 refugees
voluntarily repatriated to Afghanistan with the assistance of the United Nations, of
whom 2,061 were from Pakistan, 1,429 were from the Islamic Republic of Iran and
45 were from India. This represented a decrease of 64 per cent compared with the
same period in 2013.
43. Humanitarian access constraints continue to be recorded under the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs’ global monitoring framework. Key areas of
concern remain attacks against personnel, assets and facilities and the violation of
health facilities. As at 30 April, 82 incidents of violence against personnel, assets and
facilities were recorded in 2014, resulting in 22 deaths, 11 injuries, 83 abductions and
attempted abductions, and the arrest and detention of five aid workers. Between

12/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

1 January and 30 April, 36 incidents affected health facilities and assets, the
majority in the eastern and central provinces. Prior to the first round of elections,
intense advocacy by the humanitarian community emphasized the obligation to not
target civilians and civilian facilities, including health clinics and schools
designated for use as polling centres. On election day, 2 of 173 health clinics and
45 of the 3,546 educational facilities designated as polling locations were affected
by election-related violence. This represents a two-thirds reduction in the number of
incidents compared with 2009.
44. As at 31 May, Afghanistan reported four cases of polio, all in the east of the
country, reinforcing the importance of cross-border cooperation and coordination in
combating the virus, including in terms of synchronizing polio vaccination
campaigns with Pakistan. In general, personnel working on polio programmes have
continued to have access to insecure areas, but the uncertainty of the electoral
period has had an adverse impact on campaigns in some locations.
45. During the reporting period, 10 battlefields and 144 minefields were cleared
by the mine action sector, supported by the United Nations, and an additional six
districts were declared mine-free. In March and April, a total of 57 casualties related
to mines and unexploded ordinance were recorded; 16 of these were in or around
international military firing ranges or former bases. The United Nations continued to
work with ISAF to help ensure that premises being closed or transferred are cleared
of unexploded ordnance. To date, 81 km2 of firing range have been cleared and
33,000 explosive items and almost 13,000 items of small arms ammunition have
been destroyed. March marked the end of the first year of the 10 -year workplan to
remove all hazards from Afghanistan by 2023; during that first year, 87.2 km2 of
land were cleared. It is estimated that 4,081 minefields and 218 battlefields,
affecting 1,609 communities in 33 provinces, remain to be cleared.

VI. Counter-narcotics
46. Between 1 March and 31 May, the Counter-Narcotics Police of Afghanistan
conducted 678 operations that resulted in 583 arrests, the dismantling of 6 illicit
heroin laboratories and the seizure of 22,646 kg of precursor chemicals, 7,911 kg of
opium, 4,840 kg of cannabis, 423 kg of heroin and 1.2 kg of methamphetamines.
Four police officers were killed and seven wounded in the line of duty. Efforts to
prevent trafficking through Kabul International Airport are being strengthened
through mentorship and training activities supported by the United Nations. As a
result, 17 kg of heroin were intercepted there between 1 March and 31 May. Similar
efforts will be required in Herat, Kandahar and Mazar-i-Sharif international airports.
47. As at 27 May, 1,473 ha of land under opium poppy cultivation had been
eradicated in 13 provinces, according to data verified by the Ministry of Counter Narcotics together with the United Nations. Helmand Province accounted for 901 ha
of such land, with figures in other provinces being: 22 ha in Uruzgan; 94 ha in
Kandahar; 75 ha in Kunar; 43 ha in Nangarhar; 40 ha in Badakhshan; 36 ha in
Balkh; 24 ha in Kapisa; 12 ha in Zabul; 10 ha in Faryab; 9 ha in Kunduz; 6 ha in
Daikundai; and 1 ha in Laghman. These efforts resulted in 13 dea ths (eight police,
three army and two farmers). The area eradicated was significantly smaller than the
4,724 ha cleared in the same period in 2013. On 27 May, representatives of four
ministries and the Chair of the Afghan Red Crescent Society appeared befo re the

14-55297

13/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

Meshrano Jirga to address senators’ rising concerns at the low level of eradication
this season. It was stated that efforts had been very limited owing to the demands on
Afghan security forces around the elections.
48. On 18 March, the third steering committee meeting of the regional programme
for Afghanistan and countries in the region was held in Vienna on the margins of the
fifty-seventh session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The eight countries
concerned (Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan,
Pakistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) attended, as well as donors. The
progress made during 2013 in the four subprogrammes (regional cooperation in law
enforcement, criminal justice, demand reduction and research advocacy) was noted.
At the same time, ministerial review meetings for the Afghanistan -KyrgyzstanTajikistan Initiative and the Triangular Initiative, involving Afghanistan, Iran
(Islamic Republic of) and Pakistan, were also held to further strengthen on -theground collaboration throughout the region. The meeting on the Triangular Initiative
concluded with the signing of a formal joint ministerial statement focused on
enhancing cooperation in the areas of drugs control and border management. On
29 May, the fourth Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan Initiative meeting of senior
officials was held in Dushanbe; the ministerial meeting was held on the following
day. A declaration on counter-narcotics cooperation was adopted following
discussions emphasizing better cooperation between law enforcement and judicial
bodies.

VII. Mission support
49. UNAMA undertook a series of operational and contingency-planning exercises
prior to the elections to review the broader business continuity, crisis management
and security plans in accordance with the Organization’s overall guidance. UNAMA
also provided support to ELECT II by contracting two helicopters to provide
logistical support throughout the electoral period. The roll -out of Umoja, the “go
live” date for which was 1 March, was successfully managed. Training and capacitybuilding activities for staff using the system continued in close consultation with the
Kuwait Joint Support Office.
50. With the support of the Office of the United Nations Controller in New York,
UNAMA will prepare an interim budget for the first half of 2015, based on existing
resource levels, to allow enough time for a revised budget for 2015 to be finalized
by the end of 2014. Overall, as at 31 May, UNAMA had 1,496 personnel (and a
7 per cent vacancy rate), comprising 340 international and 1,156 national staff. In
addition, there were 60 United Nations Volunteers, 15 military advisers and 2 police
advisers.

VIII. Observations
51. The present report is issued amid landmark elections in Afgha nistan. To date,
the political engagement demonstrated by the candidates and the electorate, together
with the efforts of electoral and security bodies, has been impressive, reinforcing
national and international confidence in the future of Afghanistan. A political
transition resulting from an outcome accepted by the candidates and the electorate
would provide a solid mandate for a new leadership to tackle the country ’s many

14/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

political, economic and security challenges. I congratulate the people, electoral
bodies and security institutions on progress to date. The process — full of
challenges — is by no means over and, as long as risks remain, the United Nations
shall be actively seized of the matter. In my recent meeting with President Karzai, I
welcomed his continued support for a smooth and timely transition.
52. The first round of voting on 5 April saw enthusiastic popular participation by
both men and women across the country despite the poor weather conditions and the
threats of violence. It stands as a testament to the determination of Afghans to
exercise their right to vote and shape their country’s future. In what has been a truly
Afghan-led, Afghan-managed process, technical planning and preparations were
better than in previous elections. This is not to say that they were perfect. The
electoral institutions — the Independent Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission — were established, for the first time under
agreed legislation, and are new and still maturing. The two pre sidential candidates
rightly demanded improvements before the second round. While there was progress,
flaws undoubtedly remained. We must however be clear on the necessary outcome: a
credible process and result that is accepted by the candidates and the Af ghan people.
We should also not forget the provincial council elections, which are an important
element of ensuring local representation and accountability.
53. My Special Representative for Afghanistan continues to meet with all
stakeholders in support of the inclusiveness and integrity of the process. Electoral
management bodies have been urged to ensure transparency in their decision making and conduct so as to reassure the Afghan people that their valid votes will
count. Accountability, together with clear and timely communication with the
public, observers and the campaigns, remains vital throughout the process, including
the tallying and adjudication of the results in this decisive election. The two
presidential candidates, both well-known and respected national figures, also bear
heavy responsibilities. They must disavow fraud by their supporters and respect the
authorities of the electoral management bodies. Once electoral complaints have been
adjudicated in accordance with the law, I urge the candidates and their supporters to
accept the outcome. At this critical juncture for Afghanistan, the need is for
statesmanship, not gamesmanship. In the post-election period, whoever the winner
is, the need is for an inclusive administration drawing on the coun try’s many diverse
elements to best ensure national unity and stability.
54. Little progress has been possible in this time of uncertainty in establishing
formal dialogue between the Government and the main armed opposition groups. It
is clear that there are splits within the Taliban movement, with some of the more
hard-line elements continuing to hold the grave misperception that there can be
victory on the battlefield. Efforts to achieve peace have, nonetheless, continued at the
community level, where complex and often long-standing cycles of violence require
multi-tiered approaches. Left to fester, local grievances and disputes — including over
access to resources — can further provide insurgents with opportunities to make
gains. I welcome United Nations-supported community efforts to resolve the longrunning conflict in Nuristan. I hope that the agreement will provide the foundations
for a more peaceful future for these communities and set a wider example in
Afghanistan. I also welcome the launch of the most recent report on the Afghan
People’s Dialogue for Peace, a civil society initiative that is an inspiring example of
inclusive, rights-based peacebuilding by ordinary Afghan men and women. The
elections were a further demonstration of the Afghan people ’s commitment to the

14-55297

15/17

A/68/910
S/2014/420

political process and a rejection of continued conflict and violence. On the
campaign trail, candidates made pledges to work for peace, and I urge the new
leader to seek to build and strengthen Afghan-led, Afghan-owned channels of
dialogue. The United Nations is ready to provide support.
55. In the meantime, civilians continue to bear the brunt of the conflict, as they are
increasingly caught in the crossfire between Afghan forces and anti -government
elements, with women and children taking a particularly heavy toll. The Taliban’s
stated aim of targeting the elections — a civilian process — was of grave concern.
Overall, the vast majority of civilian casualties continued to be at the hands of anti government elements. I am particularly concerned at the rise in victim-activated
improvised explosive devices. Ending the use of these indiscriminate weapons has
been the subject of ongoing advocacy by the United Nations in Afghanistan, and last
year’s decrease was widely welcomed. Civilian targets and indiscriminate tactics
breach the norms of war and the fundamental tenets of Islam and undermine the
claims to legitimacy that such groups make. I underline again the obligations of the
parties to distinguish between civilians and combatants.
56. Among the priorities facing the country’s new leader will be a decision on
legal frameworks for the United States and NATO troops’ presence after 2014. Both
presidential candidates have stated their intention to sign such frameworks to allow
the smooth planning and implementation of the follow-on training and assistance
mission in support of Afghan institutions. In planning and implementing operations
around elections, Afghan security forces have been courageous and increasingly
confident, including in terms of placing an emphasis on protecting women so that
they too can participate. These efforts have helped bolster institutional morale and
popular confidence in the capabilities of national security institutions, which have
held their ground amid the international military drawdown.
57. To Member States, I emphasize that even as the physical presence of their
troops decreases, obligations to provide security and development assistance must
be met in ways that are predictable and reinforce Afghan systems. Ther e must not be
a perception that the Afghan people are being abandoned. The very heart of the
transition is the principle of Afghan leadership with international support through
the decade of transformation. Mutual commitments made at the NATO Chicago
summit and at the Tokyo conference must be kept. The NATO summit in September
and the London ministerial-level development conference planned for November
provide important opportunities to reiterate and reinforce mutual commitments with
the new Government of Afghanistan.
58. Continuity of support must not, however, mean business as usual. The
economic situation of Afghanistan is of grave concern and requires the urgent
attention of the new administration. There must be real commitment to economic
reform, the rule of law and good governance — including combating corruption —
together with accelerated progress on a rights-based agenda, notably sustaining and
strengthening women’s rights. Hard decisions and rapid, robust action is required to
increase government revenue and ensure jobs-based growth. This includes expediting
an agreement on a sound regulatory framework that encourages investor confidence
and is compliant with international obligations. Increasing outreach and consultation
with the private sector and civil society is required to help ensure inclusive growth.
Growing dependence on the illicit economy is a threat to the economic and
institutional stability not just of Afghanistan but of the wider region, fuelling

16/17

14-55297

A/68/910
S/2014/420

corruption and funding for terrorists. Addressing the threat posed by narcotics
requires genuine commitment to tackling entrenched interests and the lack of
tangible results to date is of great concern.
59. Economically, the interconnections between Afghanistan and other countries in
the region will grow and should contribute to progress on shared interests and wider
stability. The CASA-1000 electricity project is an example of the potential and
possibilities in regional energy connectivity and trade through Afghanistan. I
welcome the World Bank’s approval of funding and encourage other countries and
institutions to step in to help address the funding gap. Progress in the Istanbul
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
seen in a number of the confidence-building measures during the reporting period,
will however require active and constructive engagement in ensuring continued
momentum before and after the ministerial conference to be held in China in
August.
60. Humanitarian needs in Afghanistan are likely to rise given chronic poverty and
continuing insecurity. A particular focus is required on emergency health needs,
including trauma care and childhood malnutrition. Afghanistan remains prone to
recurrent sudden and slow-onset natural disasters. The northern provinces in
particular have been the subject of recurring relief interventions over recent years,
with flooding once again this spring having a devastating impact on vulnerable
populations, infrastructure and livelihoods. As this relief effort switches to
rehabilitation and reconstruction, there is an important opportunity to afford greater
priority to disaster risk management and risk reduction. This includes greater
surveillance of risk and the related issues of land allocation and restitution. The
Government’s recently endorsed policy on internally displaced persons provides
useful practical guidance and tools to support a more calibrated approach to disaster
risk management.
61. I would like to express my gratitude to all national and international s taff
members of UNAMA and to my Special Representative, Ján Kubiš, for their
continued dedication, often under challenging conditions, to fulfilling our
commitments in support of the people of Afghanistan.

14-55297

17/17
