S/PRST/2005/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 May 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5187th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 May 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Post-conflict
peacebuilding”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and recalls its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council considers post-conflict peacebuilding closely linked to
its primary responsibilities.
“The Security Council recognizes that intra-state conflicts and states
emerging from conflict, are among the most complex challenges facing the
international community, and that responding to these challenges in most
instances requires a coherent and integrated mix of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities, including political, military, civilian, humanitarian
and development activities.
“The Security Council acknowledges that serious attention to the
longer-term process of peacebuilding in all its multiple dimensions is critically
important, and that adequate support for peacebuilding activities can help to
prevent countries from relapsing into conflict.
“The Security Council underlines that priorities in the post-conflict
environment should include, where appropriate: protection of civilians;
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation of
former combatants; security sector and economic and social reform; the end of
impunity; establishment and re-establishment of the institutions of
Government, the rule of law and transitional justice, respect for human rights;
and economic revitalisation.
“The Security Council recognises the key role played by the United
Nations, including the United Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies, in peacebuilding alongside the International Financial Institutions, in
particular the World Bank, bilateral donors and troop contributors. It also
acknowledges the role the private sector can play in countries emerging from
conflict. The Security Council underlines that a successful outcome of
post-conflict peacebuilding activities depends on the sustained commitment of
all relevant actors to the process, through the involvement of these actors and

05-36177 (E) 260505

*0536177*

S/PRST/2005/20

the coordination of their activities in all phases from planning through
implementation. In this regard, the Security Council also stresses the
importance of pursuing coherent policies and resource allocation between
these United Nations entities taking into account their respective mandates.
The Security Council recalls the report of 21 August 2000 by the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations (A/55/305) and the recommendations
therein, and welcomes the progress made since the publication of the report,
not least as regards planning of peacekeeping operations.
“The Security Council underlines that for countries emerging from
conflict, significant international assistance for economic and social
rehabilitation and reconstruction is indispensable. In this regard the Security
Council acknowledges the role ECOSOC plays, including in sustainable
development, and reiterates its willingness to improve cooperation with United
Nations bodies and organs directly concerned with peacebuilding.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of national ownership
of the transition process from the end of a conflict to the attainment of lasting
peace and sustainable development and the need for the international
community to support nationally owned peacebuilding priorities. The Security
Council recognises the positive role played by local stakeholders and
encourages dialogue between the United Nations and relevant national actors.
The Security Council encourages capacity building in order to respond to the
country specific circumstances of each conflict situation. One goal of this
capacity building - and of peacebuilding generally - should be to promote the
establishment of self-supporting national authorities and thus the evolution of
international assistance from peace support to longer-term development.
“The Security Council recognises the crucial role of regional and
subregional organisations in post-conflict peacebuilding and their involvement
at the earliest possible stage. The Security Council realizes that a clear
regional perspective is necessary as most conflicts have interlocking political,
security, humanitarian and economic dynamics across borders. The Security
Council underscores in this respect the need for enhanced cooperation and,
where appropriate, coordination between United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in peacebuilding, based on a more integrated
approach and with the aim of maximising use of available resources and
capabilities.
“The Security Council stresses the importance of a comprehensive
international and regional approach to disarmament, demobilisation and
reintegration of former combatants that is not limited to the political and
security aspects, but also addresses its social and economic aspects, including
special needs of child soldiers and women.
“The Security Council stresses the special needs of Africa in
post-conflict situations and encourages the international community to pay
particular attention to those needs. It welcomes the ever-closer partnership
between the African Union, the African subregional organisations and the
United Nations in the area of peacemaking and peacekeeping and stresses the
importance of extending this partnership to peacebuilding efforts.

2

S/PRST/2005/20

“The Security Council underscores the importance of cooperation
between United Nations peacekeeping operations and the United Nations
funds, programmes and specialized agencies. The Security Council stresses the
importance of ensuring that planning and implementation of United Nations
humanitarian, peacekeeping, political and developmental activities at country
level are well coordinated system-wide, including through the development of
shared strategic objectives. The Security Council stresses that the United
Nations should function as one integrated entity at country level under
effective overall leadership in post-conflict peacebuilding.
“The Security Council stresses the need to ensure adequate and timely
financing for peacebuilding priorities at all stages of the peace process, and
stresses the need for sustained financial investment in peacebuilding over the
medium to longer-term period of recovery. It recognizes the importance of
rapid initiation of peacebuilding activities to meet immediate needs and
encourages the building of capabilities that can be incorporated rapidly.
“The Security Council welcomes the submission of the report of
21 March 2005 by the Secretary-General In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all (A/59/2005) and of the report
by the High Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change, A more secure
world: Our shared responsibility. The Security Council acknowledges
institutional gaps, identified in the reports, in the United Nations institutional
machinery with respect to effectively, coherently, and comprehensively
helping countries with transition from conflict to lasting peace and sustainable
development.
“The Security Council takes note with interest of the important proposal
by the Secretary-General to establish a Peacebuilding Commission and shares
the objective of improving United Nations capacity to coordinate with donors
and troop contributors and to perform peacebuilding activities, in particular
from the start of peacekeeping operations through stabilization, reconstruction
and development. The Security Council recognizes the important role that this
body could play to bridge the gap between maintenance of international peace
and security and the work of humanitarian and economic development
assistance.”

3
