30

Genernl Assembly-Twenty-l!eeond Session

Reaffirming that the possibility and advisability of
proclaiming a charter of development underlying international co-operation in the interests of economic, social
and cultural development deserve further consideration,
Reaffirming also that it is necessary to look ahead
to the next decade so that concerted international action will be taken for the accelerated social and economic
development of the developing countries in the light
of the experience gained during the present United
Nations Development Decade and with due regard to
safeguarding their economic interests,
Stressing the importance of intensifying the preparatory work for the next decade with a view to having,
before the end of the present decade, a clear and comprehensive picture of the specific goals and targets to
be attained by the international community in a common endeavour towards the accelerated economic and
social development of the developing countries,
Taking into account the fact that the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development will consider at
its second session the major problems of trade and development which will have an important bearing on the
prep!').rations for the next decade,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite the
preparation of the survey requested of him in General
Assembly resolution 2218 A (XXI) and to submit the
survey to the Assembly at its twenty-third session
through the Economic and Social Council at its fortyfifth session ;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General, in consultation w:ith the Committee for Development Planning
and the organizations in the United Nations system,
and on the basis of the results of the second session
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to incorporate suggestions on the appropriate
means of harmonizing measures that could be considered by international organizations, on the one hand,
and br developing and developed countries, on the
other, m the preliminary framework of an international
development strategy being prepared by him in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 2218 B (XXI)
for submission to the Assembly at its twenty-third session, with due regard to safeguarding the economic
interests of the developing countries ;

3. Urges Member States to consider taking appropriate steps to intensify national and international efforts to formulate and implement a dynamic international policy for the economic and social development
of the developing countries to be pursued during the
next decade ;
4. Stresses. the ~mport~nce of enlisting the support
of _wo~ld publtc opinion m favour of the policies and
obJechves to be pursued during the next decade and,
towards this end, the desirability for national and internation~l publjc informat~on media to take the necessary
steps m seeking the active co-operation and support of
the general public in the fulfilment of these objectives;

5. Decides to consider at its twenty-third session the
appropriate procedures to be followed for proclaiming
the 1970's as a second United Nations Development
D~c~de and for approving a programme of action
w1thm the framework of an international development
strategy for that decade.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.

2306 (XXII). International Education Year

The General Assembly,
Recalling the Secretary-General's appraisal in his •
report entitled "United Nations Development Decade
at mid-point",30 and in particular his emphasis on the
development of human resources as the greatest po-tential resource of any country,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1274 (XLIII) of 4 August 1967 on the development
and utilization of human resources,
Recognizing the urgent need for a more effective
mobili~ation of efforts in education and training as an
essential element of a suCC'essful strategy of international development,
Rec?gnizing further the fundamental importance of
educ~t1on as a means of widening man's horizons, impro~mg mutual understanding and strengthening- international peace,
Convinced that an international education year on
the basis of appropriate planning would serve through?ut the world to mobilize energies and inspire initiatives
m education and training,
1. Decides to observe an International Education
Y~ar and provisionally designates the year 1970 for
this. purpose, subject to review at the twenty-fourth
sess10n of the (;eneral Assembly, in the light of the
preparatory work ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural
~rganiza!ion and other interested specialized agencies
m preparing a programme of activities to be undertaken
or initiated by Member States, by the United N8.tions
and _by the spec~alized agencies, particularly the United
~attons Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organiza!t0n, and by. o~~er interested intergovernmental bodies,
m order to 1mt1ate those world-wide activities in education ~hich constitute the purpose of the International
Educat10n Year;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit
a J?rogres~ report to the General Assembly at its twentyth1r_d session, through the Economic and Social Council
at ~ts forty-fifth . session, so that the Assembly may
dect~e, on the basis of those preparations, on the proclamation of the International Education Year.
1629th plenary meeting,
13 December 1967.
2317 (XXII). The role of the Economic Commission for Europe in the development of
international economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Ref~ng to t~e declaration adopted by the commemorative meetmg of the Economic Commission for
Europe to celebrate the Commission's twentieth anniversary,31 in which representatives of the Governments
partici~ating in the _wor~ of the Commission expressed
the. belief that the s1t~at~on now presenting itself in the
reg10n of that Comm1ss1on called for active work and
joint efforts in developing further the co-operation
~ithin the Commission's framework which was in the
mterests of all nations,
so Ibid., Thirty-!'inth Session, Annexes, agenda item 2, document E/4071. This report was subsequently issued in English
as a United Nations publication (Sales No.: 65.1.26).
81 Official Records of the Economk and Social C1111ncil
Forty-third Session, Supplement No. 3 (E/4329), para. 'UIJ'.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

Noting with great interest the Secretary-General's
statement in the introduction to his annual report on
the work of the Organization, submitted to the General
Assembly at its twenty-second session, in which special
attention is drawn to the increasingly vital contribution
made by the regional economic commissions to the
United Nations efforts directed towards economic and
social development throughout the world, 82
Recalling its resolution 2129 (XX) of 21 December
1965, which welcomed the growing interest in the development of good-neighbourly relations and cooperation among European States having different economic, social and political systems in the political,
economic, technical, scientific, cultural and other fields,
Recognizing that the development of co-operation
among countries of the region of the Commissionregardless of their economic and social system-in the
economic, scientific and technological fields will facilitate and accelerate the economic progress of developed
and developing countries,
1. Notes with appreciation the important achievements that the Economic Commission for Europe has
realized during the twenty years of its existence, thus
contributing to the creation of an atmosphere conducive
to better mutual understanding, peace and international
security in that region ;
2. Invites States members of the Economic Commission for Europe to continue to intensify their
common efforts towards :
(a) Promoting their economic, scientific and technical co-operation in traditional as well as new fields
on a mutually beneficial basis and also for the benefit
of the entire international community, in particular of
the developing countries ;
( b) Expanding trade by seeking to remove economic, administrative and trade policy obstacles to the
development of trade, thereby facilitating world trade
in general;
3. Endorses the appeal made by the Economic
Commission for Europe at its twenty-second session
to the States members of the Commission to realize
the desirability of strengthening economic relations
with countries in other regions and to this end to maintain the closest co-operation with other United Nations
bodies and the specialized agencies, and in particular
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization.
1633rd plenary meeting,
15 December 1967.
2318 (XXII). Science and technology
The General Assembly,
Convinced that science and technology can make an
outstanding contribution to economic and social progress.
Recalling its resolution 2082 (XX) of 20 December
1965 relating to the second report of the Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technology to Development88 and endorsing the views of
the Advisory Committee concerning the establishment
of a programme for intensifying international coa2 See Official Records of the General Assemb/\•, Twentysecond Session, Supplement No. 1 A (A/6701/Add.l), para. 65.
88 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 14 (E/4026 and Corr.I).

operation in the application of the resources of science
and technology to the economic and social development
of the developing countries,
Welcoming the progress made by the Advisory Committee,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1155 ( XLI) of 5 August 1966, in which the Council
welcomed the Advisory Committee's proposal designed
to establish a world plan of action for the application
of science and technology to development and endorsed
the objectives for the proposed plan set forth by the
Advisory Committee,
Ccmcerned at the fact that, despite the improved dissemination of scientific and technical knowledge, much
more should be done to enable the developing countries
to benefit from it,
Believing that the application of science and technology in the interests of the economic and social progress of the less developed countries cannot produce the
best results unless it forms part of a coherent programme of development in the economic, industrial,
social and cultural fields,
Emphasizing the importance of considering these
problems within a regional framework and the role
which the regional economic commissions and the
Economic and Social Office in Beirut can play in
achieving the objectives contained in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1155 (XLI),
1. Endorses the objectives set forth by the Advisory
Committee on the Application of Science and Technolog-v to Development in its third report 84 with a
view to:
(a) Assisting in the building of an adequate structure of institutions in the developing countries;
( b I Improving the arrangements for the transfer and
adaptation of knowledge and technology already available in the more developed countries;
( c) Encouraging closer co-operation between scientists and research organizations in developed and
developing countries;
2. Recommends States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency to endeavour to take full account, particularly in their
bilateral aid programmes, of the aid requirements of
the developing countries in the field of science and
technology;
3. Invites the United Nations Development Programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and related institutions, in the light
of the objectives of the world plan of action for the
application of science and technology to development,
to consider making available additional resources to
meet requests from the de\ieloping countries for projects
directed towards the application of science and technologv to development ;
4. Requests the United Nations and related international organizations to assist the Advisory Committee, within the limits of their competence, in preparing
guidelines for the application of science and technology
to development;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee and the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination to examine the
detailed statements to be submitted on 1 January 1968,
84 fbid., Forty-first Session, Supplement No. 12 (E/4178
and Corr.I).
