S/PV.7887

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7887

th meeting
Wednesday, 22 February 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Kandeel
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Vassilenko
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Skau
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Sison
Mr. Rivas

Agenda
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-04642 (E)
*1704642*

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefing by the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and Federal Minister for Europe, Integration
and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Austria, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kurz.
Mr. Kurz: It is an honour to address the Security
Council today in my role as Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).
Allow me to express my condolences on the passing
away of Ambassador Vitaly Churkin of the Russian
Federation.
With 57 participating States, the OSCE is the largest
regional arrangement under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. For decades, the OSCE has been
an important partner of the United Nations. As members
can imagine, chairing the OSCE is not an easy job. Like
at the United Nations, there are many different interests
and opinions that often make it hard to find consensus
and to achieve progress on the challenges that we face.
But even if it is sometimes hard, there is no alternative
to multilateral cooperation. It is the only way to achieve
peace, security and stability.
Austria has taken over the OSCE chairmanship at
a critical moment. Everywhere we look, there are grave
threats to peace and security: war and destruction
in places like Syria and eastern Ukraine; serious
violations of international law and signs of increasing
nationalism; and radicalization and terrorism within
our societies. The consequences are the rising anxiety
of the people and increasing mistrust among States.
Given these challenges, our chairmanship will focus
on the following priorities. First, we want to contribute
to defusing existing conflicts. Secondly, we will create
2/18

22/02/2017

a platform to assist States in their efforts to combat
radicalization and violent extremism. Thirdly, we will
do what we can to help rebuild trust and confidence
among the participating States of the OSCE.
Armed conflicts have caused much suffering,
displacement and destruction in parts of the OSCE area.
There can be no military solutions to these conflicts.
We have to find ways to enable political solutions. One
of the central issues the OSCE deals with is the crisis
in and around Ukraine. This crisis — the annexation of
Crimea, the flow of arms into the Donbas, the role of the
Russian Federation, the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, and the repeated acts of violence — is
regularly discussed in the OSCE, just as it is in the
United Nations.
During my first visit to eastern Ukraine in January,
I saw the unacceptable situation of civilians there.
We must improve the living conditions of the local
population, especially along the contact line. To that
end, access for humanitarian organizations is crucial.
The level of violence that we saw a few weeks ago
is unacceptable. It remains vital that all sides fully
implement the Minsk agreements and strictly respect
the ceasefire to which they have repeatedly committed
themselves. The OSCE, with its Trilateral Contact
Group, demonstrated its crucial role in brokering the
ceasefire.
The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has
prevented a worsening of the situation through its
monitoring and reporting and facilitated the repair of
critical infrastructure, such as electricity and water
supply. We now have to support the Special Monitoring
Mission in fully carrying out its mandate. We want to
increase the number of monitors on the ground, improve
the technical equipment for monitoring, and extend
the operating hours along the contact line. We will
continue working to make concrete steps towards full
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. Forces
must disengage and heavy weapons must be withdrawn.
As Chairperson-in-Office, we will assist all efforts to
achieve progress on the other conflict situations in the
OSCE area, in particular regarding the Transnistrian
settlement process, the conflict in Georgia and the
conflict in Nagorno Karabakh.
Besides classic conflicts, one other major challenge
to security is radicalization and terrorism. Both
threaten the internal stability of States, the rule of law
and our basic freedoms, such as freedom of expression
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7887

and the freedom of religion or belief. More than 10,000
people from the OSCE area have joined Da’esh in order
to rape and kill in its name in Syria, Iraq and Libya.
These fighters not only cause terrible suffering in those
countries, but they also pose a threat to the security
of the OSCE countries when they return. In the OSCE
region, there are different dynamics for radicalization,
but what we have in common is that the most vulnerable
group to be radicalized is young people.

exchange, operational coordination and technical
suppor,t especially in the field.

To better understand these dynamics and identify
ways to effectively address the root causes and triggers
of radicalization, I have appointed Mr. Peter Neumann
as my Special Representative on Radicalization. He will
look for best practices, share them with participating
States and make concrete recommendations on how
to improve the fight against radicalization and violent
extremism. If terrorists cooperate globally, States must
do the same in order to fight terrorism more effectively.

I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.

No matter whether we want to solve conflicts or
fight against terrorism, what is always needed as a basis
for international cooperation is trust. Rebuilding trust
among States in the OSCE area is probably the most
difficult task. As a neutral country, Austria has always
been a bridge-builder between the East and the West
and a good place for dialogue. As OSCE Chair, Austria
will strive to foster open and constructive dialogue as
a basis for finding common solutions to the challenges
facing the OSCE. In the OSCE, security concerns are
often at the core of mistrust. Therefore, the Austrian
chairmanship will also try to resume discussions on
conventional arms control in Europe. That is in the
interests of every single participating State.
In line with the mandate we received at the OSCE
Ministerial Council in Hamburg, Austria will seek
to launch a structured dialogue on current and future
challenges to security in the OSCE area. Cybersecurity
and social and economic cooperation — two issues that
we discussed in Vienna recently — are areas where
everybody stands to gain from more cooperation.
Success in these areas will lead to more trust. The same
is true for human rights, the rule of law and democracy.
Together, we can strengthen the cohesiveness and
resilience of our societies to better counter threats to
our security. I welcome the establishment of the United
Nations Liaison Office in Vienna. It will enable even
stronger cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations. We both will benefit from more information

I hope that with these priorities, the OSCE
and Austria as its Chair can make a contribution
to strengthening a rules-based global order and to
advancing the goals, values and principles of the
United Nations.
The President: I thank Mr. Kurz for his briefing.

Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Federal Minister for Europe, Integration
and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Austria,
Mr. Kurz, for his comprehensive briefing.
We should like to see growing cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations on the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially its Chapter VIII. Such cooperation
must be regular and multifaceted, encompassing all
dimensions of security. The OSCE is designed to assist
United Nations mechanisms in the area of their
​​
purview
within the framework of its mandate. It is important
to take into account the comparative advantages of
the two organizations and to avoid duplication and the
waste of resources. We should like to see constructive
cooperation with the Austrian chairmanship of
the OSCE and we share its key priorities, aimed at
conflict resolution, combatting radicalization and
extremism, the restoration of trust among States, and
the strengthening of the institutional foundation of the
Organization.
The OSCE must strive to carry out those functions
for which it was created, serving as a platform for
equitable dialogue and collective decision-making
on security issues. Its focus should be on the fight
against terrorism, drug trafficking and cyberthreats;
the harmonization of integration processes; support
for traditional values ​​and the protection of the rights of
national minorities; combatting neo-Nazism; reform of
the OSCE, including the development of its charter; and
the organization of the electoral monitoring work of the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.
We are ready to contribute to that.
We see the greatest potential in combating
transnational threats, particularly in the context of the

17-046423/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

immigration crisis, the fight against human trafficking,
xenophobia and discrimination, and especially in
the protection of the rights of national, religious and
linguistic minorities.
We have noted the evolution of the cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE, with
major collaboration between the OSCE secretariat’s
Transnational Threats Department and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in combating
trafficking in drugs and small arms, terrorism,
organized crime, corruption and money-laundering,
as well as in the areas of combating human trafficking
and illegal migration. The OSCE’s Ministerial Council
meetings in Basel in 2014 and Belgrade in 2015 adopted
declarations on the issue of cooperation between the
two organizations, strengthening the OSCE’s role in
implementing important United Nations decisions,
in particular the Security Council’s anti-terrorism
resolutions 2170 (2014), 2178 (2014), 2199 (2015) and
2249 (2015). Last summer in Kaliningrad, Russia’s
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, together with the
OSCE’s Conflict Prevention Centre and the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs, organized a
seminar for OSCE participating States’ focal points on
implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
In the area of international security information, the
OSCE complements the global United Nations efforts
to develop confidence-building measures through the
use of information and communications technologies.
However, there have also been alarming attempts to
introduce monitoring mechanisms similar to those of
the United Nations into OSCE practices, as well as
non-consensus documents of the General Assembly and
Human Rights Council. We take a generally positive
view of cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE in the field, for example, through the OSCE
Mission in Kosovo. We appreciate their collaboration in
the Geneva talks on Transcaucasia, which have been an
important factor in establishing direct dialogue between
Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. We support
the Austrian chairship for its backing of the OSCE’s
continuing efforts to help settle regional conflicts, and
we are willing to cooperate in reaching settlements in
Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh.
It is to be hoped that 2017 can bring peace and a
political solution in eastern Ukraine, where the armed
conflict, which has now lasted more than three years,
continues to take new civilian lives. The residents of
Donetsk and Luhansk have suffered for their right to
4/18

22/02/2017

freedom and special status within the Ukrainian State.
It is vital that full compliance with the Minsk package
of measures be finally achieved if we are to grant the
region and its inhabitants the possibility of a peaceful
life and democratic self-government and to restore their
broken economic ties to the rest of Ukraine. All of that
is provided for in the Minsk agreement, as adopted in
resolution 2202 (2015).
In that regard, we believe that we have a proven and
well-established model for settling the conflict in southeastern Ukraine, one element of which is the OSCE’s
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine. We do not see
any practical benefits of duplicating the functions of
the Special Monitoring Mission through any new types
of international structure. We hope that the Austrian
chairmanship will continue to keep the Mission’s
objectivity under control, while giving direction to its
representatives in the Trilateral Contact Group and its
subgroups on developing a direct dialogue between the
parties to the conflict.
While the OSCE has sufficient resources in the area
of conflict resolution, it is important to act extremely
cautiously in this sensitive and delicate process and to
bear in mind three key principles — that conflicts must
be resolved peacefully, with the direct participation of
the parties and respect for their interests, and within
existing formats.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Russia
considers the OSCE to be an important mechanism
for building a fair and indivisible security system for
Europe as a whole, and is involved in strengthening its
role and authority. We believe firmly that in order to
improve the OSCE’s relevance it is essential to clearly
define the priorities for its activities and to create a
charter for the organization.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
welcome Foreign Minister Kurz to the Security Council
and thank him for his briefing today. His chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), together with Austria’s hosting of the
OSCE, as well as parts of the United Nations, shows just
how central his country is to international cooperation
and the rule-based system.
Sadly, as we heard here yesterday (see S/PV.7886),
the rule-based system is under threat. It is a threat
that we talk about often in this Chamber, but to the
residents of cities such as Marinka, in Ukraine, that
threat is a horrifying daily reality. For the past three
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

years, the people there have lived in fear, subject to the
daily unrelenting dangers that have become the norm
on the front line in eastern Ukraine. Residents there
speak of daily sniper fire and shelling, and the daily
scramble for shelter. For nearly three years, they have
survived without gas supplies in the face of plummeting
temperatures every winter. Those are the consequences
of Russia’s violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
That is what happens when the rule-based system
is attacked. We cannot allow it to become the new
normal, and we must use all the tools at our disposal
in response. The OSCE has a critical role to play,
and I would particularly like to commend the role of
the OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
working tirelessly under the able direction of Chief
Monitor Apakan. It is thanks to the bravery of the
OSCE’s monitors that we know what is going on in
places like Marinka. It is thanks to them that we know
that ceasefire violations have already reached record
highs this year.
It is unacceptable that the Mission continues to
be fired on and face restrictions on its access. Such
actions, so often perpetrated by the separatists, only
fuel suspicions that they are concealing activity that is
at odds with the Minsk agreements. I hope, therefore,
that we can all be clear today that aggression towards
monitors must stop and that the Mission must be given
unrestricted access to all of Ukraine, including the
disengagement areas and those parts of the border with
Russia that are not under Ukraine’s control.
As we heard yesterday, the long-term solution to
the situation in eastern Ukraine requires Russia to end
its destabilizing activities in the region, comply with its
commitments under the Minsk agreements, withdraw its
weapons and personnel, use its considerable influence
over the separatists to bring an end to the killing and
return Crimea to its rightful place as part of Ukraine.
That is the only meaningful path to long-term peace
in Ukraine, and until it is taken, the sanctions against
Russia must remain in place.
Beyond Ukraine, we should not lose sight of the
Council’s need to work closely with the Austrian
chairmanship of the OSCE in resolving other
issues affecting the region and in helping to protect
fundamental rights and freedoms. Those issues include
the protracted conflicts in Abkhazia, South Ossetia,
Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh. We also value the

S/PV.7887

vital role that the OSCE plays in risk reduction in the
region, and we welcome the launch of the structured
dialogue. We support the Chairperson-in-Office’s
focus on youth and radicalization, where the OSCE,
with its cross-dimensional approach to security, can
add real value.
If the OSCE is to respond to those and other
challenges, we must also continue to strengthen it. One
way to do that is through strong appointments, and I
am pleased that the United Kingdom has put forward
an excellent candidate for the post of OSCE High
Commissioner on National Minorities, in a sign of our
continued commitment to the organization. We are also
pleased that our Ambassador to the OSCE is chairing
the OSCE Human Dimension Committee this year and
working closely with the Austrian chairship.
In conclusion, events in eastern Ukraine have
reinforced just how important the OSCE is to
international cooperation. The work being done there
is vital to the beleaguered residents of Marinka and to
all Ukrainians in the eastern part of the country. Sadly,
events in Ukraine highlight the threats that countries
in the OSCE area, and the rule-based system as a
whole, continue to face. If we are to respond to them
effectively, we must continue to strengthen the OSCE,
and with it the Security Council’s cooperation.
Mr. Vassilenko (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the Ukrainian presidency for convening this important
meeting and to warmly welcome the Chairperson-inOffice of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria, Mr. Sebastian Kurz.
Despite our collective efforts, we are still far from
realizing the hopes enshrined seven years ago in the
OSCE’s Astana Commemorative Declaration and
outlined in the organization’s founding documents. The
Eurasian dimension of the OSCE security space is at the
heart of the Astana Declaration and should remain our
focus. It is also the area where we may be able to have
the greatest positive impact, replacing zero-sum games
with win-win scenarios. To achieve that ambition, we
will have to overcome the growing threats that are
fuelled by shifts in technology, the rise of radicalism
and nationalism, pandemics, economic turbulence, the
proliferation of nuclear materials and unprecedented
numbers of refugees.
The continuing crisis in Ukraine has also shown us
how a national tragedy can have global consequences.

17-046425/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

It has undermined the security of us all and has exposed
stark differences in the way that countries approach
security policy.
In the wake of such challenges, Kazakhstan fully
supports calls to strengthen the OSCE, its legal status
and its institutions. We support in particular the
efforts promoted by the Austrian chairmanship and
others to strengthen cooperative security, including by
strengthening conventional arms control mechanisms
and modernizing the Vienna document. We look
forward to further discussions on the modalities of
the structured dialogue that the Chairperson-inOffice mentioned.
Let me now propose some recommendations on
bilateral cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE.
First, the OSCE should continue to be a good partner
for countries in transition. It can do that by continuing
to promote the principles of good governance, the rule
of law, institution-building and the nurturing of a new
political culture, working with the participating States
and not on them. Secondly, the United Nations should
step up cooperation with the OSCE on the promotion of
sustainable development, where it has long experience.
That partnership should play an active role in shaping
the debate regarding the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. We believe that the OSCE and the United
Nations should work together to end extreme poverty
and ensure that we are the last generation to live with
climate change as a threat to the future of all of us.
We strongly share the priorities of the Austrian
chairmanship in the OSCE’s second dimension, and
we would like to thank the Austrian chairmanship for
appointing the representative of Kazakhstan to chair the
Economic and Environmental Committee. Within the
context of that second dimension, we fully support the
main theme of “Greening the Economy and Building
Partnerships for Security”, chosen by the Austrian
chairmanship as its slogan. We look forward to working
together with the Austrian chairmanship and the OSCE
Secretariat in holding a productive second preparatory
meeting of the Economic and Environmental Forum
during the Astana Expo-2017, on the subject of future
energy. It will be a major event in which more than
110 countries and 18 international organizations
will participate.
We consider improving connectivity to be a key tool
of long-term development. The OSCE has a part to play
6/18

22/02/2017

in promoting regional trade and transport integration
and, ultimately, in the formation of a common economic
space from the Atlantic to the Pacific. As a country,
we remain committed to the idea of Greater Eurasia,
which can bring together the European Union, the
Eurasian Economic Union and the Silk Road Economic
Belt initiative in an effort to create a common space
of mutually beneficial economic development from
Lisbon to Vladivostok.
Thirdly, given the OSCE’s special attention
to transnational threats, we see particular merit
in deepening cooperation with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Kazakhstan supports
the OSCE in signing joint action plans with United
Nations agencies. It is also of benefit to the United
Nations to work closely with the OSCE — the world’s
largest regional security grouping — on transnational
threats. Those threats range from the spread of
nuclear weapons to countering all forms of regional
transnational crime, including the trafficking in
persons, drugs and weapons. We welcome the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the OSCE
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
to support regional work on resolution 1540 (2004). That
reaffirms that the proliferation of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Fourthly, Afghanistan’s security, political and
economic progress and the withdrawal of international
forces will continue to have major implications for
the OSCE. The exchange of military information
and contacts, particularly in the border areas, is of
paramount importance. Security in Afghanistan’s
border areas is also critical to developing new trade
and transport corridors. This is a sphere in which there
is great potential for the OSCE to build on existing
cooperation with the United Nations.
Fifthly, we think that we need to step up our joint
efforts in the fight against human trafficking, which is a
key issue for both the United Nations and the OSCE. We
call in particular for more active cooperation between
the OSCE and UNODC, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the International
Labour Organization, UNICEF and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
That must be done through a comprehensive human
rights-based approach to global crime within the
OSCE-initiated Alliance against Trafficking in Persons
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7887

and under the United Nations Global Initiative to Fight
Human Trafficking.

have contributed to causing conflict situations or
to interventionism.

Last but not least, let me say that Kazakhstan has
always given the OSCE its best. We have supported the
organization and worked with all our partners within it
to strengthen it and help it to adapt to new challenges
before, during and after our chairmanship in 2010.
Today, we are prepared to give it one of our brightest
and most capable diplomats: the two-time Foreign
Minister Erlan Idrissov, whom we have nominated
for the position of Secretary General of the OSCE.
If elected, he would surely serve the best interests of
the OSCE and help steer it steadily forward in these
complex times.

We hope that communication and coordination
channels between the United Nations and the OSCE
will be maintained and strengthened for the benefit of
regional and international peace and security.

Let me end by stressing that the OSCE remains one
of the United Nations key partner organizations. The
nature of our cooperation has to become closer and,
at the same time, more expansive, comprehensive and
multidimensional, so that it can address all issues of
concern for human well-being and security.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State
of Bolivia thanks the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria, Mr. Sebastian Kurz, for his briefing in his
capacity as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
also congratulate Austria on its assumption of the
chairmanship of the OSCE and on its commitment to
maintaining peace in Europe.
Bolivia believes that it is important to highlight the
work being done by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe in its various areas of operation
and in maintaining channels of dialogue with different
actors. We believe that all conflicts between States
should be addressed in strict compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
international human rights law, always with the aim
of resolving them peacefully and, at the same time,
respecting the principles of the non-interference in the
internal affairs of States, the non-use or threat of force,
sovereignty and independence.
As we have previously mentioned in the Chamber,
Bolivia believes that regional and subregional
organizations can play a very important role in
maintaining regional stability and security and can
contribute decisively in the peaceful resolution of
conflicts. On the other hand, it is important to identify
the circumstances and action taken by NATO that

Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Foreign Minster Kurz for his briefing on the planned
activities under the Austrian chairmanship.
The track record of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) clearly demonstrates
the unique and significant role that that organization
plays in Europe. The United States fully supports the
organization’s comprehensive approach to security. We
look to the OSCE and its independent institutions and
field missions to assist all 57 participating States with
the full implementation of their OSCE commitments,
and we look to the OSCE to hold those States accountable
when they fail to do so.
As Ambassador Nikki Haley made clear yesterday,
the United States is committed to the institutions that
help keep Europe safe (see S/PV.7886). We commend the
long-standing commitment and ongoing efforts of the
OSCE in support of regional security. From promoting
peaceful resolutions to conflicts to working with
Governments on the rule of law and anti-corruption,
the OSCE plays a key role in strengthening security and
stability, addressing humanitarian needs of conflictafflicted populations and promoting good governance
in the region. We believe that the organization should
also continue its focus on supporting civil society
and independent media and on promoting tolerance
and non-discrimination throughout the OSCE region.
We urge Mr. Kurz to make the full implementation
of all human dimension commitments by all OSCE
participating States a priority of his chairmanship.
The commitment and bravery of the Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine deserves particular
recognition. As recent weeks have seen, an increase in
violence, including the use of heavy weapons, civilian
causalities and damage to critical infrastructure have
compounded a desperate humanitarian situation.
The Special Monitoring Mission has worked with
humanitarian organizations on both sides of the line
of contact to ensure that civilians enduring freezing
conditions, on top of the relentless fighting, have access
to heat, water and electricity. OSCE monitors risk
their own safety to fulfil their mandate to document

17-046427/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

ceasefire violations and to provide critical information
of the situation on the ground. They deserve our
respect and support as they press all sides to bring
an immediate end to violence. They must be granted
full and unfettered access and safe passage to better
perform their mission, particularly in areas held by
Russian-backed separatists.
We continue to be concerned about threats made
to the Special Monitoring Mission and underscore the
importance of all sides to protect them and their work
in monitoring the situation on the ground. The United
States continues to support the Minsk agreements and
their full and immediate implementation, as the best
path to resolve the conflict and alleviate the suffering
in eastern Ukraine. This should remain a priority of the
OSCE and we reiterate our call on Russia to adhere to
its commitments. We must not forget the situation in
occupied Crimea. We once again call for an end to the
Russian occupation and attempted annexation of the
peninsula.
The United States remains fully committed
to supporting the OSCE’s efforts in other areas as
well. In Georgia, the OSCE plays a positive role in
keeping all sides accountable and we encourage the
Organization to remain actively engaged as the conflict
with Russia in Georgia’s occupied territories continues
to undermind European security. As a participant
in the Geneva international discussions, the United
States looks forward to continuing our work with the
OSCE to find a peaceful resolution that guarantees
Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity within
its internationally recognized borders. As one of the
three co-Chairs of the OSCE Minsk Group, the United
States supports the peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. The sides have made progress
over the years towards a comprehensive settlement
through this process. We call on the sides to enter
into negotiations and complete confidence-building
measures agreed last spring. This conflict cannot be
resolved by force.
We are firmly committed to a comprehensive
settlement of the Transnistria conflict. We believe that
the 5+2 talks can play an important role in resolving
the conflict, but any 5+2 meeting must deliver concrete
results. The OSCE mission must have unrestricted
access to all of Moldova, including the Transnistrian
region, and we call on the Transnistrian authorities to
grant OSCE monitors consistent, unfettered access.
8/18

22/02/2017

Finally, we would like to highlight the OSCE’s vital
role in supporting the implementation of our decisions
in the Security Council. The OSCE’s support for two
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
1540 (2004), is part of the global effort to address
weapons’ proliferation, and resolution 1325 (2000) to
end violence against women and ensure women are at
the centre of efforts to resolve conflicts and counter
violent extremism.
The United States applauds the OSCE for its work
to reinforce security throughout Europe. The United
Nations-OSCE relationship is central to the Council’s
work in the region. We look forward to continuing and
deepening the decades of dialogue and cooperation
between the United Nations and the OSCE.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): I would like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Austria, for his briefing.
Yesterday’s open debate (see S/PV.7886) was a good
opportunity for us to recall the major contribution made
by the OSCE to promoting security and preventing
conflicts in Europe. However, the debate was also a stark
reminder that OSCE confidence-building measures are
increasingly necessary in light of attempts to forcibly
alter the status quo by coercion in some parts of Europe.
As a regional arrangement under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, the OSCE
is exemplary in supporting the Security Council
in maintaining peace and security at the regional
level. The OSCE has always held the conviction that
maintaining an international order based on the rule of
law that condemns the threat or use of force against the
territorial integrity and political independence of any
State, as well as building confidence among member
States through efforts for dialogue and transparency,
will bring peace and stability in Europe and the
international community. Based on this belief, the
OSCE has been taking a comprehensive approach,
which encompasses not only politico-military security,
but also economic, environmental and human aspects.
Japan, as one of OSCE’s Asian partners, firmly shares
its belief and comprehensive approach. We are pleased
to have expanded our cooperation with the OSCE over
the past quarter-century.
The situation in Ukraine, as Japan stressed at
yesterday’s open debate, is of grave concern for the
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

entire international community. It poses a serious
challenge to the international order governed by the
rule of law. This is a matter of principle. We have
contributed to Ukraine by dispatching a Japanese
expert to the Special Monitoring Mission of the OSCE
in the light of its critical tasks. In addition, Japan is
supporting the country’s reform efforts to become a
more resilient society.
The OSCE is playing an important role in
mediation, including in the situations in Abkhazia and
South Ossetia, Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh. We
applaud the OSCE’s hands-on approach to enhancing
capacities and resilience in response to emerging issues,
such as violent extremism, as well as humanitarian crises
involving refugees and immigrants. We look forward
to further cooperation with the OSCE on a wide range
of issues, including security and counter-terrorism
through strengthened border management, election
observation missions and women’s empowerment.
I would like to mention my first-hand experience
with the contribution of the OSCE. From 1999 to
2000, I was seconded to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), where
I worked with a young Austrian diplomat named
Mr. Jan Kickert, who is present in the Chamber as
Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Austria.
The OSCE was at that time one of the four pillars of
our international efforts aimed at the reconstruction of
Kosovo. The OSCE and UNMIK cooperated closely
in conducting the first local election in October 2000,
and it was quite successful. Of course, the path to
democracy in Kosovo was not an easy task, but today
peace and democracy have taken root in Kosovo to a
certain extent. We are very proud of that and it is due,
in great part, to the efforts of the OSCE.
Asia and Europe have a certain interconnectivity
on peace and security-related issues. Just as tensions
in Europe have an impact on the entire international
community, including Asia, increased tensions in Asia
affect the stability of Europe. Japan is committed to
deepening its cooperation with the States members of
the OSCE as part of its joint efforts with the OSCE to
maintain and consolidate the international order based
on the rule of law.
Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me join others in thanking
Foreign Minister Kurz for his briefing this morning
and for his leadership as Chairperson-in-Office of the

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).
The European security order continues to be
seriously challenged. The OSCE, as the largest regional
security organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, has an indispensable role to play
in upholding the rules-based order in the region and in
sustaining peace. In the light of that, we welcome and
offer our full and active support for the Austrian OSCE
chairmanship and the efforts of Minister Kurz.
Based on commonly agreed principles and
commitments, as enshrined most notably in the Helsinki
Final Act and the Paris Charter, the OSCE offers a
unique platform for dialogue on European peace and
security. At present, the principle that States should
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State is being violated. Breaches
of that core principle, which is enshrined in the United
Nations Charter as well as in the OSCE Acquis, are of
fundamental concern to all of us. European security,
like the security of other regions, depends on a rulesbased international order where the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States, large and small,
is respected.
As we also highlighted in yesterday’s open debate
on conflicts in Europe, the comprehensive concept of
security remains a strength and an added value provided
by the OSCE and must be upheld (see S/PV.7886).
Respect for democracy, the rule of law, human rights
and fundamental freedoms remains a precondition for
our joint security. It is therefore worrying that the OSCE
human-dimension and autonomous institutions — the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
the Representative on Freedom of the Media, and the
High Commissioner on National Minorities — are
under pressure. They are key assets across the conflict
cycle and are needed today more than ever. The OSCE
Chairmanship has an important role to play as the
guardian of those principles and commitments, and in
preserving the comprehensive concept of security and
those independent institutions.
Today, our fundamental principles continue to
be violated by Russia’s ongoing aggression against
Ukraine, its illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol
and its military actions in eastern Ukraine. Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity, its political
independence and right to freely choose its security

17-046429/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

arrangements must be fully respected. We reaffirm
our strong support for the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, which much be given full, safe and
unhindered access throughout the country.
The so-called protracted conflicts in Georgia,
Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh also constitute longlasting violations of our common OSCE acquis. They
must be resolved in accordance with international law
and OSCE principles and commitments. The Chairs
of the Minsk Group have a special responsibility in
bringing those processes forward.

22/02/2017

enjoy unique advantages in resolving hot-spot issues in
their respective regions. China supports enhancing the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, so
as to jointly safeguard international peace and security.

There is an obvious need for strong conventional
arms-control instruments and confidence-building
measures, which contribute to transparency and
predictability. In that context, we would especially like
to highlight this year’s launch of a structured dialogue
in the OSCE on current and future challenges and risks
aimed at exploring possibilities in the military area for
building confidence and reducing risk.

The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations should, while
steadfastly upholding the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations, seek vigorously to
promote dialogue and consultation aimed at addressing
regional and hot-spot issues, actively engage in
preventive diplomacy, resolve disputes through
peaceful means and defuse conflicts. All relevant
actions by the regional and subregional organizations
concerned should observe the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter, in particular respect for
the principles of the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States.

We welcome the Chairmanship’s intention to
mainstream a gender perspective into all its activities.
Gender aspects, including the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), must be an integral part of all
our security-related work, in Vienna as well as in the
field missions.

The OSCE is an important partner of the United
Nations. In recent years, the OSCE has been actively
engaged in preventive diplomacy, promoting mutual
trust among countries in the region and in endeavouring
to settle disputes through mediation. China expresses
its appreciation to the OSCE for its efforts.

In conclusion, in a speech to the Security Council
open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace on 10 January, Secretary-General Guterres
underlined the fundamental importance of restoring
trust among Member States so as to prevent and avoid
conflict (see S/PV.7857). We therefore welcome the
Austrian chairmanship’s focus on building trust — a
trust that can be regained only through restored respect
for common principles and commitments, and through
deeds, not words.

We welcome the priorities set by Austria as the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office aimed at defusing armed
conflicts, countering violent extremism and building
mutual trust. China supports effective and pragmatic
cooperation between the Security Council and the
OSCE in the fields of peace and security, and it is our
hope that the OSCE will continue to play an active and
constructive role in upholding regional peace, security
and stability.

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the presence at today’s meeting of His
Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Federal Minister for Europe,
Integration and Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Austria, and we thank him for his briefing.
The world today is filled with various types of
challenges. Countries are interdependent, and their
security is interconnected. While the United Nations
is at the core of the international collective-security
architecture, regional and subregional organizations
10/18

With respect to the question of Ukraine, the parties
concerned, including the OSCE, have made some
positive efforts, which China welcomes. We hope
that the situation in Ukraine will improve as soon as
possible. We also hope that all parties concerned will
fully implement resolution 2202 (2015) and the Minsk
agreements and seek a comprehensive, lasting and
balanced solution to the question of Ukraine through
dialogue and consultation.
The international community should keep up
its support for the diplomatic efforts of the parties
concerned aimed at finding a political settlement of the
question of Ukraine and at joining forces in contributing
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

to the achievement of peace, stability and development
in the country at an early date.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
Foreign Minister Kurz for his exhaustive briefing. I
congratulate Austria for assuming the Chairmanship of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). It is a pleasure to see so many old friends and
colleagues in the Austrian delegation. We are looking
forward to working together as members of the Troika
this year and, as the incoming Chairperson-in-Office,
in 2018.
The OSCE is the largest regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. At the very roots of both the United Nations
and the OSCE lies the same vision and goal of a rulesbased international order, anchored in multilateralism,
territorial integrity and equal sovereignty of nations.
We stand committed to those principles and to the need
to respect them.
Synergies and complementarities between the
United Nations and the OSCE remain still untapped
potentials to be developed, considering that the
OSCE stands as an essential forum for dialogue and
cooperation, not only among its participating States,
but also with its Mediterranean partners. In that regard,
I would like to briefly outline what we consider two
main priorities.
First, we deem that the OSCE plays an irreplaceable
role in facilitating the settlement of most of the
conflicts still affecting Europe. Its prompt engagement
in the crisis in Ukraine — which Italy supported by
contributing to the activities of the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission to Ukraine — demonstrated the
organization’s vitality and capacity to respond with
monitoring and mediation mechanisms. The OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission and the OSCE’s role in
the Trilateral Contact Group are crucial to respect for
and implementation of the Minsk agreements and to
pursuing political efforts for a sustainable solution to
the crisis. We also support the efforts of the Normandy
format in seeking a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
The OSCE mediation role in protracted conflicts
must be underscored. With regard to Nagorno Karabakh,
Transnistria and Georgia, diplomatic tracks promoted
and coordinated by the OSCE stand as the main
frameworks to put an end to instability. As the incoming
OSCE chair, in 2018, Italy will redouble efforts in that
endeavour. Those conflicts are not frozen. Talks have

S/PV.7887

never stopped and should be relaunched especially for
the sake of the communities that are involved and bear
the heaviest burden.
Secondly, with regard to the Mediterranean
dimension, as a member of the OSCE Troika, Italy
is chairing the OSCE Contact Group with the
Mediterranean Partners for Cooperation for maintaining
relations with the six Mediterranean partner countries:
Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Israel and Jordan.
Emerging challenges and conflicts in the Mediterranean
and Middle East have an impact on security for the
entire OSCE membership. The organization has a role
to play in engaging Mediterranean partner countries
in political dialogue on transnational threats to our
common security.
I would also like to point out the relevance of
migration issues for the OSCE. With its holistic
approach, field offices and missions, the organization is
well equipped to contribute to the international efforts
to manage the movement of populations, starting with
the exchange of best practices and cooperation with
the Mediterranean partners. We therefore welcome and
strongly support the decision adopted by the OSCE
Ministerial Council in December 2016 in Hamburg
endorsing that view on migration that we will prioritize
on our agenda in 2017 and 2018.
As Chairman of the Mediterranean Contact Group
and as a Mediterranean country, Italy will focus its
programme on combating human trafficking, illicit
trafficking of cultural property, cybersecurity, gender
equality, economic cooperation, especially among small
and medium-sized enterprises, and dialogue among
think tanks and policy planners from both shores. To
that end, we intend to constructively associate OSCE
partner countries with the Contact Group activities.
We will build on successful initiatives such as the
Carabinieri training course organized by the Centre of
Excellence for Stability Police Unit in Vicenza, Italy,
under the auspices of the OSCE training project entitled
“Combating Human Trafficking along Migration
Routes”, which includes participants from partner
countries and whose second phase will begin in June.
We also have proposed organizing the annual OSCE
Mediterranean Conference, under our chairmanship
in Sicily in late October, with those priority issues on
the agenda.
I should like to conclude by underscoring that
the transnational nature of the challenges and threats

17-0464211/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

to international security that we confront requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach. We are strongly
committed to promoting such a cross-dimensional
approach within both the United Nations and the OSCE.
The nexus between security, development and human
rights, with a special focus on conflict prevention and
the role of women in mediation and in conflict and postconflict situations, is at the core of the the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the sustaining peace
agenda. Therefore, it must be further integrated within
the United Nations system and in its cooperation with
regional organizations.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I wish to start by
congratulating His Excellency Mr. Sebastian Kurz, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Austria, on his becoming
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I would also like to
thank him for his comprehensive briefing.
We welcome the significant contribution that
the OSCE continues to make in supporting the
maintenance of international peace and security as
one of the largest regional security organizations. Its
comprehensive approach to security, which includes the
political, military, economic, environmental and human
dimensions, is in line with the new global paradigm
aimed at ensuring sustainable peace and development.
In that connection, we take note of the organization’s
efforts in conflict prevention and resolution as well
as post-conflict reconstruction and peacebuilding.
Particularly, we appreciate the important role that
the OSCE is playing in the efforts to resolve the
protracted and new conflicts in South-Eastern Europe,
Eastern Europe, the South Caucasus and Central
Asia, in cooperation with the United Nations and the
European Union.
As we said yesterday during our debate on conflicts
in Europe (see S/PV.7886), dialogue and negotiation
remain the only way to find a durable and diplomatic
solution to some of those conflicts and extremely
delicate issues of peace and security affecting States
members of the OSCE. We cannot overemphasize the
need for the political will and commitment of the parties
to some of those conflicts to reach peaceful settlements
but also to ensure that agreements are fully respected
and implemented. Building the necessary trust and
confidence between and among the parties is also very
critical to making tangible progress. We are pleased to
note that the Austrian chairmanship has made that one
12/18

22/02/2017

of its main priorities. Most importantly, its commitment
to continue exerting efforts to enhance informal and
alternative channels of communication to improve
mutual understanding and trust is very welcome.
As in other regions of the world, the growing
threats of terrorism and violent extremism pose a
significant security challenge to States members of
the OSCE. The organization has been playing a very
important role in preventing and combating terrorism
by promoting a coordinated approach among member
States. In that context, it is only appropriate that the
Austrian chairmanship is placing greater emphasize on
addressing youth radicalization and violent extremism
in the entire OSCE area.
Promoting cooperation with other relevant regional
and international organizations will be vital for the
OSCE not only in countering terrorism but also in all
the other dimensions of its work. Ethiopia attaches great
importance to cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations, in line with Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations. In that regard,
we appreciate the partnership between the OSCE and
the United Nations, which has been maintained through
high-level dialogues and information-sharing, as well
as cooperation in the field.
Finally, we wish the Austrian chairmanship success
in implementing its priorities towards achieving greater
security and stability in the entire OSCE area.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Today,
I welcome the presence of Mr. Sebastian Kurz, the
Austrian Minister for Europe, Integration and Foreign
Affairs, at the Security Council table and congratulate
his country on its assumption of the chairmanship
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) for this year. In the challenging
strategic environment that Europe is facing today,
Austria knows that it can count on our full support to
implement its programme of work, which is centred
appropriately on the themes of security, conflict
resolution and combating radicalization and terrorism.
In our view, today more than ever, the OSCE serves
as an indispensable toolbox for the security services in
Europe, especially on the ground.
In my statement, I will take up two points: the
central role of the OSCE in our efforts to end the
Ukrainian crisis, and priority challenges on which,
more generally, we must get the OSCE to focus.
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

The current crisis in eastern Ukraine is one of the
most serious and dangerous violations of the founding
principles of the OSCE, penned in Helsinki more than
40 years ago. It is therefore appropriate that this topic
has been a top priority on the organization’s agenda
for the past three years. The OSCE has been up to the
task in responding to the matter, which is a source of
satisfaction for us. It has lived up to the responsibility
that falls upon it by rapidly deploying monitoring
missions and subsequently assuming a central role in
ensuring the implementation of the Minsk agreements,
which remain the only way forward for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict.
As I had the opportunity to say during yesterday’s
open debate on conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886),
France has been deeply concerned by the recent
escalation of tensions on the ground, in particular
around the town of Avdiivka, as well as its direct
consequences in terms of the human toll and the
worsening of the humanitarian situation. France is also
determined, in conjunction with its German partners, to
pursue mediation efforts within the Normandy format,
as every bit of progress counts and we see no alternative
solution for supporting the Minsk agreements.
The ministerial meeting held in Munich on
Saturday made it possible to agree on specific
commitments aimed at fostering a rapid improvement
in the situation on the ground. Those commitments
include the implementation of an immediate ceasefire,
the withdrawal of heavy weapons, the protection of
critical infrastructure, the effective disengagement
of the most sensitive areas, the exchange of prisoners
and access by the International Committee of the Red
Cross to detention facilities. It is essential that they be
implemented as soon as possible, and we count on the
unanimous support of the Council in that respect.
We remain convinced more than ever that the OSCE
and its field missions have an essential role to play in
ensuring the practical implementation of decisions
taken at the political level. In that regard, it is crucial
that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine
be in a position to fully and freely carry out its mandate.
We reiterate our call for the respect for the full freedom
of movement of its observers, whose security must be
guaranteed, and condemn in the strongest terms any
violation of these principles — whether it takes the
form of intimidation, threats, destruction of equipment
or denied access to certain areas. The involvement of
the OSCE in securing local elections in the Donbas will

S/PV.7887

also be necessary, in ways that remain to be determined.
Finally, I reiterate my country’s commitment to
defending the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Ukraine. I note that France strongly condemns and
does not recognize the illegal annexation of Crimea
and Sevastopol.
Beyond Ukraine, the OSCE remains more than ever
an essential instrument for the promotion of peace and
security in Europe, amid diverse threats. The situation
should encourage its 57 members to abandon political
posturing and rediscover the spirit of Helsinki, which,
more than 40 years ago, gave rise to a common vision
of security in Europe. In that context, we believe
that the work of the OSCE should now focus on the
following issues.
First is the resolution of regional conflicts.
Beyond the Ukrainian case, we cannot accept the
persistence of frozen conflicts in various parts of the
European continent, whether in Nagorno Karabakh,
Transnistria or the separatist territories of Georgia. We
are convinced that the role of the OSCE is central to
each, together with the established mediation formats,
in order to promote dialogue and restore confidence.
Achieving tangible progress on each of those fronts is
in the interest of the concerned countries, but also of
the region as a whole. We are particularly attached to
the outcome.
Next is the revival of conventional arms control
in Europe. There can be no strategic stability without
a set of common rules to frame military competition.
We are therefore in favour of continuing discussions
on arms control, confidence-building, transparency
and risk-reduction measures, initiated last year under
the German chairmanship in the context of the OSCE’s
structured dialogue.
Maintaining the centrality of the democracy and
human rights pillar in the work of the OSCE is equally
important. While a multidimensional approach has
always been at the heart of the functioning of the
OSCE, we are concerned about the tendency of some
member States to increasingly politicize or even refuse
to address human dimension issues. Specifically, the
introduction of a selective approach to combating
discrimination is unacceptable.
Last is the development of the operational role of
the OSCE in response to certain emerging challenges. I
am thinking of the fight against human trafficking, the
prevention of radicalization, and climate change. The

17-0464213/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

OSCE must work on each of those issues, which are
priority security challenges for Europe, and respond
with concrete measures that go beyond mere public
posturing and statement of positions.
I shall conclude my remarks by recalling the strong
convergences between the action of the OSCE and that
of the United Nations, whether on the ground — where
their respective missions continue their integrated
action, from the Balkans to the Caucasus and Central
Asia — or on principles, with a common approach linking
security, development and human rights concerns.
Mr. Rivas (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this informative meeting. I also thank the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and Austrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Integration, Mr. Sebastian Kurz,
for his detailed briefing.
As was mentioned yesterday (see S/PV.7886), at
a time when the world is ravaged by new risks, such
as violent extremism, nationalism, organized crimes
and other factors, that are enmeshed in a feedback
loop within unresolved conflicts, it is more important
than ever to have the support of solid international,
regional and sub-regional organizations acting in a
coordinated manner.
Uruguay attaches the greatest importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the framework of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. In that respect, my
country participates in valuable regional organizations
and mechanisms, some long-standing like the
Organization of American States and the Agency for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, established pursuant to the Treaty for
the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America
and the Caribbean, and others more recent, like the
Union of South American Nations and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, which have
proven their worth and have contributed to peace in the
region. The role played by the regional organizations
in matters of good offices, mediation and peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as in the appropriate
implementation of their control mechanisms, is based
on intimate knowledge of local realities and provides a
crucial supplement to the work of the United Nations.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe is the broadest organization dealing with
14/18

22/02/2017

collective security. It covers a wide geographic area
and has 57 members, as others have mentioned. It
has a great deal of experience in resolving conflicts.
Uruguay recognizes the organization’s values and
the ten principles of the Final Act of the Conference
on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which are in
line with the purposes and principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter.
We also recognize the contribution of the
organization to the promotion of mechanisms for
dialogue, confidence-building and conflict-resolution
measures, as well as the work it carries out through
its various missions on the ground that support the
implementation of the relevant regional agreements.
Among its priorities are important topics germane to
international peace and security, such as the current
conflicts in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova,
Nagorno Karabakh and Ukraine, as well as the fight
against radicalization and terrorism, and the protection
of human rights. I would like to stress the momentum
that accompanies the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and the employment of a gender-sensitive
approach in its work in various conflict situations.
Finally, I wish Austria every success in its
chairmanship and in the attainment of its objectives,
which will surely contribute to a peace that will
transcend the European continent and benefit us all.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to welcome the holding of the annual
meeting of the Security Council on the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), born
of the shared vision of 55 countries in Europe, North
America and Asia of peace through cooperation.
On this important occasion, my delegation
welcomes the participation of the Chairperson-inOffice of the OSCE, Mr. Sebastian Kurz and Austrian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Integration, whom I
thank for his remarkable briefing.
Following up on the public debate that the Security
Council held yesterday on conflicts in Europe (see
S/PV.7886), this morning’s meeting provides an
opportunity to look at the political and security situation
in the Euro-Asian area. Bearing in mind its experience
of two world wars in the space of one generation, Europe
has met the challenges of its time by establishing
an architecture for cooperation in the area of early
warning, conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict reconstruction. The various events that
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

S/PV.7887

have marked the life of the OSCE since the signing of
the Helsinki Accord show, as if that were necessary,
the relevance of its mission in the light of the scale and
the serious nature of the challenges facing it. For that
reason, I would like to commend the commitment of the
Austrian chairmanship to bringing together the efforts
of all its members with a view to resolving ongoing
crises and conflicts, re-establishing mutual trust and
limiting the growth of violent extremism and terrorism.

conflict in the 5+2 negotiation format, on the one hand,
and the Geneva international discussions seeking to
resolve the Georgian conflict, on the other. We should
also mention the need to deal with radicalization and
violent extremism. We know that 10,000 persons from
the OSCE region have gone to serve as foreign terrorist
fighters. The priority must therefore be to prevent that
phenomenon from deteriorating, as it undermines the
very foundations of our societies.

The Austrian chairmanship of the OSCE comes at
a time when Europe is experiencing its most troubled
times since the end of the Cold War. From Ukraine to
Nagorno Karabakh, from Georgia to Transnistria, the
OSCE is encountering serious challenges, in addition
to cross-border challenges that include radicalization,
terrorism, arms control, crime, cybercrime, migration
and trafficking in drugs, weapons and human beings.
For that reason, I share the view of the presidency that
a strong OSCE is the very foundation of a safe Europe.
Senegal is convinced that the peaceful settlement of
conflicts throughout the world must be welcomed.
We therefore also welcome the approach to conflicts
through dialogue and cooperation, particularly between
neighbouring countries.

Although the challenges are complex and
enormous, they can still be resolved by a continent that
has all the necessary tools to prevent conflicts and to
maintain and establish peace, provided that the parties
accept to resolve the ongoing conflicts while respecting
international law. We would like to commend the idea
of enhancing the partnership between the OSCE and the
United Nations, whose support would be very valuable
in that regard.

The situation in eastern Ukraine is very serious.
Following three years of conflict with a heavy loss of
life totalling 10,000 persons, it is obvious that there can
be no military solution to that conflict. It is therefore
absolutely vital to enhance efforts to implement the
Minsk agreements, endorsed by the Security Council
in its resolution 2202 (2015). My delegation therefore
expresses its support for the Trilateral Contact Group
on Ukraine and the Normandy format, and we commend
their tireless efforts to find a political solution to
the conflict.
Similarly, the Nagorno Karabakh conflict must be
at the heart of OSCE’s work. We are convinced that the
OSCE will continue to work to convene a conference
that could serve as the basis for a peaceful negotiated
settlement of the crisis, pursuant to the relevant
Security Council resolutions. To that end, we must
step up efforts to ensure that a cessation of hostilities
agreement is reached and a peace process established
under the auspices of the OSCE Minsk Group, in the
interest of the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of States.
I would also like to stress the importance of
pursuing the peace efforts to resolve the Transnistria

In conclusion, I would like to express Senegal’s
support for the ideal underlying the Helsinki Final
Act, namely, to establish a Euro-Atlantic and AtlanticAsian region that is one of shared values of freedom,
democracy and justice.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I extend
a very heartfelt thanks to Mr. Sebastian Kurz, Foreign
Minister of Austria and Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). I thank him for his very detailed briefing on the
future priorities of that organization. We have always
emphasized the importance of regional organizations,
including the OSCE, in the area of international peace and
security under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations. We support the Austrian priorities in tackling
current challenges, namely, de-escalating conflicts in
the region; countering extremism, in particular among
youth; countering confrontations between countries;
and maintaining opening communication between the
parties to the various conflicts.
We also appreciate the efforts of the OSCE to find
a political solution to various long-standing conflicts,
including in Ukraine, Nagorno Karabakh, Georgia and
elsewhere. In that connection, we reaffirm that there
is no military solution to the conflicts in the region.
There is no alternative to bolstering efforts to launch
constructive dialogues aimed at seeking political
solutions to conflicts. We urge all parties to shoulder
their responsibility and demonstrate the necessary
political will to solve those conflicts peacefully. We

17-0464215/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

note in particular the attempts by the OSCE to pool
efforts for a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine, in
line with the Minsk agreements, which offer the most
promising framework for a lasting solution.
We also support the mediation efforts undertaken
by various actors, which enjoy the respect of the parties
themselves and of the international community. There
are close links between security in Europe and security
in the Middle East and the Mediterranean. We should
strengthen our ties with the OSCE, in the framework of
cooperation with our Mediterranean partners, in order
to resolve crises in the region, first and foremost the
crises in Libya and Syria.
I would also like to cite terrorism and extremism,
which require the strengthening of dialogue between
religions and civilizations in order to confront
Islamophobia and solve problems related to immigration,
the protection of refugees, and trafficking in human
persons in the Mediterranean, among others. We call
for a strengthening of international efforts — with
the participation of all interested parties, including
the OSCE — to eradicate terrorism through a global
approach that is not limited to military and security
solutions, but also takes into account the cultural,
economic and developmental dimensions.
Egypt is one of the OSCE’s partners in the
Mediterranean and will spare no effort in working
to achieve these goals, in particular by adopting
cooperation frameworks between the OSCE and
moderate religious institutions, such as the Al-Azhar
mosque, in order to enhance religious dialogue. This
is one of the most important areas of work in the
framework of a global strategy to counter terrorism
and extremism.
Common security in the Mediterranean requires
identifying the root causes of existing problems. It
also requires seeking lasting and permanent solutions
through constructive dialogue among the countries
of the region. Egypt would like in the near future to
see greater cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations and the OSCE, so that our shared vision
can be translated into concrete measures that will help
to strengthen our cooperation.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Ukraine.
I wish to thank Minister Kurz for his comprehensive
presentation of the priorities of the Austrian
16/18

22/02/2017

chairmanship of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for 2017. We appreciate
his personal dedication in trying to find effective
responses on the part of the OSCE community to the
significant security threats and challenges confronting
the participating States.
As recognized at the OSCE, the ongoing aggression
by the Russian Federation against Ukraine and its
severe consequences remain among the top threats
to European security. It is important that defusing
tensions and facilitating the resolution of the crisis in
and around Ukraine be identified as priorities of the
Austrian chairmanship. Three years ago, the Russian
Federation effectively violated the United Nations
Charter and all 10 principles of the Helsinki Final Act
by resorting to armed aggression against the sovereign
State of Ukraine, the illegal occupation of Crimea and
hybrid warfare in Donbas. The re-establishment of
full respect for these principles is the way to restore
the security order based on the OSCE process and the
lessons of the Second World War.
We therefore commend the determination of
the Austrian chairmanship to protect the OSCE’s
fundamental principles and commitments, as it recently
demonstrated by condemning Russia’s unilateral
measures on recognizing the so-called documents
issued by illegal structures in certain areas of the
Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine.
These actions on the part of Russia once again
defied the OSCE principles and the Minsk agreements.
We welcome the readiness of the chairmanship to
exercise leadership in performing its functions, which
is so urgently needed in these turbulent times for the
OSCE community.
As the recent spike in hostilities near Avdiivka in
Donbas has shown, the situation in the conflict-affected
areas remains volatile and unpredictable. Escalation is
possible whenever the Russian Federation considers it
politically necessary or just convenient. The military
assault by the hybrid Russian forces on Avdiivka,
accompanied by massive shelling along the entire line of
contact, demonstrated Russia’s persistent unwillingness
to honour its Minsk commitments, including their first
provision of a comprehensive and sustainable ceasefire.
Russia’s political goal of undermining Ukraine, which
set in motion its aggression against my country three
years ago, remains unchanged. Instead of a full and
good-faith implementation of the Minsk commitments,
17-04642

22/02/2017

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

Russia is resorting to political and military provocations,
blackmail and political pressure.
We commend the immediate response of the
OSCE chairmanship and the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission in highlighting the scale of the offensive of the
hybrid Russian forces and of its grave humanitarian
impact. We appreciate the international diplomatic
and political pressure brought to bear on the Russian
Federation to stop the escalation, which has contributed
to some improvement in the security situation in the
conflict area. A persistent focus, in particular at the
OSCE and in the Security Council, on security and
a peaceful resolution is needed to discourage Russia
from future provocations and escalations and to force
it to implement in full the commitments undertaken.
The OSCE, the Trilateral Contact Group and its
humanitarian subgroup should pay particular attention
to achieving the immediate and unconditional release
of Ukrainian citizens who remain illegally detained as
hostages or political prisoners in the occupied areas
of Donbas and in Crimea, as well as in the Russian
Federation. The international community must maintain
a united position in order to secure their release.
The resolution of the crisis in and around Ukraine,
as the Russia-instigated conflict is called in the OSCE,
requires not only a peaceful resolution of the situation
in Donbas, with full respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity, but also the de-occupation
of the Crimean peninsula, which is an integral part
of Ukraine.
As the illegal occupation continues, so do the gross
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
by Russia’s occupation authorities.
In its resolution 71/205, entitled “Situation of human
rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)”, adopted on 19 December
2016, the General Assembly was absolutely clear
about the extrajudicial killings, abductions, enforced
disappearances, politically motivated prosecutions,
discrimination, harassment, intimidation, violence,
arbitrary detention, torture and ill-treatment against
the residents of Crimea. The freedoms of expression,
religion or belief and association and the right to
peaceful assembly have been suppressed.
We must use all of the diplomatic assets and
international instruments at our disposal to make sure
that Crimea does not become an exclusion zone with

S/PV.7887

regard to basic human rights. We encourage the OSCE
chairmanship and institutions to pay close attention to
the people in the occupied territory and to the alleviation
of their plight.
We welcome the intention of the Austrian
chairmanship to strengthen the OSCE as an organization
that can effectively and in a timely manner fulfil the
tasks entrusted to it by participating States.
The implementation of the Minsk agreements and
the OSCE’s role in terms of monitoring, verification
and mediation require adequate resources. We
encourage Minister Kurz’s support for the efforts of the
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine to facilitate the
resolution of the conflict in Donbas, which was started
by Russia. Among the immediate tasks are ensuring
the effectiveness of the monitoring and verification
of the ceasefire and of the withdrawal of weapons,
and the establishment of permanent monitoring at
the uncontrolled segment of the Ukrainian-Russian
State border, as set out in the Minsk agreements.
The Mission’s monitoring capabilities should be
strengthened through increased use of high-technology
equipment, including unmanned aerial vehicles,
cameras and night-vision equipment.
Special Monitoring Mission monitors face
restrictions on movement and intimidation by the
hybrid Russian forces in Donbas in their everyday
activities. This is quite alarming. We encourage further
discussions under the Austrian chairmanship on how
to ensure security before, during and after the local
elections in Donbas as a key element of the political
settlement of the conflict, which will be possible only
after all the necessary security prerequisites have been
put in place.
We welcome and support the Austrian chairmanship’s
priorities on strengthening instruments for conflict
prevention and resolution, modernizing OSCE
confidence- and security-building measures and
launching a structured dialogue addressing the
prevailing threats and the possible way forward.
My country is suffering as a result of terrorism and
the terrorist groups regularly sent from the Russian
Federation into Donbas through the uncontrolled
segment of the State border with Ukraine. We are
therefore interested in a sustained focus on the practical
implementation of the counter-terrorism declaration
adopted in Hamburg, as well as in strengthening border
security, including by countering the phenomenon of

17-0464217/18

S/PV.7887

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe

foreign terrorist fighters and other non-State actors.
We see benefit in fostering international cooperation
in these areas. In the meantime, Ukraine will continue
to take legal steps to counter terrorist activity on its
territory, in particular by bringing terrorists to justice
and by submitting to the International Court of Justice
the case of Russia’s violation of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing
of Terrorism.
We support the intention of the Austrian
chairmanship to dedicate special attention to
cybersecurity and the further development of
confidence- and security-building measures in the
area. Ukraine is ready to share its own experience in
investigating and countering cyberattacks on critical
energy infrastructure.
The human dimension is at the core of the OSCE
concept of comprehensive security. We support the
Austrian chairmanship’s determination to promote
enhanced implementation of respective commitments,

18/18

22/02/2017

including in such areas as freedom of assembly and
association, freedom of media and expression, freedom
of religion or belief, tolerance and non-discrimination.
Strengthened cooperation with civil society should
be an integral part of these efforts. We believe that
such thematic issues as countering State propaganda,
eradicating the phenomenon of political prisoners,
combating torture and forced disappearances, and
ensuring the rights of internally displaced persons and
refugees should stay high on the OSCE agenda. There
can be no security without respect to human dignity,
the rule of law and fundamental human rights.
In conclusion, let me wish Austria a successful
chairmanship and practical outcomes in addressing key
security threats and challenges that undermine peace
and stability in the OSCE space.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

17-04642
