General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

154

5. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for convoking the third session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in
Armed Conflicts from 21 April to 11 June 197 6 and to
the International Committee of the Red Cross for convoking a second Conference of Government Experts
on Weapons That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or
Have Indiscriminate Effects, to be held at Lugano from
28 January to 26 February 1976;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on relevant
developments concerning human rights in armed conflicts, in particular on the proceedings and results of the
1976 session of the Diplomatic Conference;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Respect for
human rights in armed conflicts".
2441 st plenary meeting
I 5 December 1975

3501 (XXX).

Implementation by States of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and measures
to increase the number of parties to the
Convention

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of normal diplomatic
relations for the maintenance of international peace and
security and for the development of friendly relations
and co-operation among States,
Emphasizing the need for observance by all States
of the principles and rules of international diplomatic
law for ensuring normal diplomatic relations,
Concerned at instances of violations of the rules of
diplomatic law and, in particular, of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961, 18
Noting further that not all States have yet become
parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
Recognizing the necessity to ascertain the advisability
of studying the question of the status of the diplomatic
courier in the light of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
l. Reaffirms the need for strict implementation by
States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 in the interest of maintaining normal relations between them, strengthening
international peace and security and developing international co-operation;
2. Deplores instances of violations of the rules of
international diplomatic law and, in particular, of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961;
3. Urges States which have not yet done so to become parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 ;
4. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral their comments and observations on ways and
means to ensure the implementation of the provisions
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961 as well as on the desirability of elaborating provisions concerning the status of the diplomatic courier;
1s Ibid., vol. SOO, No. 7310, p. 95.

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on the comments and observations of Member States
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Implementation
by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic· Relations of 1961 : report of -the Secretary-General".
2 441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3502 (XXX).

United Nations Programme of
As1!istance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider App~iation of International Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law 19 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are. contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an
appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at
all universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral level to provide assistance in the teaching and study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, international organizations and institutions should be encouraged to
give further support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
in particular those activities which are of special benefit
to persons from developing countries,
Recalling that, in the conduct of the Programme, it
is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities made available by Member States, international organizations and others,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1976 and 1977 the activities specified in his report,
including the provision of:
(a) A minimum of fifteen fellowships in 1976 and
1977. at the request of Governments of developing
countries,

( b) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country invited to the
regional activities to be organized in 1976 and 1977,
to be financed from provisions in the regular budget
and also voluntary financial contributions which would
be received as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs 7 and 8 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his constructive efforts to promote training and
assistance in international law within the framework of
the United Nations Programme of Assi9tance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law in 1974 and 1975;
19 A/10332.
