A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/48/102
8 March 1994

Forty-eighth session
Agenda item 110
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/48/628)]
48/102.

Prevention of the smuggling of aliens

The General Assembly,
Concerned that the activities of criminal organizations that profit
illicitly by smuggling human beings and preying on the dignity and lives of
migrants contribute to the complexity of the phenomenon of increasing
international migration,
Recognizing that international criminal groups often convince
individuals to migrate illegally by various means for enormous profits and use
the proceeds from smuggling human beings to finance other criminal activities,
thus bringing great harm to the States concerned,
Aware that such activities endanger the lives of those individuals and
impose severe costs on the international community, particularly upon certain
States that have been called upon to rescue and to provide medical care, food,
housing and transportation for those individuals,
Recognizing that socio-economic factors influence the problem of the
smuggling of aliens and also contribute to the complexity of current
international migration,
Noting that smugglers, particularly in the State of destination of the
smuggling of aliens, often force migrants into forms of debt, bondage or
servitude, often involving criminal activities, in order to pay for their
passage,
Convinced of the need to provide humane treatment and protect the full
human rights of migrants,

/...

A/RES/48/102
Page 2

Recognizing that this illegal smuggling activity has high social and
economic costs, contributes to corruption and burdens law enforcement agencies
in all States where illegal aliens transit or are found,
Recalling relevant international agreements and conventions, including
the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1960, 1/ the
International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974, 2/ and the
Protocol relating thereto of 1978, 3/ by which specific safety standards are
established for certain passenger ships, each State party is required to take
the necessary steps to ensure that no vessel covered by the Conventions and
flying its flag is permitted to carry passengers on international voyages
unless it meets the standards established by the Conventions, and each port
State party is required to prevent a foreign flag passenger vessel from
sailing from its port when the condition of the ship or of its equipment is
not in compliance with the Conventions,
Recalling also the undertaking of States parties to the Supplementary
Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and
Practices Similar to Slavery, doneat Geneva on 7 September 1956, 4/ to take
all practicable and necessary legislative and other measures to bring about
progressively and as soon as possible the complete abolition or abandonment of
the practice of debt bondage,
Reaffirming that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States
must be respected, including their right to control their own borders,
Concerned that the smuggling of aliens undermines public confidence in
policies and procedures for immigration and for the protection of refugees,
Noting that the smuggling of aliens can involve criminal elements in
many States, including the State or States where the smuggling scheme was
planned, the State of nationality of the aliens, the State where the means of
transport was prepared, the flag State of any vessels or aircraft that
transport the aliens, States through which the aliens transit to their
destination or in order to be repatriated and the State of destination,
Taking into account the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the International Organization for Migration, the
International Civil Aviation Organization and the International Maritime
Organization in responding to requests from States for assistance in dealing
with the smuggling of aliens,
___________
1/

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 536, No. 7794.

2/

Ibid., vols. 1184 and 1185, No. 18961.

3/
Ibid., vol. 1226, No. 18961. Protocol relating to the
International Convention of 1 November 1974 for the Safety of Life at Sea
(with annex, appendix and Final Act of the International Conference on Tanker
Safety and Pollution Prevention, 1978). Concluded at London on 17 February
1978.
4/

Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.

/...

A/RES/48/102
Page 3

Emphasizing the need for States to cooperate urgently at the bilateral
and multilateral levels, as appropriate, to thwart these activities,
1.
Condemns the practice of smuggling aliens in violation of
international and national law and without regard for the safety, well-being
and human rights of the migrants;
2.
Commends those States that have cooperated to combat the smuggling
of aliens and to address specific incidents where smuggled aliens have needed
to be processed in accordance with international standards and the domestic
laws and procedures of the State concerned and returned safely to appropriate
destinations;
3.
Urges States to take appropriate steps to frustrate the objectives
and activities of smugglers of aliens and thus to protect would-be migrants
from exploitation and loss of life, inter alia, by amending criminal laws, if
necessary, to encompass the smuggling of aliens and by establishing or
improving procedures to permit the ready discovery of false travel documents
supplied by smugglers;
4.
Requests that States cooperate in order to prevent the illegal
transport by smugglers of third country nationals through their territory;
5.
Also requests States that have not done so to make special efforts
to prevent their airports, means of ground transportation and air carriers
from being used by smugglers of aliens;
6.
Requests States to cooperate in the interest of safety of life at
sea, to increase their efforts to prevent thesmuggling of aliens on ships and
to ensure that prompt and effective action is taken against the smuggling of
aliens by ship;
7.
Calls upon Member States and relevant specialized agencies and
international organizations to take into account socio-economic factors and to
cooperate at the bilateral and multilateral levels in addressing all aspects
of the problem of the smuggling of aliens;
8.
Reaffirms the importance of existing international conventions in
preventing the economic exploitation and loss of life that can result from
smuggling aliens, and calls upon all States to exchange information and to
consider ratifying or acceding to them where they have not done so and to
implement fully and enforce such conventions;
9.
Emphasizes that international efforts to prevent the smuggling of
aliens should not inhibit legal migration or freedom of travel or undercut the
protection provided by international law to refugees;
10.
Reaffirms the need to observe fully international and national law
in dealing with the smuggling of aliens, including the provision of humane
treatment and strict observance of all the human rights of migrants;
11.
Requests the relevant specialized agencies and intergovernmental
organizations, in particular the International Organization for Migration, the
International Maritime Organization, the International Criminal Police
Organization and the International Civil Aviation Organization, to consider
ways and means, within their respective spheres of competence, to enhance
international cooperation to combat thesmuggling of aliens;
/...

A/RES/48/102
Page 4

12.
Requests the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
to consider giving special attention to the question of thesmuggling of aliens
at its third session, to be held in 1994, in order to encourage international
cooperation to address this problem within the framework of its mandate;
13.
Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the text of the present
resolution to all Member States and to relevant specialized agencies and
intergovernmental organizations;
14.
Invites Member States and relevant specialized agencies and
intergovernmental organizations to report to the Secretary-General on the
measures they have taken to combat the smuggling of aliens;
15.
Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly
on the measures taken by States, specialized agencies and intergovernmental
organizations to combat the smuggling of aliens, and decides to consider this
question at its forty-ninth session under the item entitled "Crime prevention
and criminal justice".
85th plenary meeting
20 December 1993
