S/2017/505

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 June 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 2 March to 1 June 2017)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2327
(2016), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 15 December 2017 and requested me to report on
the implementation of the mandate every 90 days. It covers political and security
developments from 2 March to 1 June 2017, as well as reforms undertaken to adapt
UNMISS to the situation on the ground, increase efficiency in t he implementation
of its mandate and enhance the safety and security of United Nations staff. It also
provides a review of progress made by the parties in ceasing hostilities, returning to
the path of dialogue and achieving inclusiveness within the Governm ent and
addresses the issue of adjustments to the UNMISS mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
South Sudan peace process
2.
The implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan (the peace agreement) remains largely stalled, with no
significant progress towards ensuring greater inclusivity in the Transitional
Government of National Unity. On 15 March, President Salva Kiir announced the
appointment of new ministers for the portfolios of Labo ur, Public Service, Human
Resources Development and Agriculture and Food Security. The posts, which had
become vacant following the resignation of opposition officials, were allocated to
the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition un der
First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai and allied political parties. President Kiir also
appointed new Deputy Ministers of Defence and Veteran Affairs (from the
pro-Taban Deng Gai SPLM/A in Opposition) and of Labour, Public Service and
Human Resources Development (from SPLM in Government). Also on 15 March,
the President replaced 21 members of the Transitional National Legislative
Assembly linked to former First Vice-President Riek Machar with those allied to
First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai.
3.
In accordance with chapter VII of the peace agreement, the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission convened monthly plenary meetings on 15 March,
26 April and 24 May. At the March plenary, members of the Commission agreed to
establish six technical working committees, based on the thematic chapters of the

17-09495 (E)

160617

*1709495*

S/2017/505

peace agreement, namely, governance, security, humanitarian assistance, economy
and finance, transitional justice and constitutional affairs. The committees were
tasked with assessing progress towards implementation of the peace agreement,
recommending remedial actions and presenting status reports ahead of the plenary
meetings of the Commission.
4.
On 31 March, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission,
former President Festus Mogae, met with Riek Machar in South Africa, urging him
to denounce violence, declare a unilateral ceasefire and participate in the national
dialogue. Arguing that his forces were acting in self-defence, Mr. Machar called for
the convening of a neutral forum for the parties to discuss ceasefire issues and to
revive the peace agreement.
5.
On 13 April, the Chair of the National Constitutional Amendment Committee
presented to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs a draft bill outlining
amendments required to align the Transitional Constitution of 2011 with the peace
agreement. In line with its mandate, the Committee started reviewing national
security laws and other legislation to be amended, to ensure consistency with the
peace agreement.
6.
On 25 April, President Kiir expanded to 103 members the Steering Committee
of the national dialogue initiative announced on 14 December 2016, maintaining a
large majority of members from SPLM in Government, SPLM/A in Opposition
allied to First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai and allied political parties. New
appointees also include representatives of the group of former political detainees,
prominent religious leaders and nine foreign nationals, but no representatives of
Mr. Machar or other opposition movements residing outside the country. On
22 May, President Kiir officially launched the national dialogue process, in the
presence of President Museveni of Uganda, and swore in 60 committee members
present in Juba. He also announced a unilateral ceasefire to create a cond ucive
environment for the dialogue and facilitate humanitarian assistance, ordered security
organs to stop arresting opposition elements who wished to join the dialogue and
ordered a review of political prisoners. On 31 May, President Kiir appointed three
women to the leadership organ of the National Dialogue Steering Committee, now
comprising nine members.
7.
In joint statements dated 17 and 30 April, a new grouping of six prominent
opposition entities condemned President Kiir’s plans for the national dia logue as
“unilateral” and not genuinely inclusive. The signatories to the statements included
the pro-Machar SPLM/A in Opposition, the former political detainees, the National
Democratic Movement led by Lam Akol and the National Salvation Front/Army
recently formed by former Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) Deputy Chief
of General Staff for Logistics, General Thomas Cirillo Swaka. The pro -Machar
SPLM/A in Opposition faction, in a statement released on 22 May, also condemned
the process as a “one-sided dialogue being imposed by President Kiir and his
allies”.
Regional engagement
8.
During a visit to South Sudan from 1 to 7 March, the African Union High
Representative for South Sudan, former President Alpha Oumar Konaré, engaged
with Transitional Government officials, including President Kiir, in order to revive
the political process, obtain a cessation of hostilities and create an environment
conducive to inclusive dialogue. On 17 March, the African Union Peace and
Security Council urged the parties to uphold the permanent ceasefire and stressed
the imperative of an inclusive and transparent national dialogue process led by an
impartial figure. On 26 and 27 March, the Chair of the African Union Commission ,
2/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

Moussa Faki Mahamat, travelled to South Sudan to visit famine-affected areas in
Unity State and to meet with national stakeholders and assess the situation. During
those meetings, he expressed his deep concern at the humanitarian crisis in the
country and called upon the warring parties to desist from violence.
9.
In Nairobi, on 25 March, the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) discussed the situation in
South Sudan. In its final communiqué, the Assembly announced that President Kiir
had accepted to proclaim a unilateral ceasefire and grant general amnesty to those
who renounced violence in order to promote inclusive participation in the national
dialogue. In Kampala, on 25 and 26 May, President Museveni of Uganda convened
a meeting between SPLM in Government, SPLM/A in Opposition Taban Deng Gai
faction and the former political detainees.
Other political developments
10. On 9 May, President Kiir removed General Paul Malong Awan from his
position as Chief of General Staff of SPLA, appointing Lieutenant General James
Ajongo Mawut to this position. General Malong travelled to Yirol, in Eastern Lakes,
where he stayed until his return to Juba on 13 May at the urging of Dinka elders and
government officials. On 15 May, President Kiir anno unced several changes to the
SPLA leadership structure and the creation of three service branches: the Ground
Force, the Air Force and Air Defence, and the Riverine Unit.
Economic developments
11. South Sudan continues to face severe macroeconomic challenges. Prices
further increased, albeit at a slower rate in the first four months of 2017 compared
with the last four months of 2016, with annual inflation averaging 343.7 per cent
and 495.4 per cent, respectively. Oil production, at approximately 130,0 00 barrels
per day, remained at low levels compared with production before the outbreak of the
conflict. The South Sudanese pound continued to slide against the United States
dollar and persistent salary backlogs undermined household purchasing power
across the country. The Government reiterated its commitment to economic and
fiscal stabilization measures, which include non-oil revenue collection and
expenditure reduction as well as strengthening monetary policy and the banking
system, but the downturn shows no immediate signs of reversal.

III. Security situation
12. SPLA undertook offensives in Opposition-controlled areas in Upper Nile and
Jonglei and continued its attempts to flush out opposition elements in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal and Central and Eastern Equatoria. Civilians were often caught in the
fighting, if not deliberately targeted, which led to massive displacement, human
rights violations and growing humanitarian needs.
Greater Upper Nile region
13. The security situation in Greater Upper Nile continued to deteriorate. In Wau
Shilluk, on 3 March, a patrol team from UNMISS and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism observed that no civilians remained
in town following a heavy SPLA offensive. SPLA conso lidated its positions in
Manyo County by conducting an aerial bombardment around Kedbek, outside Nasir,
on 15 March and reportedly captured Thorgwang and Daba villages from the
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition. In Wau Shilluk, shelling was observed between
SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition on 23 March. There were reports of
17-09495

3/17

S/2017/505

an SPLA attack on Tonga, in Panyikang County, and clashes between Opposition
forces and SPLA near Owachi, on 13 April. Opposition troops withdrew from Tonga
following heavy fighting with SPLA on 17 April. SPLA captured Kodok from SPLA
in Opposition during fighting on 25 and 26 April, resulting in a large number of
civilians fleeing from Kodok to Aburoc. On 4 May, SPLA deployed forces to Tonga
following reports of clashes with Aguelek/pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces in
that area. From 5 to 9 May, SPLA clashed with Aguelek/pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition forces in the Kaka area and reportedly took control of the area.
14. The security situation in Jonglei was unstable, with reports of SPLA forces
advancing into Opposition-controlled areas in central and northern Jonglei.
Following fighting in Uror County, in early March, civilians reportedly fled Motot
and Pulchuol to Wa’at and Lankien, towards Akobo. On 19 March, an armed group
attacked a commercial vessel on the Nile travelling fro m Tayer to Bor, killing eight
civilians and injuring seven. SPLA reportedly clashed with the pro -Machar SPLA in
Opposition in Wau Payam, Ayod County, on 31 March, near Yuai, Uror County on
12 April, in the Wa’at area on 15 and 16 April and in Shwil Nyerol County on
25 April. On 5 May, SPLA clashed with pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition forces
when the latter reportedly attacked the residences of the Governors of Akobo and
Bieh States (created by establishment order 02/2017). On 17 May, pro-Machar
SPLA in Opposition forces tried to retake Wa’at, but were pushed back by SPLA.
15. In Unity, children and young people continued to be abducted, recruited and
used by SPLA and the pro-Taban Deng Gai SPLA in Opposition in Guit and Leer
Counties. On 26 March, UNMISS conducted a patrol to Mayendit, where
pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition officials reported clashes with Government forces.
On 15 April, UNMISS conducted a patrol to Wunkur on the border with Upper Nile,
after previously being denied access by SPLA soldiers threatening to open fire on
the patrol, and observed a large number of SPLA soldiers with four tanks and two
armoured personnel carriers. On 3 May, the UNMISS temporary operating base in
Leer came under small arms fire; UNMISS peacekeepers repelled the attack, and no
injuries or damage were sustained. UNMISS is investigating the attack. On 10 May,
clashes were reported between SPLA and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition in
Luom Payam, Leer County.
Greater Equatoria region
16. The security situation was tense in the Equatorias, with reports of clashes
between SPLA and opposition elements, insecurity along major roadways and
allegations that SPLA soldiers were targeting civilians. In Central Equatoria,
confrontations between Government forces and the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition
were reported in Yei town on 12 March, in Kajo Kaji on 26 March, in Ombaci, Yei
County, on 8 April; in the Kagelu area, west of Yei town, from 16 to 20 May; and in
the Kaia area on 25 May. The Mission also received reports that Government forces
had attacked opposition locations in the Kajo Kaji area during the month of May.
There were also reports of confrontations between members of Government security
forces in Yei town, including the killing of an SPLA soldier and a National Security
Service officer. Meanwhile, insecurity along the Juba-Bor road continued. On
10 March, a commercial vehicle was attacked by armed men, killing two foreign
nationals. On 25 March, an armed group ambushed and killed seven individuals, six
of them humanitarian workers, including four foreign nationals. In April, ambush es
by uniformed men on the Juba-Pibor and Juba-Torit roads resulted in six fatalities,
and on 5 May, multiple attacks on the Juba-Bor road resulted in 27 civilian deaths.
On 9 May, a convoy of the escort guards of the First Vice -President was attacked by
armed individuals between Gemmaiza and Mangala, resulting in two injuries.

4/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

17. In Eastern Equatoria, an SPLA convoy was ambushed in Lopa County on
7 March, reportedly by opposition elements and local youth, killing three SPLA
soldiers. On 8 March, armed men in uniform robbed a commercial truck on the
Lopa-Lafon road. On 18 March, armed men in uniform ambushed a convoy of
trucks contracted by a United Nations agency to transport food to Ikotos County. In
Pajok, from 3 to 5 April, violence erupted when armed individuals attacked an
SPLA military convoy, following which SPLA elements attacked civilians in Pajok
Payam, apparently on the basis of suspected support for SPLM/A in Opposition,
causing civilian displacement to Uganda and the surrounding area. UNMISS patrols
to Pajok observed the town to be highly militarized.
18. In Western Equatoria, insecurity involving Government forces and armed
opposition elements persisted. In March, suspected members of the South Sudan
People’s Patriotic Front allegedly abducted civilians in different locations in
Yambio County. There were also reports of SPLA operations against opposition
elements in Nagero County, clashes between Government forces and armed men in
the Ikpiro area of Yambio and a shooting incident between the South Sudan National
Police Service and former members of the South Sudan People’s Patriotic Front in
Yambio town.
Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
19. The security situation in Greater Bahr el-Ghazal was tense, with reports of
clashes and security incidents involving Government forces and opposition
elements. In Lakes, a medical mission was ambushed by armed men along the
Shambe-Karair road, near the border with Unity, on 14 March. One state official of
the Health Department was killed and two others, including an international staff
member of a United Nations agency, were wounded. On 2 May, an international aid
agency vehicle was ambushed by an armed group between Wulu and Lam, Wulu
County, resulting in two injuries. In Warrap, one SPLA soldier was killed and two
others injured, when an SPLA convoy was attacked by armed individuals in Apuk
West County on 28 April.
20. After heavy shelling and shooting south-west of Wau town on 24 and
25 March, SPLA deployed reinforcements and reported that local opposition
elements had attacked SPLA positions in Natabu and Bagari, injuring four SPLA
soldiers. After an SPLA soldier was reportedly killed in Mape l by an armed group
on 3 April, clashes continued in Mapel on 4 April, with witnesses reporting several
dead bodies at an SPLA checkpoint. Fighting in nearby Majak on 5 April caused
hundreds of civilians to seek refuge in Wau town. Following those incident s, SPLA
deployed additional soldiers, artillery and tanks to its Grinti barracks, in Wau. On
10 April, shooting broke out in five locations in Wau town after suspected
opposition forces had killed 19 SPLA soldiers in an ambush on the Bazia -Wau road
the previous day. Government forces allegedly sought revenge on civilian residents
in Wau town. More than 22,000 people were displaced, seeking refuge in the
protection area adjacent to the UNMISS base in Wau and other sites in Wau town.
Meanwhile, clashes continued outside Wau town. On 12 April, there were reports of
mortar fire in the Bagari area, south-west of Wau. An UNMISS patrol to Bagari on
13 April was stopped by SPLA on the outskirts of Wau town. On 14 April, SPLA
forces reportedly clashed with opposition elements in Raga town, resulting in
civilian displacement. On 13 May, several SPLA soldiers were reportedly killed in
clashes with the pro-Machar SPLA in Opposition between Biringi and Natabu,
south-west of Wau town. On 14 May, SPLA allegedly attacked pro-Machar SPLA in
Opposition positions in the Gede area.

17-09495

5/17

S/2017/505

Intercommunal conflicts
21. Intercommunal tensions between the Dinka Bor and Murle communities
intensified in Jonglei and Boma States over incidents of cattle -raiding and child
abduction. Fighting between Dinka Bor and Murle youth around Kochar and
Manyabol occurred from 4 to 7 March, reportedly wounding 9 Murle and 11 Dinka
youth. On 10 April, armed Luo Nuer killed up to 42 people, injured approximately
17 and abducted 25 children in an attack on a Murle cattle camp in Monychak
village, Likuangole, Boma State, when they raided thousands of head of cattle. At
least 1,000 people are reported to have fled the area for Likuangole. Meanwhile,
authorities in Pochala North County claimed that armed men from South Sudan had
killed 28 people and abducted 43 children from the Gambella region of Ethiopia on
12 and 13 March. Violent conflict between armed Mundari and Dinka Bor youth in
Gemmeiza County, Terekeka State, between 2 and 13 May, led to the deaths of
approximately 40 civilians, the destruction of villages and civilian displacement,
and the temporary closure of the Juba-Bor road.
22. In Unity, the Governors of Northern Liech, Twic, Tonj and Gogrial States held
a meeting in Mankien, Mayom County, to discuss issues affecting peaceful
coexistence. The Governors called for a joint SPLA force from the four States to be
deployed to specific locations and signed a 10-point resolution agreeing to establish
a joint border court for cattle-raiding incidents and civilian disarmament.

IV. Humanitarian situation
23. Since the onset of the conflict in December 2013, more than 3.8 million South
Sudanese have been forced to flee their homes, including 1.97 million internally
displaced persons, and more than 1.89 million people who have fled as refugees to
neighbouring countries, notably the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia,
Kenya, the Sudan and Uganda. As at 15 May, Uganda had hosted more than 919,200
South Sudanese refugees, including more than 247,500 arrivals in 2017.
24. Owing to fighting and displacement in many parts of the country, humanitarian
needs have risen sharply. In Jonglei, an estimated 100,000 people were displaced
during the Government offensive in Ayod, Nyerol and Uror Counties, and several
thousand were displaced by clashes in Pibor. In Eastern Equatoria, there was a
significant spike in displacement as people fled from Agoro, Umeo and Panyikwara
into Magwe town, as well as from Magwe and Pajok to Uganda. In Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, clashes outside of Wau and reports of targeted killings during Government
operations in Wau town displaced more than 22,000 people. In Upper Nile, an
estimated 25,000 people fled renewed fighting and the government offensive on
Kodok, Kodok County, Tonga, Panyikang County, and surrounding villages in late
April. Many of those fleeing arrived in Aburoc, a remote location with limited
access to water, while several thousand crossed the border into the Sudan.
25. The food insecurity and malnutrition situation re mained dire, with localized
famine declared in Leer and Mayendit Counties of Unity on 20 February, and some
5.5 million people estimated to be severely food insecure country -wide. General
food distributions have reached more than 320,000 people in 15 locat ions in
counties affected by famine or at high risk of famine (Koch and Panyinjar). In
addition, food insecurity is forcing people to migrate to the Sudan from Northern
Bahr el-Ghazal, and owing to conflict in Jonglei, particularly in Nyerol, people now
face emergency levels of food insecurity. The economic crisis, particularly rising
food prices, also continues to deepen food insecurity in urban areas. The United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food
6/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

Programme (WFP) are rolling out a joint strategy to stem the advance of famine
through an integrated, area-based recovery and stabilization programme.
26. The collapse of the health system and spread of communicable diseases
remained a major concern. As at 15 May, 8,160 cholera cases, including 248 deaths
(case fatality rate: 3.10 per cent) had been reported across 19 counties in South
Sudan since the initial case was recorded on 18 June 2016. Sinc e the beginning of
2017, more than 439,200 cases of malaria and measles outbreaks in five counties
have been reported, mostly impacting children under five years of age.
27. The operating environment for humanitarians deteriorated sharply. In March
alone, seven aid workers were killed, including six murdered on 25 March in an
ambush on the Juba-Pibor road and a health worker killed in an ambush in Yirol
East on 14 March. In Wau, in April, three porters contracted by WFP were killed,
and security forces detained one national WFP staff member, who was released in
early May. Also in early April, there were physical attacks against humanitarians in
Upper Nile, including the arrest and beating of an aid worker by Government
soldiers in Malakal town, the beating of aid workers in Melut by National Security
Service officials, and threats and physical assault against aid workers in Aburoc by
SPLA in Opposition forces. Active hostilities forced the withdrawal of at least
100 humanitarians from Aburoc, Ayod, Kodok, Leer, Luom, Twic East, Wa’at and
Walgak, disrupting services for tens of thousands of civilians in need. Large -scale
looting of humanitarian facilities remained a major concern, including in Mayendit
town and Wau Shilluk.
28. Notwithstanding the increasingly hostile operating environment, humanitarians
scaled up their response, including through intensive access negotiations and
sustained advocacy regarding the need for free, safe and unhindered humanitarian
access. In 2017, more than 2.5 million people have been reached with humanitarian
and protection assistance. This includes 2.5 million people who received food
assistance, more than 1 million people who gained access to improved water
sources, more than 76,100 children and pregnant and lactating women tre ated for
acute malnutrition and nearly 52,400 children between 6 to 59 months vaccinated
against measles.
29. Notwithstanding the declaration of localized famine in South Sudan, funding
shortfalls remain a challenge, with the humanitarian response plan for 2017 just
46 per cent funded, leaving a gap of $884.7 million.

V. Implementation of the mandated tasks of the Mission
A.

Protection of civilians
30. UNMISS continued to follow a three-tiered approach to the protection of
civilians. Under the first tier, protection through dialogue and political engagement,
my Special Representative exercised his good offices to engage national and local
authorities and senior military officials. In those engagements, he stressed the
Government’s responsibility to protect civilians and the need for the parties to cease
hostilities and ensure unhindered access for UNMISS and humanitarian actors.
UNMISS facilitated conferences relating to pastoral migration in Terekeka, Jubek,
Jonglei and Amadi States and delivered workshops on social cohesion,
reconciliation and conflict management. UNMISS supported a high-level visit by
First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai to Jonglei and Boma States that led to a
cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of armed youth to their respective areas.
Separately, UNMISS supported an initiative led by the First Vice -President that
resulted in a cessation of hostilities between Dinka Bor and Mundari actors in

17-09495

7/17

S/2017/505

Terekeka State and the reopening of the Juba-Bor road. A committee has been
established to investigate the violence between the Dinka Bor and the Murle and the
Dinka Bor and the Mundari and to make recommendations to prevent further
conflict between those communities. In order to facilitate the peaceful migration of
pastoralists and livestock from the Sudan to greater Upper Nile, UNMISS organized
two migration review conferences for host communities and pastoralists in Renk
and Melut Counties.
31. Under the second tier, protection of civilians under threat of physical violence,
UNMISS continued to protect 230,482 internally displaced persons in six UNMISS
protection of civilians sites, reaching the highest number of displaced persons
within those sites since the December 2013 crisis. This included 119,139 in Bentiu,
38,833 in Juba, 30,559 in Malakal, 651 in Melut, 1,956 in Bor and 39,344 in Wau. A
temporary protection area in Leer, southern Unity, continued to offer refuge to more
than 1,000 internally displaced persons.
32. UNMISS continued to focus on pre-empting, deterring and mitigating violence
against civilians in areas beyond UNMISS protection of civilians sites. Efforts
included continued proactive deployment and patrolling, including dismounted
integrated patrols comprising military, police and civilian personnel, to facilita te
engagement with host communities and internally displaced persons. During the
reporting period, a total of 7,927 patrols were conducted. In Juba, UNMISS
extended its patrols beyond the weapons-free zone around the Mission’s protection
of civilians sites, including during hours of darkness, considerably reducing
criminal activities in the zone. UNMISS also continued regular patrols outside the
protection of civilians sites in Bentiu, Bor, Malakal and Wau. Planning for the
establishment of weapons-free zones around the Bentiu and Malakal sites is
ongoing. UNMISS undertook significant outreach activities, including integrated
patrols, to conflict-affected areas of Kajo Kaji and Yei in Central Equatoria, Magwi
in Eastern Equatoria, Raja in Western Bahr el-Ghazal, Wunkur in Unity, Manyabol
Pochala in Jonglei, and Kodok and Aburoc in Upper Nile. Furthermore, to address
incidents of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence against displaced
women and girls, UNMISS enhanced integrated and active patrollin g in areas where
women and girls were most vulnerable, including in Pathai, Yuai, Motot and Wa’at.
In the protection of civilians sites in Bor and Bentiu, sensitization campaigns
reminded women to adhere to the firewood patrols to avoid sexual assaults. In Juba,
firewood patrols increased from two to three per week.
33. Under the third tier, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS
continued engaging with national and community authorities and civil society to
identify measures that contribute to the peaceful coexistence among neighbouring
communities. UNMISS, with the support of implementing partners, carried out
23 quick-impact projects, improving access to basic services such as water and
renovating public facilities including schools, youth and women’s centres and a safe
house for vulnerable individuals.
34. Within the framework of the Global Open Day for Women and Peace,
UNMISS facilitated dialogue processes between women leaders and the Mission
leadership to evaluate the implementation status of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). The Mission hosted 10 women’s peace forums, engaging more than 500
women both from the UNMISS protection of civilians sites and local communities,
to hear their perspectives on the impact of conflict on women and on women’s
representation in conflict resolution and dialogue initiatives. Recommendations
emanating from the consultations and an action plan for implementation are to be
presented to the UNMISS leadership in order to inform the Mission’s good offices
efforts. UNMISS also continued hosting human rights sensitization workshops,
including on conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, for community
8/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

members and national security forces. In addition, UNMISS hosted a forum on
gender parity exploring critical linkages between the increase in the number of
women peacekeepers and the effective realization of the Mission’s protection of
civilians mandate.
35. The United Nations Mine Action Service provided a weapons and ammunition
storage container to UNMISS police at five locations (Juba, Bentiu, Bor, Malakal
and Wau) to secure hazardous items confiscated during searches of the UNMISS
protection of civilians sites. Additionally, in collaboration with UNMI SS, the Mine
Action Service conducted a risk assessment that included the review of ammunition
and explosive stores across 17 UNMISS field sites.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
36. Civilians continued to bear the brunt of the ongoing conflict across the
country. Although both Government and opposition forces were responsible for
human rights violations and breaches, SPLA was responsible for the majority of
cases documented by UNMISS. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded the
killing of 149 civilians and the wounding of 90 others in conflict-related violence.
In Pajok, Eastern Equatoria, between 3 and 5 April, Government forces were
responsible for indiscriminate and targeted killings of civilians, conflict -related
sexual violence, looting and destruction of civilian property. This included at least
66 documented deaths of civilians of Acholi ethnicity, including eight women, five
children and two men with disabilities, and the wounding of three others . Witnesses
indicated the existence of mass graves in Pajok and Lawaci, and UNMISS found
three newly dug graves and two sites with freshly turned soil. The Mission also
received reports of three incidents of sexual violence involving six individuals; the
perpetrators in one incident were reportedly arrested. Two primary schools and a
health centre were looted and homes were burned. In Central Equatoria, a satellite
imagery analysis carried out by the Operational Satellite Applications Programme
estimated that, owing to recent fighting, more than 18,300 structures had been
damaged in and around the cities of Yei, Morobo and Kaya. In Western Bahr
el-Ghazal, on 10 April, after a suspected SPLM/A in Opposition ambush and killing
of SPLA soldiers, SPLA elements, supported by Dinka men, sought revenge on
civilian residents of Wau town. UNMISS documented 18 deaths and 10 injuries,
including three women. All casualties were of Luo and Fertit ethnicity; three male
WFP contractors were among those killed. Estimates by state authorities indicated
28 dead and 27 injured. The state governor established a committee to investigate
the attacks, but to date, UNMISS has no information regarding any arrests made.
37. UNMISS documented fewer human rights abuses perpetrated by SPLM/A in
Opposition, partly owing to the inability of the Mission to access Opposition
strongholds. In Western Equatoria, between 14 and 19 March, five men reportedly
affiliated with SPLM/A in Opposition kidnapped a local chief and three
non-governmental organization staff, accusing them of being government spies. The
victims were released after paying a ransom or following the intervention of a
religious leader.
38. Human rights violations persisted in the administration of justice. UNMISS
continued to document cases including prolonged and arbitrary detention, proxy
detention, executive interference in the justice system, detention of minors
alongside adults and detention conditions that failed to meet international human
rights standards. Three men sentenced to death by Tonj County Cou rt were executed
in Tonj Prison in March, following a process that did not meet national or
international due process and fair trial standards. In March, UNMISS documented
the deaths of two inmates of Juba Central Prison who allegedly died as a result of

17-09495

9/17

S/2017/505

ill-treatment, inadequate food and lack of medical care, and of a human rights
defender held at a National Security Service detention facility in Jebel whose body
showed signs of strangulation. In March, prisons in Kuajok, Bor and Yambio
reported severe food shortages.
39. Cases of politically motivated detention remained widespread. On 2 April,
military intelligence officers arrested more than 50 Luo men in Wau on suspicion of
supporting SPLM/A in Opposition. All individuals were subsequently released. The
National Security Service continued to hold individuals incommunicado without
access to lawyers or family and without bringing them before a court. Cases include
SPLM/A in Opposition spokesman, James Gatdet Dak, who has been detained since
his deportation on 3 November from Kenya, where he had refugee status, and three
UNMISS national staff members who have been held since 2014, one of whom was
released on 26 May.
40. There were further reports of attacks on freedom of the press in relation to the
refusal by the Government to accredit some international journalists. In two cases,
local authorities reportedly accused the journalists of publishing articles deemed
critical of the Government. At least three other international journalists have
reportedly been refused accreditation or visas in 2017. Separately, UNMISS
documented an incident of hate speech at Aweil Catholic Church on 17 April, where
two senior Dinka officials agitated against other ethnic groups.
41. During the reporting period, the country task force on monitoring and
reporting grave violations against children documented 106 incidents affecting
7,557 children (3,965 boys, 3,592 girls). Over one third of the incidents related to
the recruitment and use of children by armed forces and groups. Fur thermore,
23 incidents of attacks on and military use of schools were recorded, mostly in
Eastern Equatoria; one school was vacated, and the United Nations continues to
verify reports of 55 schools allegedly used for military purposes.
42. On 14 March, the South Sudan Human Rights Commission reported to the
Human Rights Council a massive increase in gross human rights violations and
abuses in South Sudan since July 2016. Its mandate was extended for another year
and it was charged with collecting and preserving evidence of, and clarifying
responsibility for, alleged gross violations and abuses of human rights and related
crimes, with a view to facilitating accountability and ending impunity.

C.

Creating conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
43. UNMISS maintained approximately 1,021 kilometres of main supply roads,
enabling humanitarian organizations to pre-position aid supplies for delivery during
the rainy season. UNMISS provided force protection for food drops, convoys and
other humanitarian activities in various locations. Patrols aimed at accessing areas
where violence, displacement and human rights violations had been reported and
where humanitarians were providing services continued to face frequent
obstructions, delaying their ability to reach critical areas. However, the Mission
forces have adopted a more robust posture, refusing to retreat and sleeping at
checkpoints when necessary, in order to assert their freedom of movement.
44. During the deteriorating security situation in Wau in April, UNMISS stepped
up force protection to WFP warehouses and staff. In Leer town, UNMISS
accommodated humanitarians in its temporary operating base and regularly
patrolled surrounding areas, enabling humanitarians to scale up their ser vices.
Furthermore, UNMISS helped to create secure conditions through mounted and

10/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

dismounted patrols for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and services in areas
such as Nhialdiu, Kuach, Nimni and Kaljak. At the request of humanitarians in May,
UNMISS supported the return of aid workers and the response to life -saving needs
on the West Bank in Upper Nile. This included rapidly deploying troops to establish
a light military presence to enable humanitarians to resume water deliveries to
displaced people sheltering in Aburoc.
45. The United Nations Mine Action Service deployed 46 mine action teams to
survey and clear roads, airstrips and helicopter landing sites to facilitate security
and humanitarian access. A total area of 5,985,093 square metres was surveyed and
released, and 12,435 explosive hazards and 219,889 pieces of small arms
ammunition were removed and destroyed.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
46. Overall progress in the implementation of the peace agreement dur ing the
reporting period was, at best, minimal. UNMISS continued to actively support the
work of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, including by facilitating,
ahead of its plenary meetings, a regular forum for international partners and the
“Friends of South Sudan” group to align the positions of the international
community in support of the work of the Chair of the Commission. UNMISS also
participated in the Commission working committees mandated to facilitate the
Commission’s tasks.
47. UNMISS supported the operations of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism by providing force protection and logistical
and administrative assistance to the Mechanism’s monitoring and verification teams
during their field visits, including to the sites of the alleged killings of civilians in
Wau and Pajok. However, the Mechanism continued to raise concern about the
Government’s inflexible security clearance procedures and access constraints,
particularly at checkpoints.
48. UNMISS police continued to work with the joint management team,
comprised of officers from the South Sudan National Police Service and the
SPLM/A in Opposition faction led by First Vice-President Taban Deng Gai, in
support of the establishment of the Joint Integrated Police. With the support of
UNMISS and UNDP, a total of 1,147 officers, including 195 women, completed
their training on 26 May. UNMISS also supported the joint management team in
developing the deployment plan, and UNDP and other partners offere d logistical
support, including the renovation of three police posts and the provision of police
uniforms. All support has been provided in accordance with the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non -United Nations security forces.
49. Progress towards the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan
continues to be slow. The African Union Commission has not yet been given the
opportunity to consult with Government officials in Juba on the Hybrid Court.
However, cooperation between the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and the
Office of Legal Counsel of the African Union Commission regarding the
establishment of the Hybrid Court has intensified over the past three months. The
technical committee for the consultative process on the establishment of the
Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing completed a mapping of conflict
patterns and identified areas for national consultations to inform the drafting of
legislation establishing the Commission. The plan and budget for national
consultations was submitted to the Government for approval. The next step for the
technical committee is to develop an action plan for analysis of the conflict patterns.
The United Nations remains committed to providing technical assistan ce in setting

17-09495

11/17

S/2017/505

up the Hybrid Court and for the implementation of other accountability -related
aspects of chapter V of the peace agreement, pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 2241 (2015), 2252 (2015) and 2327 (2016).

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment
50. As at 29 May, the strength of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,604,
including 845 international staff members, 1,371 national staff members and
388 United Nations Volunteers.
51. The UNMISS police strength stood at 1,692 of the authorized 2,101 officers,
including 628 individual police officers, 989 personnel in formed po lice units and
75 corrections officers. The deployment of 160 Rwandan formed police unit
personnel to Juba was completed on 4 April, and the arrival of 170 Ghanaian formed
police personnel in Wau is expected for July/August. Deployment delays were
attributed mainly to delays in force generation and readiness of force personnel and
equipment, as well as security clearance requirements for troops and contingentowned equipment imposed by the Government.
52. The UNMISS troop strength stood at 11,611 military personnel, including
189 military liaison officers, 356 military staff officers and 11,066 military contingent
personnel. The 363-strong contingent of military engineers and medical staff from
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is anticipated to
complete its deployment to Malakal and Bentiu by 10 June. Following the arrival in
late February of a 255-strong advance party of the incoming Bangladeshi infantry
battalion in Wau, the main body of the Bangladeshi battalion is expected to arrive in
June, subject to securing remaining clearances. A 140 -strong Ghanaian contingent is
expected to be deployed to Aweil starting in July.
53. The regional protection force commenced its deployment to South Sudan in
April, under the command of Brigadier General Jean Mupenzi from Rwanda. The
60-strong advance party of a construction engineering company from Bang ladesh
completed deployment in May, bringing essential equipment to begin the
preparation of accommodation and working areas for the force in Juba. An advance
party of the high-readiness company from Nepal started arriving in mid -May. The
first elements of regional infantry battalions from Rwanda and Ethiopia are
expected to arrive in June and August, respectively. The United Nations Mine
Action Service conducted survey and clearance operations at the regional protection
force site, resulting in the removal of 14 explosive items. As the full deployment,
and planning for the effective employment, of the regional protection force steadily
progresses, critical issues are yet to be resolved with the Government, including the
modalities for implementing the mandate of the force to protect Juba International
Airport.
54. UNMISS intensified efforts to raise awareness on the United Nations
standards of conduct and to implement the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, pursuant to his report on special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse ( A/69/779). UNMISS appointed a
member of the mission leadership as a victim rights advocate and launched a “no
excuses” pocket card that restates the rules on sexual exploitation and abuse and
applicable reporting mechanisms, to be carried by all UNMISS personnel.

12/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations personnel
55. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 53 violations of the status -offorces agreement, 38 of which were restrictions of movement affecting the
Mission’s operations and mandate, including in situations where outbreaks of
violence were reported to the Mission. Of particular concern was the restriction of
movement by SPLA soldiers of an UNMISS long-duration patrol from Torit to
Pajok; threats by SPLA soldiers at a checkpoint to open fire on members of an
UNMISS long-duration patrol from Bentiu to Wunkur if the patrol did not return to
its base; small arms fire directed towards the UNMISS base in Leer and firing over
the UNMISS base in Yei in May; and the physical assault of an UNMISS staff
member by SPLA soldiers in Torit resulting in bodily injuries. Other violations
recorded by UNMISS included five incidents of confiscation and/or destruction of
United Nations property, seven unlawful demands for taxes and fees and eight cases
of arrest and detention of members of UNMISS. The latter includ es the detention of
three staff members arrested in 2014, including an UNMISS radio journalist who
was released on 26 May. The three staff members in prolonged detention have not
been charged and the National Security Service has denied access to UNMISS to
visit them since December 2015. The Government also continued imposing
immigration procedures specific to UNMISS personnel and international
contractors. Four incidents involving SPLA in Opposition were recorded relating to
violations of the freedom of movement, unauthorized entry into UNMISS premises,
firing at an UNMISS base and unauthorized use of UNMISS assets. The Mission
continues to notify the host Government of the violations of the status -of-forces
agreement through notes verbales and in meetings with relevant officials. A monthly
matrix of incidents is also shared with the Government.
56. A series of security risk management measures aimed at enhancing the safety
and security of United Nations personnel, adopted by the Security Management
Team following the crisis of July 2016, have been implemented. The measures
include revised residential zones for international staff residing outside United
Nations premises, enhanced physical security measures for United Nations offices
and residential compounds, improved systems to disseminate security and safety
information and the development of a medical evacuation plan.

VIII. Financial aspects
57. The General Assembly, by its resolution 70/281 of 17 June 2016, appropriated
the amount of $1,081,788,400 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017.
58. As at 18 May 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNMISS Special
Account amounted to $281.1 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to $1,613.5 million.
59. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period
up to 31 January 2017, while reimbursement of the costs of contin gent-owned
equipment has been made for the period up to 31 December 2016, in accordance
with the quarterly payment schedule.

17-09495

13/17

S/2017/505

IX. Observations and recommendations
60. In paragraph 34 of its resolution 2327 (2016), the Security Council requested
that I provide the Council with a review of progress made by the parties in ceasing
hostilities, returning to the path of dialogue and achieving inclusiveness wit hin the
government and recommend any relevant adjustments to the UNMISS mandate. As
made evident in the current report, progress in the areas mentioned in paragraph 34
has been extremely limited owing to the lack of political will. A whole population
has been condemned by its leaders to appalling suffering.
61. With respect to hostilities that have taken place on the ground since the
adoption of resolution 2327 (2016), both SPLA and SPLA in Opposition have been
responsible for initiating military operations against one another, as reported in my
regular reports to the Security Council, monthly briefings provided by my Special
Representatives and other ad hoc communications to the Council. Significant
hostilities have occurred in the Upper Nile region, with SPLA undertaking a major
military offensive against the opposition in areas that have typically acted as a
stronghold for the latter. Similarly, clashes between the parties have taken place in
Jonglei, Greater Equatoria and Greater Bahr el-Ghazal, as well as in Unity, where
humanitarian organizations are working to address fa mine and severe food
insecurity. Rather than any abatement in hostilities between the parties, conflict has
continued, with profound humanitarian consequences for civilians in the affected
areas. The unilateral ceasefire announced by President Kiir on 22 May has not
ended SPLA offensive operations. The renewed upsurge in fighting represents a
callous and blatant disregard of that pledge.
62. Against the backdrop of heightened military activity on the ground, President
Kiir officially launched the national dialogue on 22 May. Deliberations of the
National Dialogue Steering Committee commenced on 29 May and the co -chairs of
the initiative have stated their intention to consult opposition leaders within and
outside the country, including Riek Machar. Joint statements by opposition groups,
some of which have rejected the national dialogue in its current format, are an
indication of their feeling that it is not a fully inclusive platform for discussion.
With respect to inclusivity in the Transitional Government of National Unity, as
mentioned above, efforts towards the consolidation of the SPLM in Opposition/
Taban Deng Gai faction presence, as well as a few other political parties, have led to
the exclusion of other key actors.
63. In the light of the limited progress in these key areas and the continuation of
the political and security crisis that unfolded in July 2016, I cannot recommend any
adjustments to the current mandate of UNMISS. The persistence of significant
military operations on the ground, a complete lack of dialogue between the parties
and the absence of authentic inclusivity within the governmental structures in South
Sudan unfortunately mean that the mandate of the Mission, as currently structured
under resolution 2327 (2016), remains relevant and suited to purpose, including the
role of the regional protection force to increase security and protection of civilians
in the capital. Should a genuine cessation of hostilities take hold, buttressed by the
full implementation of the peace agreement, revisiting the UNMISS mandate and
the tasks of the regional protection force would be warranted.
64. I again appeal to all South Sudanese stakeholders to silence the guns. A
credible and inclusive political process, as envisaged in the peace agreement, is the
only way forward. The parties must show political will to return to the path of
dialogue. I acknowledge calls for a national dialogue; however, this process cannot
be a substitute for implementation of the peace agreement. Furthermore, credible
dialogue cannot take place in a climate of war, starvation or fear. I reiterate my call

14/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

upon the parties to implement an immediate cessation of hostilities and for the
Transitional Government to restore the political freedoms necessary for a credible
process.
65. Regrettably, with the intensification of the conflict, humanitarian needs have
risen sharply. New clashes since the beginning of 2017 have uprooted additional
tens of thousands of people across the country. Food insecurity and malnutrition in
the country have reached unprecedented levels. Some 100,000 people are facing
starvation and 1 million more are on the brink of famine.
66. I commend the courage of the humanitarian actors, who continue to reach
millions of vulnerable people with life-saving assistance, notwithstanding an
increasingly difficult operating environment, and often at real personal risk. South
Sudan has become one of the most dangerous countries for aid workers, with at least
82 humanitarians having been killed since December 2013. I call upon all parties to
stop attacks on humanitarians and humanitarian assets and to ensure free, safe and
unhindered access to vulnerable populations.
67. I am alarmed that military operations and attacks by SPLA and other armed
groups have all too often been indiscriminate. They have left behind torched homes
and fields, looted hospitals and schools and abandoned villages and civilian
casualties in their wake. Civilians continue to suffer human rights violations.
Women, girls and children have borne the brunt of this crisis. The violations must
stop, impunity must end, and concrete actions must be taken to hold perpetrators
accountable. In this regard, the military trial being conducted for the SPLA soldiers
alleged to have perpetrated the crimes committed against civilians in the Terrain
compound in July 2016 must comply with international fair trial standards. Peace,
accountability and respect for human rights cannot be viewed as separate stages in
the trajectory of South Sudan: they are inextricably linked and must be pursued in
tandem.
68. I commend the efforts made by UNMISS to improve the robustness of its
response in the face of challenges that are unprecedented in United Nations
peacekeeping. The Mission has further intensified its active patrolling in areas
affected by or at risk of conflict and is making great strides to improve its capacity
to project its presence in order to protect civilians from physical violence and to
establish a protective environment. Intensified fighting and further civilian
displacements have placed increased demands on the Mission.
69. I welcome the deployment of the vanguard forces of the regional protection
force, which, in the coming months, will boost UNMISS capacity in Juba, allowing
UNMISS peacekeepers to further extend their presence across the country. In that
regard, I renew earlier calls for troop-contributing countries to expeditiously deploy
the remaining capabilities, which are critical to enable UNMISS to effectively
deliver on its mandate. Similarly, I call upon the Government to facilitate clearance
procedures for the rapid deployment of the full authorized strength of the regional
protection force, in line with its commitments to the Security Council.
70. Now, more than ever, the Mission is needed to provide a protective presence
for civilians and to support South Sudan in building dura ble peace. Looking ahead,
within the framework of its current mandate and within its capacity, UNMISS
should continue to prioritize the protection of civilians, both within the protection of
civilians sites and beyond, including addressing the specific pro tection needs of
women and children. The Mission should also continue to prioritize the promotion
of human rights and the reporting of violations and abuses, while also strengthening
mechanisms for accountability. Furthermore, I expect the Mission to conti nue to
play a leading role in facilitating local and national reconciliation efforts and, under
the good offices of my Special Representative, to support regional and international
17-09495

15/17

S/2017/505

initiatives to support the peace process. The unified and unwavering suppor t of the
Security Council for the efforts of the Mission in that regard and for the
implementation of its other mandated tasks will be critical.
71. Since assuming my responsibilities as Secretary-General of the United
Nations, I have engaged frequently and at length with key actors, including
President Kiir and the guarantors of the peace agreement, to revitalize the political
process and reverse the downward spiral that the people of South Sudan have been
experiencing. I welcome the efforts of IGAD member States and the African Union
to revive the political process. It is my hope that the thirty -first Extraordinary
Summit of the IGAD Assembly of Heads of State and Government on South Sudan,
on 12 June 2017, will further a coherent regional approach and re sult in a clear path
forward for the political process. I reiterate the readiness of the United Nations to
support the region as it leads the way in finding an inclusive and lasting solution to
the conflict and its commitment to continue doing all it can t o help the people of
South Sudan to fulfil their long-standing aspirations to peace and security.
72. Lastly, I wish to convey my sincere appreciation for the steadfast commitment
of UNMISS military, police and civilian personnel, who, under the able lead ership
of my Special Representative, David Shearer, continue to work courageously to
protect hundreds of thousands of civilians, safeguard human rights, facilitate the
work of humanitarians and promote an inclusive political process. I particularly
thank the troop-and police-contributing countries that have provided much-needed
uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I further commend the United
Nations country team and non-governmental organization partners for their
tremendous courage and sacrifice in providing vital humanitarian assistance to the
population, under increasingly arduous and challenging conditions.

16/17

17-09495

S/2017/505

17-09495

17/17
