tary-General of the United Nat.ions to this effect, who
shall forthwith communicate such reservations to all
Parties to the present Convention and inquire whether
they have any objection thereto. If within six months
of the date of the communication of the Secretary-General no objections have been received; the reservation
shall be deemed to have bebn accepted."

leur intention It• Sccrftaire general de !'Organisation
des Nations Unies. Celui-ci communiquera immediatement ccs reserves a toutes lcs Parties a la presente
Convention en leur demandant si elles ont des objections a presenter. Si, dan~ un delai de six mois it dater
de laditc communication, aucun pays n'a ptescnttl
d'.objection, la risen<' <'II question scra <·onsideree
comrne accepti•1·. ~

tions of the functions exercised by
the French Government under the
International Agreement of 18 May
1904 and the International Convention of 4 May 1910 for the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic, and the Agreement of 4 May
1910 for the Suppression of the
Circulation of Obscene Publications

256 (Ill). Transfert a l'Organisation
des Nations Unies des fonctions
exercees par le Gouvernement
fram;ais en vertn rle l' Arrangement
international du 18 mai 1904 et
de la Convention internationale du
4 mai 1910 relatifs a la repression
de la traite des blanches, ainsi que
de !'Arrangement du 4 mai 1910
relatif a la repression de la circulation des publications obscenes

The General Assembly.
Noting that the French Government exercises

L' Assemblee generale,
Constatant qu'aux termes de !'article 7 de

certain functions under article 7 of the International Agreement of 18 May 1904 for the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic, 1 under
articles 4, 8, 10 and 11 of the International
Convention of 4 May 1910 for the Suppression
of the White Slave Traffic, 1 and under articles 1,
4, 5 and 7 of the Agreement of 4 May 1910 for
the SupprP-ssion of the Circulation of Obscene
Publications, 1

!'Arrangement international du 18 mai 1904
en vuc d'assurer une protection efficacP conlrn
le trafic criminel connu sous le nom de traite
des blanches', des articles 4, 8, 10 et 11 de la
Convention internationale du 4 mai 1910 relative
a la repression de la traite des blanchPs 1 rt des
articles 1, 4, 5 et 7 de !'Arrangement du 4 mai
1910 relatif a la repression de la circulation
des publications obscenes 1 le Gouvcrnement
franyais exerce certaines fonctions,
Prenant acte de l' offre faite par le Gouvernement fran~is de transferer a !'Organisation
des Nations Unies les fonctions qu'il exerce en
vertu de ces instruments,
Considerant que, par sa resolution 12 6 (11) 2
du 20 octobre 1947, l'Assemblee generale a
decide d'assumer les pouvoirs et fonctions anterieurement exerces par la Societe des Nations
en vertu de la Convention internationale du
30 septembre 1921 pour la repression de la
traite des femmes et des enfants3, de la Convention internationale du 11 octobre 1933 pour
la repression de la traite des femmes majeures~
et de la Convention internationale du 12 septembre 192 3 pour la repression de la circulation
et du trafic des publications obscenes5 ,

256 (III). Transfer to the United Na-

Tal:ing note of the French Government's offer
to transfer to the United Nations the functions
exercised by it in virtue of these instruments,
Considering that, by resolution 12 6 (Il) 2
adopted on 20 October 1947, the General
Assembly decided to assume the powers and
functions previously exercised by the League of
Nations under the International Convention of
30 September 1921 for the Suppression of
the Traffic in Women and Children,3 the International Convention of 11 October 1933 for
the Suppression of the Traffic in Women of
Full Age,~ and of the International Convention
of 12_ September 192 3 for the Suppression of
the Circulation of and Traffic in Obscene Publications5,
Being desirous of continuing and centralizing
international co-operation in order to suppress
the traffic in women and children and in obscene
publications,

1
For the text of these instruments see document A/639/
Rev.1.
' See Official Record, of the Second Seuion of the General
Auembly, Resosution, page 32.
3
See 1-gu, of Nation, Treaty Serie,, volume IX, P88e 415.

• Ibid., volume CL, page 431.
• Ibid., volume XXVII, page 213.

164

Desireuse de continuer et de centraliser la
cooperation internationale en vue de la repression de la traite des femmes et des eofants et
de la repression du trafic des publications
obscenes,
1 Pour le texte de ces trois instruments, voir le doCUIDent
A/63 9 /Rev. t.
' Voir les Docum,nt, officiel, de la deuxieme uuion de
l'A,,emblee glnirale, Resolution. par,e 32
• Voir Socii!J de, Nation,, R~l de, Traiu,, Volume IX,
page 415.
' Ibid., Volume CL, page 431.
'' Ibid .• Volume XXVII, page 213

Approve, the transfer to the United Nations of
the functions exercised by the French Government in virtue of the above-mentioned instruments;
Approves the Protocols which accompany this
resolution;
A,l, that each of these Protocols he signed
without delay :

(a) By the States Members of the United
Nations which are Parties to the Agreements or
to the Convention which the Protocols seek to
amend;
(b) By those States which are not Members of
the United Nations and which are Parties to the
Agreements or the Conventions which the Protocols seek to amend, and to which the Secretary-General shall have communicated a copy of
the Protocols in conformity with international
agreements in force and the recommendations
contained in the resolutions of the General
Assembly;
Recommends that, pending the entry into force
of the aforesaid protocols, effpct be given to
their Provisions by the aforementioned States,
each in respect of the instruments to which it is a
Party;
lnstructs the Secretary-General to perform the
functions conferred upon him by the aforesaid
Protocols upon their entry into force.

Approuve le transfert

a !'Organisation des

Nations Unies des fonctions exercees par le
Gouvernement frall(;ais en vertu des instruments
ci-dessus mentionnes;
Approuve les Protocoles qui accompagnent la
presenle resolution;
Demande que chacun de ces Protocoles soit
signe sans retard :
a) Par Jes Etats Membres de !'Organisation
des Nations Unies qui sont Parties !'Arrangement ou
la Convention que le protocole a
pour objet d'amender;
b) Par ceux des Etats qui ne sont pas mrmbres
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et qui sont
parties !'Arrangement OU la Convention que
le ProtocolP a pour objet d'amender, auxquels
IP Seeretaire genera I aura communi<ple co pie
du Protocole Pn se conformant aux engagements
intnnationaux en vigueur l't aux recommandations rontenuPs dans IPs resolutions de l'Assemblee grnfralP:
RecommandP qu' Pn attendant I' Pntree en vigueur
desdits Protocol,t>.,, leurs dispositions soient appliqu{>es par lrs Etats susmentionnes charun rn ce
qui concernl' lrs instruments auxqnels ii rst
Partie:
flonne pour instruction au Srcretaire r:enrral dP
s'arquittet, des l'entree en vigueur desdits
Protocoles, des fonctions que ceux-ei lui assi gnrnt.

a

a

a

a

Cent-soixflnte-neuvi.eme seance pleniere,
le 3 decembre 1948.

Hundred and si,xty-ninth plenary meeting,
8 December 19 4 8.

PROTOCOL AMENDl!\t; THE I~TERMTIONAL
AGREEMENT FOR THE SlPPRESSIOi\ OF THE
WHITE SLAVE TRO'FIC. SIGNED AT PARIS,
0'.\1 18 MAY 1904. AND THE 1'.\TERNATIONAL
CONVE'.\TTION FOR TIIE Sl;PPRESSJON OF THE
WHITE SLAVE TRAFFIC. SIG,ED AT PARIS.
ON 4 MAY 1910

PR0T0C0LE AMENDANT L'ARRANGEMENT 1\TER\ATI0NAL EN nm D'ASSCRER l1~E PROTECTION EfFICA.CE COJ\'TRE LE TRAFIC
CRIMINEL CONNl' sors LE NOM DE TRAITE
DES BLANCHES. SIGl\E A PARIS. LE t 8 ~HI
l 9(l'i, ET LA C0'.WEl\lTION INTERNATimALE
RELATIVE A LA REPRESSION DE LA TRAIT!•:
DES BLANCHES. SIGYEE A PARIS LE Li MAI

Th<> Partil's lo tlw pns<'lll Prototol. considering
I hat undn the Intrrnat ional .\grL'Pment for tlw
Suppr:!ssion of the Whitr Slaw Traffic, signed at
Paris, on 18 Mav 1904. and the lnteriiational
Convention for the· Suppression of the White Slave
Traffic, signed at Paris, on 4 \Iay 191 0, the Government of the French Rt>puhlic was inwsted with certain functions; considering that the said Govrrnment
has offered to transfer to thP linitPd Nations the functions ext>rcised by it unrl€r the abovP-mentioned
agreemPnls; and considf'I'ing that it is expedient
that thPs1' functions should LP ass111n€d hencrforth
by the Unit Pd Na1 ions, hf'rdiy a1p-e<' as follows :

LPs ttats Parties au present Protocole considerai11
qu 'en Y1-rl11 de !'Arrangement international en V\!f'
d'assurt>r une protection t>llicace contrr I€ tralir
criminel com1U sous le nom de traite des blanche,.
sign1: i1 Paris, le 18 mai 1904. et de la Co11v,•ntio11
internationale rel11tiw a la n\pl'l'ssion de la traite d<•,;
blandws, signee a Paris. le 4 mai 1910, lt> Gouvernernent de la Republique fran9;iis" ,;tail imt>sti dt>
cntairws fonctions; considerant quP h•dit GouVPrm·1w·nt a spontanrm,•nt ofT<'rl de trand,;n.'r a !'Organisation drs Nations Lnirs h·s fonctions qu'il exert·•·
en vertu ,les accords sus-mr-ntionnes; t'I ronsidt'•ra11t
qu'il Psi opportun qu'Plles soiPnt assumrf's desormais par !'Organisation drs 'lations l 1 nil's; sont
convt'nus dPs dispositions suirnntPs :

1910

ARTICLE

1

ARTICLE PRE:lllf.R

The Parties to the present Protocol undertake that
as between themselvt>s they will, each in r€spect of
the instruments to which it is a Party and in accordance with the proYisions of I hf' prPsPnt Protocol,

Les Etats Partit>s au present Protocole prennent
!'engagement qu'entr<> Pux-memrs, chacun f'll ce qui
concerne Jes instruments auxquels ii est partie, \'I
conformem<>nt aux dispositions du present Pro1orolr,

165

attribute full legal force and effect to, and duly apply,
the amendments to those instruments which are set
forth in the annf'x to the present Protocol.

ARTICLE

2

The Secretary-Genf'ral shall prepare the texts of
the International AgNiement of 18 May 1904 for
the Suppression of tlw White Slave Traffic and of
the International Convention of 4 May 1910 for the
Suppression of the White Slave Traffic, as revised
in accordance with th11 prt>sent Protocol, and shall
send copies, for thrir information, to the Govern1n,•nts of every Member of the United Nations and
ewry non-member State to which this Protocol is
opPn for signaturt\ or acceptancP. He shall also
imite Parties to any of the instrumrnts to be anwnded
by the present Protocol to apply thP amended t1•xts
of those instruments as soon as tlw amPndments arP
in force, even if they have not yet hN•n ahle to bPr.omP
Part.irs to the presf>lll Protocol.

AKTICLE

ils attribueront plein effet juridique euxamendements
a ces instruments contenus dans !'annexe au
present Protocole, les mettront en vigueur et f'll
assureront !'application.
ARTICLE

Le Secretaire gent'·ral preparna It's textes de l'Arrangement international en vue d'assurer unc prot1!ction effi.cace conlrP It, trafic criminel connu sous
le 110m de traite dPs blanches du 18 mai 190A, d
dP la Convention intt>rnationale relative it la reprt•ssion de la traite des blanches du 4 mai 1910, revises
conformement au pn;s,•nt Protocole Pt en transmettra,
a tilrP d'information. dt>s copies au Gomernem1•11l
d1\ cha<1ue Etat Membrt' d .. l'Organisation des Nations
Unies. ainsi qu'au Gouvl•rnement de chaque Etat non
membri, a la signalun' oil a l'arceptation duquel 1..
prt;sPnt Protocol,• P,t 011vert. II invitem <;galem,·nt
lt>s Etats Partirs it l'un quP!conque drs instruments
sllsmentionnes i, appliquer lt> tPxte am;,ndt'! de ce
Oil Ot'S instrlllllf'llls cl1\, \'entree t'll viw1e11r dPs
amrndrnwnts, nv\nw s 'il, n 'ont pas l'IICorP pu den•nir
parti,-s au pn'•,,·nt Protocol,•.

3

The present Protocol shall be opt•ll for signature
or aeceptanct! by auy of the PartiPs lo tlw Interna-

2

AnncLE 3

tional Agre1>111ent of 18 May 190'1 for thP Suppre~sion of the ,vhite Sla,e Tra!Iic or to tht• lnll'mational
ComPntion of ,, May 1910 for th<> Suppression o[
th,. White SlaYP Trafflc lo 1rhich thP SPcretaryG1·111•ral has comm1111icaf<'<i for this p11rpost• a <'opy
of tit,! prPsent Protocol.

Le prespnl Protocole sna ouvert a la signature 011
i1 l'i:cci•ptation ctP tous IPs Etals PartiPs i1 l'Arrang1·111Pnl intcr11/llional 1•11 v1w d'assurPr unP protection
pflicacP conlN' I,· tratir criminel connu so11s le nom
de traile dPs blanrlws du 18 mai 190/i ou i1 la Co11vP11tio11 inlt'rnat ional,· rPialiVI' ii la repression de la
I rait,· tl,·s blanc'lws du Ii mai 1910. auxquels I,•
Secn'•tairP 1r•·nt'•ral aura cmmnuniqut'·. i1 r.Pt pffot. 1111
l'XPmplHir>' du pr,;s<•nt Protocol!'.

ARTICL}; /1

Anncu; /1

Statps may hecome Parties to the pri•se11t Protocol
hy :

Lf's Etats pourront drvenir PartiPs au pres!'nt
Protocole :

(a) Signature without rt•servalion as to acceptanc<i;

a; En le signant sous reserve quanta l'acceptation;

(b) Signature with rPservation ;is to accqitanr,•,
followed by accepta11c1!:
(r) Acceptancf•.
Acceptance shall be t•ITt>ctf'd br the dt>posit of ;i
formal instru111P11t with tlu• SPrn•tarv-GPnf'ral of tht>
llnitPd Nations.
·
ARTICLE

b) En le signant sous reserve d'acceptation Pt PH
!'acceptant ulterieurement;
c) En !'acceptant.
L 'acceptation s\!ITectuera par le depot d'nn instrunwnt fornwl aupri•s du Secrf'laire gi\nt\ral dP l'Oq{anisat ion tlrs Nations llnit•s.

5

The present Protocol shall comP i11to forcP on tlw
elate on which two or morP Stal<'s shall have beconw
1'11 rti,•s thereto.
Tlw amendmt>11ls st'l forth in tlw annpx to th,,
prf'sent Protocol shall come into forcP in I'l'spect of
the International AurrrmPHt of 18 "ay 190li for
the Suppression of tlw White Slav .. Traffic when
twenty PartiPs tlwrPto shall havP bt>comP P;irtirs to
thr present Protocol; and in resprct of the IntPrnational Convention of Li May 1910 for thP SupprPssion
of the White Slavt> Traffic when twenty Parti.-s thrreto
shall have become Parti;,s to the p1:,.,.,nt Protocol:
and, consequ;,ntly, any St.. te J,ecoming a Party to
tlw Agreement or to the Convrntio11 aflt•r ilw amPrnlmPnts thereto have come into fo,·cr shall becornP a
Party to the Agreement or to thr Conwntion a, so
amended.

ARTICLE 5

a

LP presPnt ProtocolP f'Htrera en vigueur la dalt>
laquel!P dPux 011 plusiPurs Etats sf>ront drvpn11s
parti,•s audit Proloco!P.
Lt>s amendrmrnts ronlPnus dans l'annexe du pn;s<'nt Prntocoh• Pnh'f'ronl en vigueur, rn cP qui cont·PrnP l'Arrangt>nwnt intrrnational I'll Vilt' d'ass11rPr
11111• protPclion pfficacP rontre IP trafir rriminrl rnnn11
sous IP nom dP 1raill' dPs hlanchrs, tin 18 mai 190 '1.
lorsq11P Yingt Etats Parli<'s audit ArraHff!'ITIPllt snont
dPvt'IIIJ('S PartiPs au prPs!'n1 Protorole: rt, PH Cl'
<pti concPrne la Conwntion intnnationalP relativP it
la ri'·prt>ssion di' la tr~it,· dPs blandws du /1 mai 1910.
lorsq,w vingt d", Etat, <p1i y sont parti,•s seront
d"Vl'llus parti•·s au prt'•sput Protocol<•; PI, Pll comi'-<pwner. tout Etat <tui dPvirndra partie soil a l'Arranw•nwnt soil i1 la Convention apres que les amendPments s'y rapportant srront entn\s PII vigueur.
deviendra partiP l'Arranaement Oil la Convrntion
ainsi IIIIIPilcteS.
i1

a

a

ARTICLE

(i

Upon the entry into force of the amendments sel
forth in the annex lo the present Protocol and concerning either thP Agreement or the Convention, the
French Govf'rnment shall dPposit with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations the original of that of
the two agreements to which the aforesaid amendments relate, together with the various documents
which were in its custody hy virtnn of the functions
which it exercised.
AnncLt:

,\RTICLE

The present Protocol, of which the Chinese, En-

annex being in the French language only, the French
text of the annex shall he authf'ntic and the Chinese,
English, Russian and Spanish texts shall he translations.
A certified copy of the Protocol, including
the annex, shall he sent by tlw SPcretary-General to
each of the Parties to the International Agreement of
18 May 1904 for the Suppression of the White
Slave Traffic or to the International Convention of
4 May 1910 for the Suppression of the White Slave
Traffic, as well as to all Statrs Memhns of the United
Nations.

IN WITNBss WHEREOF the undnsigned, being duly
authorized thereto hy their respective Governments,
signed the present Protocol on the datP appearing
opposite their respective signatures.
DoNE AT ••• this ... day of! ....

7

Conformemeut aux dispositions du parag1-aphe
premier de !'Article 102 de la Charle des Nations
Unies et au rt•glement adopte par l'Assemhlee generate pour !'application de ce texte, le Secretaire general de l'Organisalion des Nations Unies est autorise a
euregistrer le present Protocole ainsi que Jes amendements apportes a !'Arrangement et a la Com·ention
par le present Protocole, aux dates f!'spectives de leur
entree en vigueur, et a puhlier, aussit~t que possible
apri\s IPur enregistrement, le 'Protocole et le textP
amend{, de !'Arrangement et de la Convention.

8

glish, French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally
authentic, shall he deposited in the archives of the
United Nations Secretariat. The Agreement and the
Convention to he amended in accordance with the

6

Des !'Pntree en vigueur des amendem,!nts contenus
dans !'annexe au present Protocole et relatifs, soit a
I' Arrang~ment, soil ala Convention, le Gouvernement
frarn;ais deposera aupres du Secretaire general de
!'Organisation des Nations Unies !'original de celui
rlPs deux accords auquel ont trait lesdits amendements, ainsi que les differents documents dont ii
avail la garde en vertu des fonctions qu'il exercait.

7

In accordance with parauraph 1 of Article 102 of
the Charter of the Unitrd Nations and the regulations
pursuant tlu•reto adopted by the General Assembly,
the Secretary-f~neral of the United Nations is authorized to elfoct registration of the present Protocol
and the amendments made in tlrn Agreement and
Convention by the present Protocol on the respective
dates of their f'nlry into fore,,, and to publish the
Protc:.col and the amended Agreement and Convention as soon as possihlP aftPr rPi;istration.

ARTICLE

ARTICLE

ARTICLE

8

Le prt\sent Prolocole, dont les textes anglais,
chinois, espagnol, franc;ais et russe font egalement
foi, sera depose aux archives du Secretariat de !'Organisation des Nations Unies. L'Arrangement et la
Convention qui seront amendes conformement a
!'annexe ayant ete rediges seulement eh franc;ais, lr
texte franc;ais de !'annexe £era foi et les textes anglais,
chinois, espagnol et russe seront consideres comme
des traductions. Une copie cPrtifiee .conforme du
Protocole, y compris l'annexe, sera envoyee par le
Secretaire general a chacun des Etats Parties a !'Arrangement international en vue d'assurer une protection efficace contre le trafic criminel connu sous
le nom de traite des blanches du 18 mai 1904, ou
a la Convention int.ernationale pour la repression de
la traitP des blanches du 4 mai 1910, ainsi qu'a
tousles Etals MPmhres de l'Organisafion des Natiom
Unies.
E,; FOi DE QUOI, les soussignes, dument autorises
par leurs Gouvernements respectifs, ont signe IP
present Protocole it la date fip,urant f'n rer,ard de leur
signature respective.

Fm 11 • • • , I" ... t 9A .

ANNEX' TO THE PROTOCOL

ANNEXE' :\U PROTOCOLE.

1. INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT •·on THE SUPPRESSION OF THE
WHITE Sun TRAFFIC, SIGNED u
PARIS ON 18 MAY

1. ARRANGEMENT INTERNATIONAL EN VOil D'AssURllR UNB l'llO-

1904

TECTION EFFICACE CONTRE LE TRAPIO CRIMINEL CONNU SOUS
LE

NOM

Dll

TUITE

DES

BLANCHES,

SIGNE A PARIS

LB

18HA1190/i

Artu:l.e 7 shall read :
ttNon-signatory States may adhere to the present
Agreement. For this purpose they shall notify their
intention to the Secretary-General of the United Nations~
who shall acquaint all the Contracting States and all
the Members of the United Nations."

1
The above Protocol will be open for signature at Lake
Success on a date subsequent to the end of the first part of the
third session of the General AssPmhly.
• The French text is authentic, and lhe En[rlish text is a
trimsiation.

L'article 7 sera redige comme suit :
~ Les Etats non signataire~ sont admis a adherer 1111
present Arrangement. ,~ cet affet, ils notifieront leur
intention au Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies, qui en donnera cQnnaissance a tous les
Etats contr~ctants ainsi qu'a tous les Etats Membrcs
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies."
1
Le ,Protocole ci-dessus •era ouvert a la signature a Lake
Success a une date posterieure a la fin de la premiere partie
de la troisieme session de l'Assemblee generale.
' Texte authentique en fran~ais.

2. INTERNATIONAL CoNVENTION FOR THE SnPREss10~ oF nn:
WHITE SLAVE T11AFF1c, SIGNED AT PARIS ON

4 Mn

2. C••~H:NTION INTERNATIONALE JIELATIVE A LA REPRESSION DB
:T.!.ITE DES BLANCHES, SJGNEE APARIS LE

4 MAI 1910

1910
Article !J shall read :
"The Contracting l'arties shall communicate to each
other, through the Secretary-General of the united Nations, such laws as have already been, or may in the future he, promulgated in their countries relating to the
subject of the present Convention."

i•article !J sera redige comme suit :
"Les Parties contractantes se communiqueront, par
l'entremise du Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies, les lois qui auraient deja ete rendues, ou
qui viendraient a l'~tre, dans leurs Etats relativement a
l'objet de la presente Convention."

Article 8. The first paragraph shall read :

A l'article 8, le premier paragraphe sera redige comme
suit :
"Les Etats non signataires sont admis a adherer a
la presente Convention. A cet effet, ils notifieront leur
intention par un acte qui sera depose dans les archives
de !'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le Secretaire
general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies en enverra
copie certifiee conforme a chacun des Etats contractants et a tous les Etats Membres de !'Organisation
des Nations Unies et les avisera en m~me temps de la
date du depbt. II sera donne aussi, dans !edit acte de
notification, communication des lois rendues dans
l'Etat adherent relativement a l'objet de la presente
Convention."

"Non-signatory States may accede to the present
Convention. For this purpose, they shall notify their
intention by an instrument which shall be deposited
in the archives of the United Nations. The SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations shall send a certified
copy to each of the Contracting States and to all the
Members of the United Nations, and shall at the same
time inform them of the date of deposit. The said
instrument of notification shall also transmit anv laws
promulgated by the acceding State relating to t1::e
subject of the present Convention."

"The denunciation sh-all be notified by an instrument
which shall be deposited in the archives of the United
Nations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall send a certified copy to each of the Contracting
States and to all the Members of the United Nations,
and shall at the same time inform them of the date of
deposit."

A /' article 10, le deuxieme paragraphe sera redige
comme suit :
"La denonciation sera notifiee par un acte qui sera
depose dans les archives de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unies en enverra copie certifiee conforme a
chacun des Etats contractants et a tous les Etats
Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et les
avisera en m~me temps de la date du dep6t."

Article 11
The first paragraph shall read
.,Should a Contracting State desire the present
Convention to come into force in one or more of its
colonies, possessions or areas under consular j urisdiction, it shall for this purpose notify its intention by an
instrument which shall be deposited in the archives
of the United Nations. The Secretary-General of the
United Nations shall send a certified copy to each of the
Contracting States and to all the Members of the
United Nations, and shall at the same time inform them
of the date of deposit."

Article 11
Le premier paragraphe sera redige comme suit :
"Si un Etat contractant desire la mise en vigueur de
la presente Convention dan5 une ou plusieurs de ses
colonies. possessions ou circonscriptions consulaires
j udiciaires, il notifiera son intention a cet effet par un
acte qui sera depose dans les archives de !'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies en enverra copie certifiee
conforme a chacun des Etats contractants et a tous les
Etats Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et
les avisera en m~me temps de la date du dep6t.,,

The fifth paragraph shall read :
"The denunciation of \he Convention by one of the
Contracting States for one or more of such colonies,
possessiorn1 or areas under consular jurisdiction shall
take place in accordance with the forms and conditions
laid down in the first paragraph of the present article.
It shall take effect twelve months after the date of deposit of the instrument of denunciation in the archives
of the United Nations."

Le cinquieme paragraphe sera redige comme suit :
"La denonciation de la Convention par un des Etats
contractants pour une ou plusieurs de ses colonies,
possessions ou circonscriptions consulaires judiciaires,
s 'effectuera dans les formes et conditions determinees au
premier alinea du present article. Elle portera elfet
douze mois apres la date du dep6t de l'acte de denonciation dans les archives de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies.,,

PROTOCOL AMENDING THE AGREEMENT FOR
THE SUPPRESSION OF THE CIRCULATION OF
OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS, SIGNED AT PARIS,
ON 4 MAY 1910

PR OTOCOLE AMEND ANT L 'ARRANGEMENT RELATIF A LA REPRESSION DE LA CIRCULATION
DES PUBLICATIONS OBsd:NES, SIGNE A
PARIS, LE 4 MAI 1910

The ·Parties lo the present Protocol, considering
that under the Aweement for the Suppression of the
Circulation of Obscene Publications, signed at Paris
on 4 May 1910, the Government of the French
Republic was invest!'d with certain functions; considering that thr, said Government has offered to
transfer to the United Nations the functions exercised
by it under the above-mentioned Agreement; and
considering that it is expedient that these functions

Les Etats Pa.rties au present Protocole, considerant
qu'en vertu de \'Arrangement relatif a la repression
de la circulation des publications obscenes signe a
Paris, le 4 mai 1910, le Gouvernrment de la Republique frarn;aise etait investi de certaines fonctions;
considerant que !edit Gouvernement a spontanement
offert de transferer a\'Organisation des Nations Unies
les fonctions qu'il exerce en vertu de \'Arrangement
susmentionne; et considerant qu' il est opportun

Article 10. The second. paragraph shall read

168

should be assumed henceforth by the United Nations,
hereby agree as follows :

ARTICLB

qu'elles soi(•nt assumees desormais par !'Organisation
dPs Nations Unies; sont convenus les dispositions
suivant,~s :

1

ARTICLE PREMIER

LPs Etats Parties au present Protocole prennent
f'.,ngagement qu'entre rux-memes, et conformement
aux dispositions du present Protocole, ils attribueront plein effet juridique aux amendements a cet
instrument contenus clans l'annexe au present Protocole, les mettront en v1gueur et en assureront
l'application.

The Parties to the presf•nt Protocol undertake that
as between themselves they will, in accordance with
the provisions of the present Protocol, attribute full
legal force and effect to, and duly apply, the amendments to this instrument which are set forth in the
annex to the present Protocol.

ARTICLE

2

ARTICLE

Le Secretaire general preparera le texte de !'Arrangement du 4 mai 1910 relatif a la repression de la
circulation des publications obscenes, revise conformem,mt au present Protocole et en transmettra, a
titre d'information, copie au Gouvernement de chaque
Etat Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
ainsi qu'au Gouvernement de chaque Etat non
membre a la signature ou a l'acceptation duquel le
present Protocole est ouvert. II invitera egalement
les Etats Parties a !'Arrangement susmentionne a
appliquer le texte amende de cet instrument des
l'entree en vigueur des amendements, meme s'ils
n'ont pas encore pu deviner parties au present
Protocole.

The Secretary-General shall prepare the text of
the Agreement of 4 May 1910 for the Suppression
of the Circulation of Obscene Publications, as revised in accordance with the present Protocol, and
shall send copies, for their information, to the Governments of every Member of the United Nations and
every non-member State to which this Protocol is o;-,en
for signature or acceptance. He shall also invite the
Parties to the aforesaid Agreement to apply the
amended text of this instrument as soon as the
amendments are in force, even if they have not yet
been able to become Parties to the present Protocol.

ARTICLE

3

The present Protocol shall be open for signature
or acceptance by any of the Parties to the Agreement
of 4 May 1910 for the Suppression of the Circulation
of Obscene Publications to which the SecretaryGeneral has communicated for this purpose a copy
of the present Protocol.
ARTICLE

AnTJCLI!

4

ARTICLE

4

L~s Etats pourront devenir parties au present
Protocole :
a) En le signant sans resnve quanta l'acceptation;
b) En le signant sous reserve d'acceptation et en
!'acceptant ulterieurement;
c) En l'acceptant.
L'acceptation s'effectuera par le dep6t d'un instrument formel aupres du Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies.

States may become Parties to the present Protocol

(a) Signature without reservation as to acceptance;
(b) Signature with reservation as to acceptance,
followed by acceptance;
(c) Acceptance.
Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of a
formal instrument with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

5

ARTICLE

5

Le present Protocole entrera en vigueur a la date
a laquelle deux ou plusieurs Etats seront devenus
parties audit Protocole.
I,,~s amendements contenus dans l'annexe au present Protocole entrcront en vigueur en ce qui concrrne l'ArrangPmPnt du lt mai 1910 rdatif a la
repression de la circulation des publications obscenes
lorsque treiw Etats Parti,•s audit Arrangement seront
devenus par! iPs au present Protocole et, Pn consequence, tout Etat qui deviendra partie a !'Arrangement a pr/.s que IPs amendements s'y rapportant
seront entres en vigueur, deviendra partie a l'Arrangenwnt ainsi amPnde.

The present Protocol shall come into force on the
date on which two or more States shall have become
Parties thereto.
The amendments set forth in the annex to the
present Protocol shall come into force in respect of
the Agreement of 4 May 1910 for the Suppression of
the Circulation of Obscene Publications when thirteen Parties thereto shall have become Parties to the
present Protocol, and consequently, any State becoming a Party to the Agreement after the amendments
thereto have come into force shall become a Party to
the Agreement as so amended.

ARTICLE

3

Le present Protocole sera ouvrrt a la signature ou
a l'acceptation de tons les Etats Parties a !'Arrangement du 4 mai 1910 rclatif a la repression de la
circulation des publications obscenes, auxquels le
s~cretairr general aura communique, a cet effet, un
exemplaire du present Protocole.

by:

ARTICLE

2

6

ARTICLE

Upon the entry into force of the amendments set
forth in the anne~ to the present Protocol, the French

6

Des l'entree en vigueur des amendements contenus
dans l'annexe au present Protocole, le Gouvernement

169

Government shall deposit with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations the original of the Agreelll{•nt,,
together with the various documents which were in
its custody by virtue of the functions which it exercised.

fran~is deposera aupres du Secretaire general de
\'Organisation des Nations Unies l'original de l'Arrangement ainsi que les differents documents dont ii·
avait la garde en vertu des fonctions qu'il exercait.

.hTICLB 7

!BTICLB 7

In accordance with paragraph 1 of Article 102 of
the Charter of the United Nations and the regulations
pursuant thereto adopted by the General Assembly,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations is authorized to effect registratien of the present Protocol and
the amendments made in the Agreement by the present Protocol on the respective dates of their entry
into force, and to publish the Protocol and the
amended Agreement as soon as possible after registration.

Conformement aux dispositions du paragraphe
premier de I' Article 102 de la Charte des Nations
Unies et au reglement adopte par l' Assemhlee generale pour l'application de ce texte, le Secretaire general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies est autorise
a enregistrer le present Protocole ainsi que les amendements apportes a !'Arrangement par le present
Protocole, aux dates respectives de leur entree en
vigueur, et a puhlier, aussit6t que possible apres leur
enregistrement, le Protocole et le texte amende de
I' Arrangement.

ARTICLE

8

ARTICLE

The present Protocol, of which the Chinese,
English, French, Russian and Spanish texts are
equally authentic, shall he deposited in the archives
of the United Nations Secretariat. The Agreement
to he amended in accordance with the annex being
in the French language only, the French text of the
annex shall he authentic and the Chinese, English,
Russian and Spanish texts shall he translations. A
certified copy of the Protocol, including the annex,
shall be sent by the Secretary-General to each of the
Parties to the Agreement of 4 May 1910 for the
Suppression of the Circulation of Obscene Publications, as well as to all States Members of the United
Nations.
b WITNESS WBBBEOP, the undersigned, being duly
authorized thereto by their respective Governments,
signed the present Protocol on the date appearing
opposite their respective signatures.

8

Le present Protocole, dont les textes chinois,
anglais, fran~is, russe et espagnol font egalement
foi, sera depose aux archives du Secretariat de \'Organisation des Nations Unies. L'Arrangement qui sera
amende conformement a l'annexe ayant ete redige
seulement en fran~is, le texte fran~is de l'annexe
fera foi et les textes, chinois, anglais, russe, espagnol
seront considere comme des traductions. Une copie
certifiee conforme du Protocole, y compris l'annexe,
sera envoyee par le Secretaire general a chacun des
Etats parties a l'Arrangement du 4 mai 1910 relatif
a la repression de la circulation des publications
obscenes, ainsi qu'a tousles Etats Memhres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
EN ,01 DB QUOI les soussignes, dfiment autorises par
leurs Gouvernements respectifs, ont signe le present
Protocole a la date figurant en regard de leur signature respective.

FAIT l.1 . . . , le ... 194 •

Don AT . . . this ... day ofi ...

ANNEXE AU PROTOCOLE

ANNEX' TO THE PROTOCOL

Armle 1. The fiual paragraph shall read :
ffThe Contracting Governments shall mutually make
known to one another, through the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, the authority established or des~
gnated in accordance with the present article,,,

A.rmle IJ shall read :
ff Non-signatory States will be permitted to adhere
to the present Agreement. They shall notify their intention to that effect l•y meam of an instrument which
shall be depcoited in the archives of the United Nations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall send a certified copy of the said instrument to
each one of the Contracting States and to all the Members of the United Nations, and at the same time
apprise them of the date of deposit.
ffSix months after that date, the Agreement will go
into effect throughout the territorv of the adhering
State, which will thereby become a Contracting State."
1 The above Proto<:ol will be open- for signature at Lake
Succeu on a date subsequent to the end of the first part of the
third session of the General Assembly.
• The French text is authentic, and the English text is a
translation.

170

A l'article premier, le paragraphe final sera redige
comme suit :
ff Les Gouvernements contractants se feront connaltre
mutuellement par l'entremise du Secretaire general de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, l'autorite etablie ou
designee conformement au present article.,,

L'article IJ sera redige comme suit :
"Les Etats non signataires sont admis a adherer ·au
present Arrangement. A cet effet, ils notifieront leur
mtention par un acte qui sera depose dans les archives
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Le Secretaire
general de !'Organisation des Nations Unies en enverra
copie certifiee conforme a chacun des Etats contractants
et a tous les Etats Membres de l'Organisation des
Nations Unies et les avisera en m~me temps de la date
du depot.
ff Six mois afres cette date, l'Arrangement entrera en
vigueur dans l ensemble du territoire de l'Etat adherent,
qui deviendra ainsi l'Etat contractant."
1 Le Protocole ci-dessus sera ouvert a la signature a Lake
Success a une date posterieure a la fin de la premi~re partie
de la troisiooie session de l'Assemblee generale.
• Texte authentique en fran~ais,

~rtiel, 5.

A l'artule 5, le troisieme paragraphe sera redige
comme suit :
"La denonciation sera notifiee par un acte qui sera
depose dans les archives de !'Organisation des Nations
Unies. Le Secretaire general de l'Orgauisation des
Nations Unies en enverra copie certifiee conforme a
chacun des Etats contractants et a toua lea Etata
Membres de !'Organisation des Nations Unies et les
avisera en m~me temps de la date du dep6t."

The third paragraph shall read :

"The denunciation shall be notified by an instrument

which shall be deposited in the archives of the United
l'iations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall send a certified copy thereof to each one of the
Contractin!f States and to all the Members of the
United Nations, and at the same time apprise them of
the date of deposit.,,

Artie/, 7
The first paragraph shall read :

A l'artieltJ 7
Le premier paragraphe sera redige comme suit :
« Si un Etat contractant desire la mise en vigueur ,du
present Arrangement dans une ou plusieurs de ses
coloities, possessions ou circonscriptions consulaires
judiciaires, ii notifiera son intention a cet effet par un
acte qui sera depose dans les archives de l'Orffanisation des Nations Unies. Le Secretaire general de l Organisation des Nations Unies en enverra copie certifiee
conforme a chacun des Etats contractants et a tous les
Etats Membres de l'Organisation des Nations Unies et
les avisera en m~me temps de la date du dep6t.,,
Le troisieme paragraphe sera redige comme suit :
"La denonciation de !'Arrangement par un des Etats
contractants pour une ou plusieurs de ses colonies,
possessions ou circonscriptions consulaires judiciaires,
s'effectuera dans les formes et conditions determinees
a l'alinea premi~r du present article. Elle portera effet
douze mois apres la date du dep6t de l'acte de denonciation dans les archives de l'Orgdnisation des Nations
Unies,,,

"Should a Contracting State wish to enforce the present Agreement in one or more of its colonies, possessions or areas under consular jurisdiction, it shall
notify its intention to that effect by an instrument
which shall be deposited in the archives of the United
Nations. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
shall send a certified copy to each of the Contracting
States and to all the Members of the United Nations
and at the same time apprise them of the date of the
deposih.
The third paragraph shall read :
«The denunciation of the Agreement by one of the
Contracting States on behalf of one or more of its colonies, possessions or consular court districts shall be
effected in the form and under the conditions set forth
in the first paragraph of this article. It shall take effect
twelve months after the date of the deposit of the instrument of denunciation in the archives of the United

Nations,,,

257 (Ill). Missions permanentes aupres de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies

257 (ID). Permanent Missions to the
United Nations

A

A
TAB Genwal Auembly,
Conaideri"lf that, since the creation of the

L' AuemhUe #au,
Conaiderant que, depuis la cr~tion de l'Orga-

United Nations, the practice has developed of
establishing, at the seat of the Organir.ation,
permanent missions of Member States,
Coniitkri"lf that the presence of such permanent missions serves to assist in the realization
of the purposes and principles of the United
Nations and, in particular, to keep the necessary
liaison between the Member States and the
Secretariat in periods between sessions of the
different organs of the United Nations,
Conaidmng that in these circumstances the
generalization of the institution of permanent
missions can be foreseen, and that the submission of credentials of permanent representatives
should be regulated,

nisation des Nations Unies, l'usage s'est etahli
d'instituer des missions permanentes des Etats
Membres au si~ge de !'Organisation,
Comiderant que la presence de telles missions
permanentes contribue a la realisation des buts
et des principes des Nations Unies et perm.et, en
particulier, d'assurer la liaison necessaire entre
les Etats Membres et le Secretariat dans les
periodes entre les sessions des dift'erents organes
des Nations Unies,
Conmlbant qu'il convient dans ces conditions
de prevoir la generalisation de l'institution des
missions permanentes et de reglementer la
presentation des pouvoirs des representants
perm.anents,

Recomm,,uJ,

2. That the appointments and changes of
members of the permanent missions other than
the permanent representative shall be communicated in writing t" t.he .Secretary-General by the

R6COfflfl'IIJntk
1. Que les pouvoirs des representants perm.anents emanent soit du Chef de l'Etat, soit du
Chef du Gouvernement, soit du Ministre des
aft'aires etrangeres, et soient communiques au
Secretaire general ;
2. Que les designations et chanp:nents de
membres des missions permanentes autres que le
representant permanent soient communiques par
ecrit au Secretaire general par le chef de"la

head of the mission;

IDlSSlOn;

1. That credentials of the permanent representatives shall be issued either by the Head
of the State or by the Head of the Government
or by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and shall
be transmitted to the Secretary-General ;

171
