A

UNITED
NATIONS
G eneral Aeeembly

^istr.
GENERAL
X/SES/4S/5S
13 December 1990

Forty-fifth session
Agenda item 53

RESOLOTIOKS ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the First Coimittee (A/45/775)]

45/55.

Prévention of an arms твсе in outer snaee
A

Prevention of an arms race in outer space
The General Assembly.
Recognising the connon interest of all mankind in the esploration and use of
outer space for peaceful purposes.
Reaffirming the will of all States that the exploration and use of outer
space, including the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be for peaceful
purposes, shall be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all
cotmtries, irrespective of their degree of economic or scientific development, and
shall be the province of all mankind.
Reaffirming also provisions of articles XIX and XV of the Treaty on Principles
Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space,
including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies, 1/
Recalling the obligation of all States to observe the provisions of the
Charter of the United Mations regarding the use or threat of use of force in their
international relations, including in their space activities.

1/

90-35642

Resolution 2222 (XXI), annex.

2948Z (E)

.

/...

A/RES/45/55
Page 2

Reafglrmlno further paragraph 80 of the Fiaal Document of the Tenth Special
Seaaion of the General Aaaembly, 2./ ia vhich it ia atated that in order to prevent
an arma race in outer apace further awaaurea ahould be taken and appropriate
international negotiationa held ia accordance with the apirit of the Treaty,
Taking note of ita previoua reaolutiona on thia iaaue and of the Declaration
adopted by the Hinth Conference of Heada of State or Government of Mon-Aligned
Countriea, held at Belgrade from 4 to 7 September 1989, 1/ and taking note also of
the propoaala aubraitted to the General Aaaembly at ita tenth apecial aeaaion and at
ita regular aeaaiona, and of the recommendationa made to the competent organs of
the United Mations and to the Conference on Disarmament,
Recognlalna the grave danger for international peace and security of an arms
race in outer space and of developments contributing to it,
EmohaaIrina the paramount in^ortance of strict compliance with existing arms
limitation and disarmament agreements relevant to outer apace, including bilateral
agreements, and with the existing legal regime concerning the use of outer space,
Motina that bilateral negotiations between the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and the United States of America have continued since 1985 with the
declared objective of working out effective agreements aimed, inter alia, at
preventing an arms race ia outer space.
Welcoming the re-establishment of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Prevention of an
Arms Race in Outer Space at the 1990 session of the Conference on Disarmament, in
the exercise of the negotiating responsibilities of this sole multilateral
negotiating body on disarmament, to continue to examine and identify, through
substantive and general consideration, issues relevant to the prevention of an arms
race in outer space.
Hating also that the Ad Hoc Conaittee on the Prevention of an Arms Race in
Outer Space, taking into account its previous efforts since its establishment in
1985, continued the examination and identification of various issues, existing
agreements and existing proposals, as well as future initiative's relevant to the
prevention of an arms race ia outer space, 1/ and that this contributed to a better
understanding of a number of problems and to a clearer perception of the various
positions,
Rmphasisina the mutually complementary nature of bilateral and multilateral
efforts ia the field of preventing an arms race in outer space, and hoping that
concrete results will emerge from these efforts as soon as possible.

2/

Resolution S-10/2.

2/

See A/44/551-S/20870, annex.

£/
See Official Records of the Genernl Assembly,JortVrflfth-Session.
blBBleWgnt У9..32 (h/45/27), para. 118.

X/HES/45/55
Page 3

Convinced tbat further measures should be examined in the search for effective
and verifiable bilateral and multilateral agreements in order to prevent an arms
race in outer space,
1.
Heaffirms the importance and urgency of preventing an arms race in outer
space and the readiness of all States to contribute to that common objective, in
conformity with the provisions of the Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities
of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies;
2.
Eecognises. as stated in the report of the Ad Hoe Cononittee on the
Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space, that the legal regime applicable to
outer space by itself does not guarantee the prevention of an arms race in outer
space, that this legal regime plays a significant role in the prevention of an arms
race in that environment, the need to consolidate and reinforce that regime and
enhance its effectiveness, and the importance of the strict compliance with
existing agreements, both bilateral and multilateral; £/
3.
Emnhasiaes the necessity of further measures with appropriate and
effective provisions for verification to prevent an arms race in outer space;
4.
Calls upon all States, in particular those with major space capabilities,
to contribute actively to the objective of the peaceful use of outer space and of
the prevention of an arms race in outer space and to refrain from actions contrary
to that objective and to the relevant existing treaties in the interest of
maintaining international peace and security and promoting international
co-operation;
5.
Reiterates that the Conference on Disarmament, as the single multilateral
disarmament negotiating forum, has the primary role la the negotiation of a
multilateral agreement or agreements, as appropriate, on the prevention of an arms
race in outer space in all its aspects;
6.
Requests the Conference on Disarmament to consider as a matter of
priority the question of preventing an arms race in outer space;
7*
Also requests the Conference on Disarmament to intensify its
consideration of the question of the prevention of an arms race in outer space in
all its aspects, building upon areas of convergence and taking into account
relevant proposals and initiatives, including those presented in the Ad Hoe
Committee at the 1990 session of the Conference and at the forty-fifth session of
the General Assembly;
8.
Reeognixes. in this regard, the relevance of considering sieasures on
confidence-building and greater transparency and openness in space as stated in the
report of the tBLEStS. Committee;

para. 63 of the quoted text.

A/RZS/45/55
Page 4

9.
Further reguesta the Conference on Oiearmafflent to re-eatablieh an ad hoc
connittee with an adequate mandate at the beginning of its 1991 session and to
continue building upon areas of convergence with a view to undertaking negotiations
for the conclusion of an agreement or agreements, as appropriate, to prevent an
arms race in outer space in all its aspects;
10. Drges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of
America to pursue intensively their bilateral negotiations in a constructive spirit
with a view to reaching early agreement for preventing an arms race in outer space,
and to advise the Conference on Disarmament periodically of the progress of their
bilateral sessions so as to facilitate its work;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its forty-sixth session
the item entitled "Prevention of an arms race in outer space".

59th plgaary.megting
'
.

4 December 1990
В

.

Confidence-building measures in outer space
The General Assembly,
Conscious of the importance and urgency of preventing an arms race in outer
space.
Recalling that, in accordance with the Treaty on Principles Governing the
Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space, including the Moon
and Other Celestial Bodies, 1/ the exploration and use of outer space, including
the Moon and other celestial bodies, shall be carried out for the benefit and in
the interest of all countries, irrespective of their degree of economic or
scientific development, and shall be the province of all mankind.
Aware of the fact that more and more States are taking an active interest in
outer space or participating in important space programmes for the exploration and
exploitation of that environment,
.
Reeoonixlno. in this context, the relevancy space has gained as an important
factor for the socio-economic development of many States, in addition to its
undeniable role in security issues.
Emphasising that the growing use of outer space has increased the need for
more transparency as well as confidence-building measures, .
Recalling that the international community has unanimously recognized the
importance and usefulness of confidence-building measures, which can significantly
contribute to the promotion of peace and security and disarmament, in particular
through General Assembly resolutions 43/78 H of 7 December 1988 and 44/116 U of
IS December 1989,

/ . ..

.

À/RES/45/55
Page 5

Hotina the important work being carried out by the Ad Hoc Committee on the
Prevention of an Arms Race in Outer Space of the Conference on Disarmament, which
contributes to identifying potential areas of confidence-building measures.
Aware of the existence of a number of different proposals and initiatives
addressing this subject, which attests to a growing convergence of views,
1.
Reaffirms the importance of confidence-building measures as means
conducive to ensuring the attainment of the objective of the prevention of an arms
race in outer space;
2.
Recognises their applicability in the space environment under specific
criteria yet to be defined;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to carry out, with the assistance of
government experts, a study on the specific aspects related to the application of
different confidence-building measures in outer space, including the different
technologies available, possibilities for defining appropriate mechanisms of
international co-operation in specific areas of interest and so on, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its forty-eighth session.
54th Plenary meeting
4 December 19QQ
