A /67/PV.35

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

35th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 13 November 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 41
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/118)
Draft resolution (A/67/L.2)
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China on
agenda item 41, entitled “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. I would
like, first of all, to acknowledge the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba.
The Group of 77 and China expresses its deep
concern at the continuation of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo unilaterally imposed for half a
century now by the United States of America against
Cuba.
The Group of 77 and China states, as it has
done on many occasions before, that the embargo
against Cuba contravenes the fundamental norms of
international law, international humanitarian law,
the Charter of the United Nations and the norms and
principles governing peaceful relations among States.
Its continued imposition violates the principles of the
sovereign equality of States and of non-intervention
and non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs.

The measures announced by the Government of
the United States two years ago related to a certain
relaxation of restrictions on travel and the transfer of
remittances have had a very limited effect and have
not changed the framework of laws, regulations and
provisions of the embargo, which is still in place. In
fact, the embargo continues to impose severe economic
and financial restrictions on Cuba. The embargo
has caused, and continues to cause, a high degree of
economic and financial damage, has a negative impact
on the welfare and well-being of the people of Cuba
and constitutes a very significant hindrance to Cuba’s
economic and social development.
The deepening impact of the ongoing global
economic and financial crisis and the continued embargo
by the Government of the United States, including
by imposing sanctions and applying extraterritorial
national laws against third countries’ citizens,
institutions and companies that establish economic,
commercial and financial relations with Cuba, will
contribute to further aggravating the hardships for the
people of Cuba.
Furthermore, the embargo frustrates efforts
towards the achievement of all the internationally
agreed developed goals, including the all-important
Millennium Development Goals, and negatively affects
regional cooperation in the area.
The Group of 77 and China has always been firmly
against the embargo. At the second South Summit, held
in Doha in 2005, the Heads of State and Government
of the Group of 77 and China firmly rejected the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-58675 (E)

*1258675*

A/67/PV.35

imposition of laws and regulations with extraterritorial
impact and all other forms of coercive economic
measures, including unilateral sanctions against
developing countries, and called upon the Government
of the United States to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba,
which, in addition to being unilateral and contrary
to the Charter, international law and the principle of
good-neighbourliness, causes huge material losses and
economic damage to the people of Cuba.
Today, the Group of 77 and China would like to
reiterate once again its long-standing and principled
position on this important matter, and recalls the
ministerial declaration of the thirty-sixth annual
meeting of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Group, held in New York in September. The Ministers
firmly rejected the imposition of laws and regulations
with extraterritorial impact and all other forms of
coercive economic measures, including unilateral
sanctions against developing countries, and reiterated
the urgent need to eliminate them immediately. They
emphasized that such actions not only undermined the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and international law, but also severely threatened the
freedom of trade and investment. They therefore called
on the international community to neither recognize
those measures nor apply them.
We recall that, last year, 186 Member States voted in
favour of the resolution introduced by the representative
of Cuba (resolution 66/6). That represented an
overwhelming majority of the international community
demanding the end to the five-decades-old embargo
and full adherence to the principles of mutual respect
and non-interference in the internal affairs of a State
Member of the United Nations.
The Group of 77 and China is committed to working
for the achievement of peaceful coexistence among
nations. Such a goal requires adherence by all nations
to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to
the peaceful conduct of relations among nations and to
the rule of law, including international law.
The Group of 77 and China will again fully support
the draft resolution against the embargo (A/67/L.2) and
urges all Member States to do so.
The President: Before giving the floor to the next
speaker, I would like to propose that the list of speakers
for the debate on this item now be closed. Unless I hear

2

any objection, I shall take it that the Assembly agrees
to that proposal.
It was so decided.
Mr. Goddard (Barbados): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the 14 member
States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
namely, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.
CARICOM aligns itself with the statements made
by the representative of Algeria on behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, as well as with those to be made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the representative
of Chile on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States.
This is the twenty-first consecutive occasion that
we meet in this forum to raise the sustained chorus
of opposition to the United States imposition of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
the Republic of Cuba. While in some parts of the world
twenty-first birthdays are especially commemorated,
the twenty-first year of the adoption of the annual
draft resolution on the Cuban embargo should instead
give the Assembly pause for reflection. The embargo
has persisted for too long, in spite of the unambiguous
reproof of an overwhelming majority of Member States,
as demonstrated by the annual adoption of the text of
the draft resolution before us (A/67/L.2).
In view of the significant challenges that the
hemisphere of the Americas has faced, it is all the more
regrettable that this measure continues to be unilaterally
applied. The recent passage of hurricane Sandy through
the Caribbean region at the end of October, prior to
its landfall on the eastern coast of the United States,
brings clearly to the fore one of our region’s most real
and present threats. However, it has also revealed a
resilience of spirit and unity that emerges as one of our
greatest strengths. In that regard, CARICOM wishes
to express its collective regret and sadness at the loss
of life and damage wrought by this hurricane within
the countries of the Caribbean, including on the eastern
coast of Cuba and, more recently, in the United States
of America.
With the increasing frequency of natural disasters
and the persistent impact of the global economic crisis,

12-58675

A/67/PV.35

the unacceptable humanitarian cost of the embargo
is becoming even more acute. Cuba’s safety, advance
preparedness and pace of recovery are compromised by
the embargo’s many direct and indirect effects. Indeed,
it is in such times of national crisis that the fundamental
injustice of the Cuban embargo is brought into sharpest
relief. When viewed in the light of the generosity and
selfless assistance that Cuba has kindly accorded to
other States in times of need, the unilateral application
of the embargo against Cuba is seen to be especially illconceived. Such events underscore the significant need
not for intensification of punitive measures but, rather,
for greater regional and international cooperation and
solidarity.
As a bloc of States that are small in size, the
Caribbean Community attaches great value to the
strength that lies in collective capacity, will and a
firm stance on common principles that promote our
shared objectives. Those principles include adherence
to the Charter of the United Nations, multilateralism,
sovereignty and free trade. It is in that spirit that the
Caribbean Community has remained unstinting in its
solidarity with Cuba and in calling for an end to the
embargo, which runs counter to both the letter and spirit
of the Charter and serves no justifiable legal, political
or moral purpose within contemporary international
relations.
The annual report of the Secretary-General on the
embargo, contained in document A/67/118, presents
an impressive catalogue of submissions by some
145 Member States. They reveal a shared perspective
of opposition to the unilateral application of the
embargo and its many extraterritorial effects, as well
as support for respecting the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. Also striking, in that regard, are the submissions of
some 26 entities of the United Nations system, detailing
the reach of the embargo even into their manner of
conducting work in Cuba.
Despite such significant challenges, Cuba continues
to show itself to be a key regional and international
partner and actor. CARICOM member States, in keeping
with our policy of mutual respect, good-neighbourliness
and respect for the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, have a camaraderie with Cuba that
has remained cordial and resilient even through a
continually evolving hemispheric and international
geopolitical landscape. Cuba maintains Embassies in
all independent countries of the Caribbean Community

12-58675

and continues to show itself to be an integral part of the
Caribbean. In that context, CARICOM and Cuba have
developed and enjoy mutually beneficial programmes
of cooperation and trade in a number of key areas,
including physical education and sports, accounting,
the natural sciences, the humanities, the economy,
special education, health and medicine. In that regard,
CARICOM also profoundly appreciates Cuba’s proposal
for other areas of cooperation with the Community,
such as the treatment of physical disabilities, the arts,
language training, agriculture and fisheries, water and
infrastructure.
In the Caribbean alone, Cuba has built hospitals and
clinics, provided medicines and furnished doctors, nurses
and other health-care professionals — contributions
that continue to be received and remembered with
the utmost appreciation. Students from the Caribbean
Community have benefited from university educations
in Cuba free of charge, and Cuba has unselfishly
extended much generosity to the CARICOM member
State of Haiti, following the devastating earthquake
there. During the fourth CARICOM-Cuba Summit,
held in December 2011 in Port-of-Spain, the Heads of
State and Government of CARICOM issued a statement
strongly rejecting the imposition of the embargo and its
extraterritorial effects, and celebrated the outcome of
the Summit in its reinforcement of the strong fraternal
bonds between CARICOM and Cuba.
The CARICOM member States also continue to
value and enjoy long-established, warm and friendly
relations with the United States of America. It is in that
spirit that we urge its Government to heed the calls of
the international community to end the embargo. In that
regard, we also encourage engagement in a constructive
process of dialogue and normalization of relations.
We believe that would be in the interest of all parties
and would significantly contribute to greater peaceful
development and cooperation within the Americas.
At the risk of discrediting our efficacy as an
organization, we must not be content to be a mere
symbol of change. Accordingly, CARICOM delegations
fully support the draft resolution before the General
Assembly entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”, and we will
vote in favour of its adoption.
Mr. Lima (Cape Verde): Speaking on behalf of the
African Group on this perennial and critical item, allow
me to start by voicing the African Group’s support for
3

A/67/PV.35

the statements just made on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and the Caribbean Community.
Last year, the Assembly heard an overwhelming
majority make repeated calls for an end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed against
Cuba. Today, we presume, will be no exception, as
countries around the world ask for more positive action
in dealing with the decisive challenges and threats of
today. The possibility of remaining silent in the face of
this blockade of Cuba, whose people continue to suffer
its adverse consequences, has been inconceivable for
Africa and many other regions. The situation has been
characterized as a negation and flagrant violation of the
cherished universal principles of the sovereign equality
and territorial integrity of all States, big and small.
In a resolution adopted at the African Union
summit in July 2012, African leaders reiterated their
call inviting the United States of America to lift the
long-standing and unjust economic and trade embargo
imposed on the people of the Republic of Cuba.
Africa’s vote today in favour of draft resolution
A/67/L.2 will be a concrete step in advancing the
position taken by the African Union at its summit. As
Winston Churchill said,
“Criticism may not be agreeable, but it is necessary.
It fulfils the same function as pain in the human
body. It calls attention to an unhealthy state of
things.”
At this point, I would like to make reference to
the successful conclusion of the High-level Meeting
on the Rule of Law at the National and International
Levels (see A/67/PV.3), held in September. The General
Assembly’s status quo on this situation runs counter
to the letter and spirit of the Declaration of the Highlevel Meeting (resolution 67/1), highlighting, among
other things, the aspirations of all leaders to a more
equitable and just world. It is also counterproductive
for Cuba’s progress towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals, as well as an obstruction to
advancing regional integration in that region of the
western hemisphere.
We think that the path of history today is built
by and open to those who decidedly choose openness
and an outstretched-hand policy, instead of other, less
productive ways. Political will is more than ever needed
everywhere. Today, more and more leaders in the world
understand that no people in the twenty-first century
will accept to live under castigation, oppression or lack
4

of dignity. “For to be free is not merely to cast off one’s
chains but to live in a way that respects and enhances
the freedom of others”, said Nelson Mandela.
In closing, I would like to join others on behalf of
the African Group to extend our deepest condolences to
all countries affected by Hurricane Sandy for the loss of
life and property.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to address the General Assembly on behalf
of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States (CELAC) on the occasion of the presentation of
draft resolution A/67/L.2, entitled “Necessity of ending
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba”.
Since the adoption of resolution 47/19 on
24 November 1992, the General Assembly has adopted
every year a resolution emphasizing the necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba. It will be recalled that, at its sixty-sixth
session, the General Assembly adopted resolution
66/6 with the same title by an overwhelming majority
of Member States. Since 1992, 20 resolutions of the
General Assembly, the most representative organ of the
United Nations, have called for an end to the embargo
imposed against Cuba.
It is important to place on record the reasons
underlying the convictions of CELAC on this subject.
The main reason is that, in our view, the commercial,
economic and financial embargo imposed on Cuba is
contrary to the letter, spirit, principles and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. The Charter of the United Nations enshrines
rights, obligations and principles that have become
part of the legal corpus not only of international law,
but of humankind. That corpus must not be violated or
undermined by any Member State.
Member States must align their national and
international behaviour with the rights, obligations and
principles enshrined in our constituent Charter. In that
connection, CELAC reiterates the full applicability
of the Charter of the United Nations and of the
principles enshrined in it, including the principles
of the sovereign equality of States, non-intervention
and non-interference in internal affairs, freedom of
trade and navigation, and the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

12-58675

A/67/PV.35

The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed against Cuba began in 1959 and continues
to this day. We observe that the embargo has been
transformed into a strict system of unilateral measures
that has continued over time and is creating huge
injustices for the Cuban people. The embargo in
itself, as a unilateral measure, runs contrary to the
multilateralism, openness and dialogue promoted by
the Charter of the United Nations.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States reiterates its concern, expressed in resolution 66/6,
regarding the application by States Members of the
United Nations of laws and regulations, such as the socalled Helms-Burton Act, the extraterritorial effects
of which affect the sovereignty of other States, the
legitimate interests of entities or persons under their
jurisdiction, and the freedom of trade and navigation.
The unilateral measures applied under the embargo
imposed on Cuba are affecting many companies
that conduct business with Cuba in accordance with
international law, including the norms established
by the World Trade Organization. In the past year,
several restrictions and fines have been imposed
on international companies, some belonging to the
members of our Community.
We recall that at the CELAC summit held
in Caracas, Venezuela, on 3 December 2011, the
States members of our Community issued a special
communiqué on the need to put an end to the economic,
trade and financial embargo imposed by the United
States on Cuba, in which they reiterated their strongest
condemnation of the application of laws and measures
contrary to international law, such as the Helms-Burton
Act, including its extraterritorial effect, and called on
the Government of the United States to put an end to the
application of that Act.
The Community of Latin American and Caribbean
States supports the adoption of the draft resolution
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”. We emphasize the inconsistency
between the application of unilateral measures that have
no backing in international law and the letter, spirit,
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. We urge the United States of America to make
the necessary adjustments to its international behaviour
in this regard, aligning its national legislation with the
Charter of the United Nations, the resolutions of the
United Nations and the views of the countries of Latin
12-58675

America and the Caribbean and, in general, of all the
regions of the world
We recall the appeal made by our heads of State in
Caracas on 3 December 2011 to the Government of the
United States of America,
“in accordance with the successive resolutions
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly
and in response to repeated calls from the countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean, to put an end
to the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba” (A/67/118, p. 12).
CELAC appreciates the support traditionally
given to the draft resolution introduced today for the
consideration of the General Assembly, which refers
to the adverse effects inflicted on one of our member
States. We also appeal to the States members of the
General Assembly to heed the force of the arguments
and the evidence provided by the facts and oppose the
unilateral measures undermining the Charter of the
United Nations, its principles and spirit, as well as
international law and its institutions.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): I have the pleasure,
on behalf of the States members of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), to deliver the following
statement in my country’s capacity as Chair of the OIC
group.
We offer our sincerest condolences to and stand
in solidarity with the Governments and people of all
countries affected by Hurricane Sandy for the tragic
loss of life and the devastation it has caused.
We express our thanks to the Secretary-General
for his report on the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba (A/67/118). The
report once again indicates that, besides the Member
States, the United Nations system, various international
forums and non-governmental organizations have also
tirelessly and repeatedly expressed their rejection of the
unilaterally imposed sanctions on Cuba.
It is important to recall that the Assembly first
decided to include the current item as a critical item on
its agenda in 1991. The discussion continues 20 years
later, with little progress to record. We therefore wish
to address the situation with a sense of great urgency.
The activities of the OIC are guided by the principles
of international law. The OIC upholds the right of every
nation to follow its own and unique way of development
5

A/67/PV.35

and therefore condemns any form of unilateral action
that affects the sovereignty and interests of another
State and its people.
We have recently seen dramatic changes in the
Middle East and North Africa, demonstrating the
people’s struggle to steer the course of their own
development. Those have resulted in unexpected
and profound political transformations. Hence, the
application of justice cannot be confined only to the
national level. It should also extend to the international
sphere and to relationships among Member States.
The OIC does not agree with any external regulations
that infringe, impede or delay the development of any
country, including in the economic, commercial and
financial spheres. Some of the measures meant to relax
restrictions have had only limited effect, as the embargo
is still in place, thus severely impacting the overall
well-being of the Cuban people. Further, the embargo
frustrates efforts towards achieving the Millennium
Development Goals. It has impeded efforts to eradicate
poverty and violated basic human rights to food, health
and education, humanitarian assistance and overall
national progress.
The already harsh situation in the country is further
aggravated by the ever-more frequent and devastating
storms and hurricanes caused by climate change and
Cuba’s geographical susceptibility to such natural
disasters.
The OIC underlines that the imposition of arbitrary
unilateral laws contradicts the regulations and directions
of the World Trade Organization, which prohibit the
adoption of measures likely to hinder international free
trade and shipping and the widest partnership possible
between two partners.
Finally, the OIC, like the overwhelming majority
of the international community, calls for lifting the
embargo on Cuba in accordance with the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and
relevant General Assembly resolutions.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the States members
of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR). The
associated States of Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador
and Peru also join in this statement.
First, I would like to welcome the presence of
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba. MERCOSUR was founded on the

6

principles of solidarity, interdependence and goodneighbourly relations. We believe that tolerance is
the foundation that has made possible the historic
convergence on our continent of peoples from all
corners of the world. We are linked to our Latin
American neighbours by the desire to live in peace,
promote mutual understanding, defend independence
and equality among States, including sovereignty, and
to promote respect for international law.
MERCOSUR and its associated States believe
that the embargo against Cuba violates the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the norms of
international law, in particular equality among States,
non-interference in their internal affairs and the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Moreover, it contravenes the
norms of the multilateral trading system that link
members of the World Trade Organization.
The embargo violates the principles of justice and
human rights. It generates shortages and suffering
for the entire Cuban population. It limits and delays
economic and social progress, and prevents the
achievement of international development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals. We
therefore lament the fact that the unilaterally imposed
embargo against Cuba continues unchanged. We also
see an increase in restrictions on financial transactions
between Cuba and third countries that prevent greater
transparency through direct dialogue.
The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States reject, out of principle, unilateral
and extraterritorial measures. We believe that those
measures cause irreparable harm to the well-being of
peoples and obstruct regional integration processes.
We also condemn the application of unilateral, coercive
measures that contravene the principles of free trade.
In again reaffirming our unwavering support for the
draft resolution contained in document A/67/L.2,
MERCOSUR and its associated States reiterate
our commitment to multilateralism as a legitimate
instrument for settling disputes and an effective way to
promote international cooperation and understanding
among peoples.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed on Cuba is nothing but than an example of
obsolete policies that have no place in today’s world. In
adopting the draft resolution, the Assembly will prove
once again its undeniable political will to defend the
ideals of freedom, solidarity and respect for sovereignty
and international law.
12-58675

A/67/PV.35

Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the pleasure to address the General Assembly today on
behalf of the 120 Members of the United Nations that
are members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
I take this opportunity to extend a warm welcome
to Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, and to express to him and the people of
Cuba the Movement’s full support and solidarity.
I also extend our deep condolences to the
Governments and peoples of all countries affected
by Hurricane Sandy for the tragic loss of life and the
devastation it provoked.
The Non-Aligned Movement, as it has done on
many previous occasions, unequivocally rejects blatant
violations of multilateralism that run counter to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law. The Movement has also
reaffirmed its steadfast commitment to ensuring the
continued viability of all provisions of international
law that, together, form the core of our multilateral
work and inspire our collective efforts to maintain
peace and security, achieve inclusive economic growth
and sustainable development, and ensure full respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
At the sixteenth NAM Summit, held in Tehran,
Islamic Republic of Iran, from 26 to 31 August, the
Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned
Movement reiterated their call on the Government of the
United States of America to put an end to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba,
which, in addition to being unilateral and contrary to
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the principle of good-neighbourliness, is causing huge
material losses and economic damage to the people of
Cuba. They once again urged strict compliance with
resolutions 47/19, 48/16, 49/9, 50/10, 51/17, 52/10, 53/4,
54/21, 55/20, 56/9, 57/11, 58/7, 59/11, 60/12, 61/11, 62/3,
63/7, 64/6, 65/6 and 66/6. They expressed deep concern
over the widening of the extraterritorial nature of the
embargo against Cuba and rejected the reinforcement
of the measures adopted by the Government of the
United States aimed at tightening the embargo, as well
as other recent measures carried out by the Government
of the United States against the people of Cuba. They
reiterated that those measures constitute a violation
of Cuba’s sovereignty and a massive violation of the
human rights of its people.

12-58675

For the past two decades, an overwhelming number
of the States Members of the United Nations have
voted in favour of the resolution calling for the lifting
of the United States embargo against Cuba. Each year,
we have made it clear that the blockade is not only
in violation of international law, but is also counter
to the purposes and principles of the United Nations
set forth in its Charter, of which the United States of
America is itself a founding signatory. The embargo
violates Cuba’s right to do business with the rest of the
international community and, in the process, frustrates
the country’s efforts to achieve the internationally
agreed development goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals.
The embargo has had and continues to have a
high degree of adverse impact on the well-being of the
people of Cuba. The direct and indirect damage caused
by the embargo against Cuba is enormous. It affects all
crucial sectors of the economy, including those most
vital for the well-being of the Cuban people themselves,
such as public health, nutrition and agriculture, as well
as banking, trade, investment and tourism.
We salute the Cubans for what they have achieved
so far, including their significant progress in the areas of
education and health care, despite the huge difficulties
they encounter. Yet we stress once again that the
embargo imposed continues to impede socioeconomic
progress and creates unnecessary economic hardship.
It is clear that the embargo denies Cuba access to
markets, development aid from international financial
institutions and technology transfers, which are all
important for the development of the Cuban economy
and for the well-being and advancement of its people.
The United States Administration has in the past
claimed that it would reach out to the Cuban people and
engage with them. Yet those words, regrettably, have
not been translated into concrete actions. The punitive
measures imposed against the whole Cuban nation
persist, and with them the enduring suffering of its
brave people.
Moreover, the unilateral blockade has had an
extended negative effect on companies and citizens
from third countries, thereby violating their sovereign
rights. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its deep
concern at the harmful impact on other countries of
widening the extra-territorial nature of the embargo,
which we consider to be an added argument in favour of
the prompt elimination of those unfounded sanctions.

7

A/67/PV.35

We recall that last year 186 Member States voted
in favour of resolution 66/6. That number represented
a large majority of the international community
demanding an end to the five-decade-old embargo and
full adherence to the principles of mutual respect and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Cuba. The
Non-Aligned Movement believes that the continuation
of the embargo is unjustifiable and runs counter to
Cuba’s efforts to achieve sustainable development.
The Non-Aligned Movement once again urges the
United States of America to immediately and fully
comply with all General Assembly resolutions calling
for an immediate end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed against Cuba and, once
and for all, to yield to the will of the overwhelming
majority of the international community, which will
today vote in favour of the draft resolution on the
necessity of ending the embargo against Cuba, thereby
enabling the valiant people of Cuba to fully prosper and
enjoy their sovereignty, independence and right to selfdetermination.
Mr. De Alba (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (A/67/118),
which underscores yet again the widespread rejection
by the international community of the embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba, as well
as the serious economic losses suffered by the Cuban
people as a result of the blockade and its negative
effects on their quality of life and well-being.
Similarly, allow me to associate myself with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Chile on behalf of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States (CELAC), and to welcome Cuban
Minister for Foreign Affairs Parrilla to the Assembly.
The Government of Mexico comes before the
Assembly to reiterate its opposition to the economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba and
its rejection of the use of coercive actions that are
contrary to international law and thus to the Charter
of the United Nations. We are convinced that such
measures have severe humanitarian consequences, in
clear contradiction to their supposed goals. They also
represent a rejection of negotiation, diplomacy and
dialogue as the appropriate means to solve disputes
between States.
Various organs and entities of the United Nations
system, as well as the report of the Secretary-General,
documented the negative impact of the embargo and

8

other unilateral measures on Cuba’s economic and
social development. It harms sensitive sectors that have
a direct impact on the lives of the people and also has
negative repercussions on third countries.
The international community’s overwhelming call
against the embargo on Cuba is irrefutable proof that
that kind of action cannot be the outcome of unilateral
decisions nor can or should it be of an extraterritorial
nature. We must not forget that the political, economic
or military sanctions imposed on States can emanate
only from Security Council or General Assembly
decisions or recommendations.
Mexico has therefore supported all initiatives
against the blockade and related unilateral measures,
both in the General Assembly and in the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development and other forums,
among which I would highlight the Organization of
American States, the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System, the Ibero-American Summit and
CELAC. That is also why we will continue to support
Cuba’s inclusion in mechanisms for dialogue and for
global economic, trade and financial exchanges, in line
with the will and sovereign decisions of that country, in
order to promote cooperation and development.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
For Mexico, dialogue and negotiation remain the
appropriate way to settle disputes and to ensure peaceful
coexistence among States. In the case before us today,
the virtually unanimous rejection by the international
community prooves us right.
Our closeness to Cuba and the Cuban people and
our own convictions make clear to us understand the
urgent need for the blockade to end. For that reason,
Mexico will, as it has always done, vote in favour of the
draft resolution submitted for our consideration at this
meeting (A/67/L.2).
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me this opportunity to address the General
Assembly.
My delegation associates itself with the statements
made earlier in this meeting by the representatives of
Algeria on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
This is the twenty-first year in a row that we are
here to consider the draft resolution submitted by
Cuba (A/67/L.2). In all those years, the Assembly
12-58675

A/67/PV.35

has emphatically rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with an extraterritorial impact and all other
forms of coercive economic measures that hurt the
progress and prosperity of the world over.
While doing so, the Assembly has also called upon
all States to respect their obligations under the United
Nations Charter and international law and to repeal and
invalidate laws and measures that have extraterritorial
effects on other States. In spite of its rejection by the
Assembly year after year, the United States embargo on
Cuba remains in full force. We see that as a violation
of world opinion and as an act that severely undermines
multilateralism and the credibility of the United Nations
itself.
The half-century-old United States embargo on
Cuba has brought immense suffering to its people.
The embargo, which perhaps has no parallel in history,
is a transgression of the right of a sovereign State to
develop and to enjoy freedom of trade, economy and
navigation. The embargo has denied a life of respect
and basic living standards to the people of Cuba and has
severely undermined the country’s progress, including
sustaining the Millennium Development Goals, which
it achieved long before their adoption.
The impact of the embargo during the present
global economic slowdown has been particularly
severe on the Cuban economy. Spiralling food and
energy prices have made matters worse. The embargo
has denied Cuba access to United States markets,
investment, technology, financial services and
scientific, educational, cultural and sports institutions.
Cuba has had to pay enormous extra costs for sourcing
products, technology and services from third countries
located thousands of kilometres away.
The extraterritorial application of the United States
embargo has discouraged investment, technology
transfer and commercial and other forms of business
collaboration between Cuba and third countries. The
denial of technology and related scientific support,
particularly due to the extraterritorial application of
the embargo, has severely impacted health care, which
is a commitment under the Millennium Development
Goals, in the country. It has also undermined Cuba’s
ability to provide health assistance to developing
countries as part of South-South cooperation.
The report of the Secretary-General on the agenda
item under consideration (A/67/118) illustrates the
detrimental impact that the embargo has had on

12-58675

international efforts to undertake socioeconomic
progress in Cuba. The United Nations Resident
Coordinator in Havana has noted the high cost and
negative impact of the embargo on the development and
humanitarian cooperation implemented by the United
Nations system.
There is a huge potential for strengthening
economic and commercial ties between Cuba and the
United States, especially in the tourism sector. Taking
advantage of limited openings under the United States
Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement
Act of 2000, the United States has become the largest
exporter of agricultural products to Cuba. Congressional
efforts in the United States to relax or lift the embargo
lend further credence to the annual United Nations
resolution calling for its lifting.
People-to-people contacts between the United
States and Cuba hold immense possibilities for
fostering a better understanding. The steps taken by the
United States Administration in January 2011 to reduce
restrictions on travel and remittances to Cuba are
positive developments. However, it is far from making a
fundamental change in the complex framework of laws
and regulations that are part of the embargo against
Cuba. Much more needs to be done.
India joins other nations in calling for an immediate
end to the United States embargo. India supports the
draft resolution to be introduced by the representative
of Cuba.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our full support for
the statements delivered earlier in this meeting by the
representatives of Algeria on behalf of the Group of
77 and China; of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement; of Cape Verde on behalf of the African
States; and of Kazakhstan on behalf of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, under agenda item 41, on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
full solidarity with the people of Cuba and all those
who have suffered the negative effects of Hurricane
Sandy. We offer our warm condolences to the families
of the victims of that hurricane.
The Sudan condemns and rejects the unilateral
and coercive embargo imposed against Cuba by the
United States, in flagrant violation of the Charter of
9

A/67/PV.35

the United Nations, the principles of human rights,
and the right of peoples to choose their own political
systems. My country has also been subjected to such
an heinous crime. It requires us all to work hard and
to exert pressure on the United States Administration,
which threatens the dignity and economic development
of a United Nations Member State.
The Sudan categorically rejects the package of
resolutions and legislation adopted by the United
States, including the Trading with the Enemy Act and
its repercussions. We also reject the embargo that has
been in place since 1959 and taken a severe toll on the
economy, development and social and psychological
well-being of the Cuban people, to which a price
cannot be affixed. It has also hindered their political,
diplomatic, bilateral and multilateral relations with
other peoples and countries.
The Sudan has lost precious economic and social
resources as a result of such policies. We therefore call
upon Member States to take fair and equitable actions
and measures and to accelerate the reform of the United
Nations system, including the Security Council, because
it should not be possible for one country to enjoy the
right of veto and thereby violate the sovereignty of
another country and the Charter of the United Nations
and threaten international peace and security.
In conclusion, we call upon the international
community to put an end to the commercial, financial
and economic embargo imposed on Cuba, the Sudan
and other countries, as well as to the use of unilateral
coercive measures. That will guarantee a world in
which peace and justice can prevail. The aggressive
actions of the United States is a crime that must be
halted, as it alienates developing countries and hinders
their achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals and sustainable development.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the participation in today’s
debate of Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(A/67/118) presenting the views of Member States that
disagree with and reject the unilateral, extraterritorial,
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba.
The basic position of the Russian Federation is
well known and unchanging. Our country, alongside
the overwhelming majority of the members of the

10

international community, strongly condemns the
economic, commercial and financial blockade by the
United States of America against Cuba. We believe that
the perpetuation of the embargo represents an outdated
relic of the Cold War that has no place among current
realities.
The sanctions that have been in effect for a half
century have clearly demonstrated their inability to
influence the Cuban people in their sovereign choice
of a development model. Their sole consequence has
been the worsening living conditions of the Cuban
people, the creation of artificial barriers to growth of
the country’s economy, and encroachment upon the
interests of third countries.
We expect that the decisions of the United States
Government to relax some aspects of the blockade, in
particular some of the restrictions on visits by United
States citizens to relatives in Cuba, and on sending
monetary and postal transfers will be followed by other
actions aimed at lifting the blockade once and for all.
We are convinced that the lifting of sanctions and the
subsequent normalization of relations between Cuba
and the United States will contribute to improving
the situation of the Republic of Cuba, facilitate the
implementation of the ambitious socioeconomic reform
programme that began on the island in 2011, aimed
at modernizing the national economy and raising the
standard of living of the population.
Guided by the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations concerning the inadmissibility
of any discriminatory measure or interference in the
internal affairs of States, Russia has consistently called
for the prompt repeal of the embargo and, in general,
for a reduction of political pressure and coercion, which
exacerbate the confrontational tendency in international
relations.
In that context, the Russian Federation will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/67/L.2 before us.
Ms. Hafid (Indonesia): In contributing to the
debate on agenda item 41 concerning the embargo
imposed against Cuba since 1961, the delegation of
Indonesia associates itself with the statement made by
the representative of Algeria on behalf of the Group of
77 and China.
The General Assembly has once again convened
to consider the 51-year-old unilateral policy banning
economic, commercial and financial activity with
Cuba. The embargo imposed during the Cold War of the
12-58675

A/67/PV.35

twentieth century has been detrimental to Cuba. While
the people of Cuba have endured the embargo valiantly,
it has imposed a forbidding cost on them. Furthermore,
it has impacted the economic and commercial relations
of third countries. The sanctions exceed the jurisdiction
of national legislation and encroach on the sovereignty
of other States that deal with Cuba.
In the context of the twenty-first century, there
are numerous reasons to question the validity of the
embargo. Much has changed since it was initially
imposed. The world of 2012 is very different from
that of 1961. Despite the impact of recent crises on the
global economy, nations have opted to work together
to overcome the difficulties created by the crises. That
testifies to the fact that globalization has created the
conditions for true global solidarity and partnership
among the community of nations.
The continued imposition of an economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba
violates the principles of the sovereign equality of
States, non-intervention and non-interference in each
other’s domestic affairs, international humanitarian
law, the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
and principles governing peaceful relations among
States. The Charter is clear on the need for nations
to develop friendly relations among themselves. It is
equally emphatic about the need for nations to refrain
from action that will threaten the political independence
of others or lead to intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State.
The embargo undermines relations between the
main parties. Instead of dialogue to resolve differences,
what we have is an undesirable standoff that does
not allow for an exchange of views to normalize
relations. Not only do political complications result
from the embargo, but the economic, commercial
and financial hardship it has caused can hardly be
justified on humanitarian grounds. It is a great burden
on a poor developing country whose people would
benefit tremendously from cooperation rather than
confrontation.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
has caused hardship for the people of Cuba. Therefore,
Indonesia remains steadfast in its opposition to the
embargo. While it is true that some small, meaningful
changes — such as the easing of travel restrictions
to Cuba and the removal of obstacles to transfer of
remittances — have occurred in recent times, the
12-58675

preferred outcome is for the embargo to be lifted
completely.
The lifting of the embargo would be in
keeping with the spirit of the times. It would also
demonstrate unambiguous respect for the principles
of non-intervention embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations and international law. Cuba will also
be able to exercise its right to develop, unhindered by
restrictions on its trade and other business activities.
The tensions that now exist between the two nations
will also dissolve.
Indonesia therefore urges renunciation of the
application of extraterritorial laws and measures
that affect the sovereignty of other States, the lawful
interests of their subjects or other persons under their
jurisdiction and freedom of trade and navigation.
Indonesia calls for the immediate cessation of the
embargo. It is Indonesia’s hope that the near future will
see a thawing of the frosty relations that now keep those
two important neighbouring States apart. We believe
that it is time for peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Escalona Ojeda (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We express our
deepest solidarity with the statements made by the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and by the representative of Iran on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. We also offer our fraternal
greetings to and solidarity with Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the brotherly
Republic of Cuba.
On 25 October 2011, the General Assembly adopted
for the twentieth time a resolution against the embargo
imposed by the Government of the United States of
America against Cuba (resolution 66/6). It was a historic
vote whereby 186 countries expressed their support to
that heroic people. Only two countries opposed that
resounding global expression of feeling. Venezuela
has firmly supported the 20 resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly by an overwhelming majority,
and denounced the brutal, illegal embargo against the
people of Cuba.
The Government of Venezuela reiterates its
strongest rejection of the implementation of unilateral
measures with extraterritorial effect. Such actions
contravene the norms and principles of international
law, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and other international legal instruments. They violate
unhindered navigation and the norms of the international

11

A/67/PV.35

trade system, inter alia. The implementation of the
extraterritorial provisions of the Torricelli and HelmsBurton Acts severely harms the Cuban economy and
affects third countries. They are an affront to the
dignity of the world’s peoples, who rebel against such
outrages.
The embargo that has been inhumanly imposed
for over 50 years undermines the human rights of the
Cuban people. It is a despicable practice that Venezuela
strongly rejects. It punishes civilians while seeking to
produce a change of Government in socialist Cuba. It
has not achieved that goal and never will. The embargo
has set back international relations to an era when the
law of the jungle prevailed and power was based on
lawless violence. It is an expression of a barbaric policy
at the heart of the twenty-first century. Nevertheless,
the Cuban people stoically and heroically overcome
that unjust practice. Despite the calamitous effects,
that brotherly nation continues to move forward with a
policy of solidarity, even beyond its own borders.
There is no bilateral embargo against Cuba, as the
Government of the United States claims. What exists is
an extraterritorial embargo that affects third countries.
The Government of the United States impedes
economic relations between Cuba and other countries,
in blatant violation of State sovereignty and the right to
free trade. It flouts international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.
The advocates of imperialism claim that Cuba
represents a threat to the region. That is a terrible
lie. For Venezuela, the people of Latin America, the
Caribbean and the entire world, Cuba has, on the
contrary, represented an element of hope and support
based on its solidarity activities in health, medicine,
education and sport, inter alia, that contribute to social
well-being. Cuba has contributed generously and
practically to eliminating the material, cultural and
spiritual poverty of peoples.
While President Barack Obama has managed
to connect with the majority sentiment of the Latin
American population living in the United States,
he should also echo the strongly held feeling of the
people of the continent in order to finally end the
inhuman embargo against the Cuban people. If the new
Government of President Obama moves forward in that
direction — and there is no doubt that he possesses the
foreign policy capacity to do so — he will be acting on
the right side of history.

12

There have been repeated international demands
against the embargo against the Cuban people. On
20 October 2011, the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System, meeting at the ministerial level
in Caracas, Venezuela, adopted a declaration entitled
“Ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States against
Cuba”. On 3 December 2011, the Heads of State and
Government of Latin America and the Caribbean,
meeting in Caracas, Venezuela, at the summit of the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States,
issued a special communiqué on the need to end the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba. On the occasion of
the sixth Summit of the Americas, which took place
in Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, on 14 and 15 April,
all of the States of Latin America and the Caribbean
rejected the embargo and expressed their support for the
Cuban people. It is also important to remember that the
Heads of State and Government of the States members
of the Non-Aligned Movement, meeting in Tehran on
30 and 31 August, once again repeated their appeal
to the Government of the United States of America to
put an end to the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against Cuba.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reiterates its
call on the Government of the United States of America
to comply with the provisions of the 20 resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly and put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba. Venezuela will vote wholeheartedly in
favour of draft resolution A/67/L.2 on the necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin by welcoming the report submitted by the
Secretary-General under agenda item 41 (A/67/118).
The Chinese delegation associates itself with the
statement made by the representative of Algeria on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
For 20 consecutive years, the General Assembly
has adopted by overwhelming majority resolutions
on the necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba, urging all countries to abide
by the Charter of the United Nations and international
law and to repeal or invalidate any laws and measures

12-58675

A/67/PV.35

with extraterritorial effect that affect the sovereignty
of other States, the legitimate interests of entities or
persons under their jurisdiction, and the freedom of
trade and navigation.
Regrettably, however, those resolutions have not
been effectively implemented over the years, and the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States against Cuba is yet to be lifted.
This practice has inflicted enormous economic and
financial losses on Cuba. It is estimated that Cuba’s
economic losses directly resulting from the embargo
had exceeded $108 billion by December 2011. If the
depreciation of the United States dollar against the price
of gold in international markets is taken into account,
the figure would rise to $1.066 trillion.
The embargo has caused a shortage of supplies and
commodities and dealt a heavy blow to Cuba’s economy.
It stands as the major stumbling block to Cuba’s
economic development and social progress. Moreover,
the embargo has brought huge suffering to the Cuban
people and violated their fundamental human rights,
including their rights to food, health and education as
well as their rights to survival and development.
We note that one of the most prominent features
of the embargo in the past year has been interference
with Cuba’s international financial transactions.
This has not only hit Cuba’s economy hard, but also
affected normal economic, commercial and financial
interactions between other countries and Cuba, and
thereby impaired the interests and sovereignty of third
countries.
The embargo against Cuba constitutes a serious
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, and has
been firmly rejected by the vast majority of Member
States. The call of the international community on the
United States Government to change its policy towards
Cuba, lift the embargo and normalize its relations with
Cuba, as reflected in this year’s report of the SecretaryGeneral, is growing ever stronger.
The Chinese Government has always believed that
inter-State relations should be developed on the basis
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and respect for the rights of other countries
to independently choose their own social system and
development path. China is opposed to any unilateral
sanctions against other countries by military, political,
economic or other means.

12-58675

Meanwhile, China has strictly followed and
implemented the relevant General Assembly
resolutions. China and Cuba have maintained normal
economic, trade and personnel exchanges. The friendly
and mutually beneficial cooperation in various fields
between our two countries is on the rise. This is not
only in line with the desires of the two peoples, but also
conducive to the economic and social development of
Cuba.
In today’s world, dialogue, exchanges and
harmonious coexistence represent the mainstream of
international relations. Exchanges and cooperation
on an equal footing among countries have become
the prevailing trend. Dialogue on an equal footing
and friendly consultation are the best means to settle
disputes. China hopes that the United States will follow
the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and the relevant General Assembly resolutions
and end its embargo against Cuba as soon as possible.
China also hopes that the relationship between the
United States and Cuba will gradually improve.
China will again vote in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Cuba under this agenda item
(A/67/L.2).
Mr. Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil (Egypt): Allow
me first to welcome Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and to assure him
of Egypt’s full support.
I would also like to align myself with the statements
made by the representatives of Algeria on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China, Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, Cape Verde on behalf of the
Group of African States, and Kazakhstan on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
A little over 50 years ago, an unjust and unjustifiable
unilateral embargo was imposed by the United States
of America against Cuba. The world has profoundly
changed since then. Nevertheless, the embargo
persists, in total violation of multilateralism, the norms
of international law, and the principles of the United
Nations Charter. The embargo is an anachronism from
a bygone era.
The embargo against Cuba is the longest and
toughest system of sanctions ever applied against any
country in modern history. Its extraterritorial effects
violate the sovereignty of many Member States. It
must be lifted. One hundred and eighty-six countries
voted last year in favour of resolution 66/6 on this
13

A/67/PV.35

matter — the twentieth resolution adopted on this issue.
This is not only the plea of the Cuban people and their
leaders; it is the request of the overwhelming majority
of Member States.
Despite the undue economic and social hardships
caused by the embargo on the Cuban people, they have
made significant progress in many areas, including
education, health care and gender equality. We
praise them for these achievements under difficult
circumstances. At a time when peoples in our region
are bravely fighting for freedom and justice and some
of them, as in my own country, Egypt, are establishing
the foundations of a genuine democracy of their own,
it is troubling that the United States continues to adopt
coercive measures to prevent a neighbouring nation
from freely deciding its own political and economic
system.
History has shown that cooperation and engagement
are more effective than isolation and estrangement.
It is high time for the embargo to end. It has lasted
unwarranted for over half a century. Fifty years late is
better than never. The re-election of President Obama
last week proves that the American people strongly
support multilateralism and the values of the United
Nations. It offers the American Administration a fresh
opportunity to rectify this historic injustice inflicted on
Cuba. We hope that this opportunity will not be missed.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Let me
first welcome the presence in this Hall of Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
and convey through him our sincere congratulations to
the Cuban people on the overwhelming majority that
will most certainly adopt draft resolution A/67/L.2,
entitled “Necessity of ending the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba”, later today.
I would also like to re-emphasize the solidarity
of the people and Government of Ecuador with the
victims of the devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy
and the subsequent floods that killed scores of Cubans
and did great damage to their brotherly country. On
5 November, the Ecuadorian Government sent nine
tons of humanitarian aid, including a water-purification
plant, as part of our policy of solidarity and support for
risk management and rehabilitation.
Ecuador hopes that this unequivocal message
sent by the most representative and legitimate organ
of the United Nations, together with the preceding

14

20 resolutions on the matter, will be implemented
in its entirety and put an end to the enactment and
enforcement of laws and provisions, such as the
so-called Helms-Burton Act of the United States of
America, whose extraterritorial effect undermines the
sovereignty other States and constitutes an economic,
financial and commercial blockade against Cuba and
its people.
The delegation of Ecuador will of course vote in
favour of the draft resolution because our Constitution
condemns any form of interference in the internal
affairs of other States, whether through armed
incursion, acts of aggression, occupation or economic
or military blockade. Similarly, Ecuador believes that
the failure to adopt specific measures to abolish the
provisions and measures that constitute the embargo
against Cuba, as noted in the draft resolution, is a clear
violation of the principles of sovereign equality among
States, non-interference in the internal affairs of other
countries, the freedom of trade and navigation enshrined
in the Charter, and numerous other international legal
instruments.
Ecuador has maintained a consistent and coherent
position on this matter, to the extent that we did not
accept an invitation to the most recent Summit of the
Americas, where an attempt was made to veto Cuba’s
participation, although ultimately it was agreed that
the Cuba embargo should be discussed. My country
also considers it unacceptable that, as we discuss the
post-2015 development agenda and the integration of
the pillars of sustainable development, among other
positive aspects of the United Nations agenda, we
continue to see economic statistics reflecting the
damage inflicted on Cuba’s trade and external affairs,
which seriously harms Cuba’s people and hinders its
efforts to fulfil its internationally agreed development
objectives, including the Millennium Development
Goals. In that context, Ecuador encourages beneficial
and complementary commercial exchanges with Cuba,
such as the recent round of negotiations held in Havana
with a view to increasing bilateral trade in goods and
services in the textile, fisheries, construction, food
processing, tourism and pharmaceutical sectors, among
others.
For those reasons, Ecuador associates itself with
the views expressed by the representatives who spoke
earlier on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States, and the Southern

12-58675

A/67/PV.35

Common Market and associated States, and calls once
again for full implementation of today’s draft resolution
and for an end to this infamous blockade, which the
entire international community considers shameful.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my delegation,
I would first like to welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
report (A/67/118) on the agenda item that is the subject
of today’s meeting, highlighting the general and global
rejection of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed arbitrarily and unilaterally by the
United States of America on the Cuban people.
We take this opportunity to endorse the statements
made earlier today on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States, and the Southern
Common Market.
At the outset, we would like to make it clear that the
Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia firmly
rejects and repudiates the use of unilateral measures by
any State seeking to impose an economic, commercial
or financial embargo with detrimental humanitarian
results and in flagrant contravention of the principles and
standards of international law. This blockade is unjust,
illegitimate, illegal, extraterritorial and opposed to the
goals, purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, and thus to the foundations of international
law: respect for State sovereignty, non-interference in
the affairs of other States, and freedom of navigation
and trade. In this specific case, it violates the Cuban
people’s right to exercise their sovereignty, to free selfdetermination and to development, and it undermines
the Cuban Government’s efforts to eradicate poverty
and inequality.
We recall that this is the twenty-first time that such
a draft resolution has been submitted to the Assembly,
and the twenty-first consecutive time that we will reject
the unilateral embargo. The United States is flouting
the global call for an end to an injustice that harms the
people not only of Cuba but of the entire world. This
unilateral and noxious position and attitude of the
United States have been characterized by President Evo
Morales from this rostrum as genocidal, immoral and
in violation of the human rights of an entire people. We
therefore reject the economic and financial embargo
on Cuba. Bolivia condemns the coercive nature of this

12-58675

measure, affecting as it does not only Cuba but every
other country around the world, to the extent that it
imposes limits on their sovereignty.
We fully endorse and support Cuba’s international
efforts to fight the embargo, which hinders the
development and well-being of its people. We commend
the struggle and valour of the revolutionary people of
Cuba, which, despite the difficulties entailed by the
embargo, continues to move forward in dignity. It has
demonstrated its solidarity with countries around the
world through its cooperation and economic assistance.
We recognize Cuba’s efforts to collaborate with the
people of Bolivia and other countries, despite the
damage inflicted by the United States on its economy,
and guided by the wise words of former President
Fidel Castro, to the effect that solidarity does not mean
giving a great deal but sharing what one has, even if it
is not much.
While some countries — in this case, the country
imposing the blockade — send armies with soldiers
with huge arsenals, Cuba has armies of doctors and
teachers who enthusiastically cure and teach people
in the neediest areas of Latin America. While those
who impose the embargo also impose war and death,
Cuba stands for solidarity, life, dignity and human
value. The actions carried out voluntarily by the Cuban
Government with respect to the Bolivian people are
invaluable, and we are profoundly grateful for them.
If, as the President of the United States stated in this
very Hall, democracy truly exists; if the resolutions of
the General Assembly truly matter; if the international
rule of law is truly respected; and if it is true that the
Government of the United States upholds equality and
freedom, then its President must immediately lift the
inhumane embargo against the people of Cuba. The
victory of the Cuban people will be the victory of
solidarity over arrogance, of justice over coercion, and
of the principles of the United Nations over attempted
imperial punishment.
In conclusion, I wish to recall Ché Guevara, who
almost five decades ago in this Hall echoed the wise
words of José Martí: “Every genuine human being
should feel on his own cheek the blow struck on the
cheek of any other human being” (A/PV.1300, para. 57).
Mr. Pham Vinh Quang (Viet Nam): The Vietnamese
delegation would like to align itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM)

15

A/67/PV.35

and the statement made by the representative of Algeria
on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China.
Viet Nam’s delegation once again welcomes the
theme of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session, “Bringing about adjustment or settlement of
international disputes or situations by peaceful means”,
as well as the President’s other high priorities, including
the rule of law and advancing the revitalization of
the General Assembly aimed at enhancing the role,
authority, effectiveness and efficiency of this body,
with a particular focus on implementing the resolutions
adopted by the Assembly.
Over the past 20 years, the General Assembly has
almost unanimously adopted 20 consecutive resolutions
calling for an end to the economic, commercial and
financial blockade imposed by the United States against
Cuba. Yet the blockade and the sanctions remain and
continue to impose severe economic and financial
restrictions on Cuba. This issue therefore merits
additional attention under the theme of this session of
the General Assembly.
The blockade has had a tremendous impact on the
lives of the Cuban people and the development of their
country. According to the report submitted by Cuba to
the Secretary-General, the loss and damage caused by
the embargo to the Cuban economy exceed $1 trillion
(see A/67/118). Cuba has made significant progress in
development. We admire the resilience of the Cuban
people, but the embargo plus the deepening impact
of the global economic and financial crisis continue
to impede the socioeconomic advances and efforts
of Cuba towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Most of the international community, including
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77
and China, on many occasions has clearly stated that
the embargo contravenes the fundamental norms of
international law, international humanitarian law, and
the fundamental principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations, especially the principles of
sovereign equality, non-interference in internal affairs
and the self-determination of States. Viet Nam shares
the views expressed by the international community in
its continued opposition to the embargo.
In this context, Viet Nam goes along with the
call contained in the outcome document of the
sixteenth NAM Summit, in which the Heads of State
and Government of NAM reiterated their call on the

16

Government of the United States to put an end to the
embargo because of it is unilateral nature, contrary to
the Charter of the United Nations, international law and
the principle of good-neighbourliness. In the same vein,
Viet Nam supports the statement of the G-77 and China
on this matter.
For all the reasons I have mentioned, Viet Nam will
join the large majority of Member States in voting in
favour of the draft resolution (A/67/L.2) to be introduced
by the Cuban Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bruno
Rodríguez Parrilla. On this occasion, Viet Nam
wishes to reiterate its support for and solidarity with
Cuba. Viet Nam once again urges the United States, in
conformity with its obligations under the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, to fully comply
with relevant General Assembly resolutions calling for
an immediate end to the economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Bruno Eduardo Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.2.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to reiterate the most heartfelt condolences
of the people and the Government of Cuba to the people
of the United States, the city of New York, the people
who have been directly affected and particularly the
relatives of the victims, for the loss of human lives and
the great material damage caused by Hurricane Sandy.
We likewise offer our condolences to the peoples and
the Governments of the Bahamas, Haiti, Jamaica, the
Dominican Republic and Canada in connection with
the same events, as well as to Guatemala and Mexico
for the recent earthquake that affected those countries.
On 6 April 6 1960, Under-Secretary of State Lester
D. Mallory wrote the most concise, accurate and
enduring definition of the objectives of the blockade
against Cuba. They were, he wrote,
“to cause disenchantment and disaffection based on
economic dissatisfaction and hardship... to weaken
the economic life of Cuba ... denying money and
supplies... to decrease monetary and real wages, to
bring about hunger, desperation and overthrow of
Government”.
To date, this vision has embodied the inhumane,
failed and anachronistic policy of 11 successive United
States Governments under which 76 per cent of Cubans
have been born. Our country has never been at war
12-58675

A/67/PV.35

with or carried out any hostile action against the United
States. It has never consented to the perpetration of
terrorist actions against the American people.

has been an insurmountable obstacle in the country’s
increasingly uncomfortable relations with Latin
America and the Caribbean.

In 2008, presidential candidate Obama electrified
Americans with his energy, his origins and his words
“Yes we can”. Three months later, having been elected
President, he announced “a new beginning with Cuba”
and said:

Should the blockade come to an end, the United
States Government would avoid any further discrediting
of its humanitarian policies and would cease to be a
consistent violator of the human rights of Cubans. The
United States could refrain from including our country
on spurious lists, such as that which classifies it as a
sponsor of terrorism, with the sole purpose of justifying
the implementation of additional measures against
financial transactions, thereby doing great damage to
the effectiveness and credibility of the international
struggle against that terrible scourge.

“We can move United States-Cuba relations in
a new direction ... [and] launch a new chapter of
engagement that will be sustained throughout my
administration.”
However, the reality of the past four years has
been characterized by a persistent tightening of
the economic, commercial and financial blockade,
particularly in its extraterritorial dimension, despite
the fact that the Assembly has approved, by a consistent
and overwhelming majority, 20 consecutive resolutions
calling for an end to this policy.
Keeping this policy in force is not in the national
interest of the United States. On the contrary, it harms
the interests of its citizens and companies, especially
in times of economic crisis and high unemployment.
Those citizens and companies are, according to polls,
demanding a change of policy.
What is the point of encroaching on Americans’
constitutional and civil rights and freedom of travel
by preventing them from visiting the island when they
can visit any other place on the planet, including places
where their country is waging wars? What is the point
of giving up on a new market of 11 million people? What
is the point of continuing to waste hundreds of millions
of dollars of taxes paid by American citizens on the
useless and illegal subversion of Cuba? What is the
point of damaging Cuba’s relations with other States,
including its allies, with extraterritorial measures that
violate international law? What is the point of adopting
an approach that is diametrically opposed to one that
encourages enhanced economic relations with States
with a different political system?
The blockade also harms the legitimate interests of
and discriminates against the Cuban emigres who have
settled here in this country, and who overwhelmingly
favour the normalization of relations with their home
country. It harms the credibility of the foreign policy
of the United States and isolates it. It makes the United
States adopt costly double standards. For 50 years, it
has proved to be ineffective in achieving its goals and
12-58675

There is no legitimate or moral reason to maintain
the blockade, which is rooted in the Cold War. It is just
a weapon in the hands of an increasingly exiguous,
isolated, violent and arrogant minority that exploit it
for electoral gain. They show contempt for the voice of
the majority and cannot resign themselves to the fact
that the Cubans are firmly resolved to decide their own
destiny.
The use of less strident and threatening rhetoric
and the adoption of certain partial measures relaxing
the travel restrictions on United States residents of
Cuban origin and others for academic, scientific or
cultural purposes have failed to conceal the tightening
of the blockade over the past four years. The report
of the Secretary-General (A/67/118), to which a
significant number of delegations and agencies present
here contributed, broadly documents the multiple and
diverse impacts not only on my country but also on
many of the Governments represented here.
In November 2011, the Treasury Department
hit the New York branch office of the German bank
Commerzbank with a fine of $175,500 for serving
as consultant to and guarantor of a Cuban national
for a payment to be made to a Canadian company. In
June 2012, the Department of Justice announced the
imposition of a $619 million fine on the Dutch bank
ING for alleged violations of the regime of sanctions
against Cuba and other countries. This was the largest
fine ever imposed on a foreign bank. In referring to
this unprecedented event, Mr. Adam Szubin, Director
of the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) of the
Treasury Department, stated menacingly:
“Our sanctions laws reflect core United States
national security and foreign policy interests and

17

A/67/PV.35

OFAC polices them aggressively. Today’s historic
settlement should serve as a clear warning to
anyone who would consider profiting by evading
United States sanctions.”
During President Obama’s Administration, the fi nes
imposed have amounted to $2,000,259,732 — twice
as much as under both terms of the George W. Bush
Administration. The enforcement of the blockade has
exceeded all conceivable limits. In December 2011,
the Hilton Hotel of Trinidad and Tobago, which is
the property of that country and operates under a
management contract with the Hilton hotel network,
received categorical orders from OFAC to prevent the
celebration of the fourth Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the Caribbean Community countries
and Cuba on its premises. This was a scandalous act of
disrespect to all Caribbean nations and the international
community.
In July, two executives from the French branch
office of the travel agency Carlson Wagonlit Travel
were fi red for selling tourist packages to the island. The
company runs the risk of being fined $38,000 dollars
for each trip sold. On 10 May, less than a year after the
first and very limited licences were granted to allow
United States citizens to travel to Cuba for educational
purposes and for people-to-people exchanges, the
Treasury Department prohibited trips to recreational
sites and financial transactions involving tourism
activities and established new and stricter measures
to ensure that all itineraries and programmes were in
line with the policy against Cuba. At the same time, it
was announced that any violation of these restrictions
would be subject to a $65,000 fine and the suspension
of licenses.
The human impact of the blockade is massive
and impossible to calculate. The blockade has led to
hardship, shortages and difficulties that affect every
family, every girl and boy, every woman and man, the
handicapped, every senior citizen and the ill.
The William Soler Pediatric Cardiology Centre
has no access to Levosimendan, a medication that is
used to treat heart problems associated with cardiac
capacity in small children. The hospital is unable to
use this medicine because its supply has been denied,
as it is manufactured by Abbott Laboratories. The
cardiovascular surgery service of that same hospital
treats between 100 and 110 children younger than
1 year of age every year. More than 90 per cent of

18

those children require nutritional supplements before
undergoing surgery for a better prognosis. Our
country does not have access to parenteral nutritional
supplements — that is, supplements administered
intravenously — produced in the United States, which
are recognized to be among the most effective and of
highest quality.
The impossibility of acquiring tissue laminates for
skin expansion used in preparing skin transplants and
the need to purchase them in distant markets at a higher
price complicate and prolong the treatment of boys and
girls suffering from severe burns by increasing their
time spent in surgery and at the hospital.
The pacemaker and electrophysiology service
of the Institute of Cardiology and Cardiovascular
Surgery does not have a non-fluoroscopic anatomical
three-dimensional mapping system, which is used to
analyse the points of arrhythmia in the human heart, as
a result of the withdrawal of the United States company
St. Jude. That prevents treatments and catheterizations
to cure complex arrhythmias from being carried out.
Consequently, we are forced to send those patients to
third countries to receive treatment.
On the evening of 6 November, President Obama
referred to the cure of the eight-year-old girl Erin
Catherine Potter, who suffers from leukaemia and lives
in Mentor, Ohio. On 28 October 2009, we explained in
this Hall that the Cuban children who also suffer from
lymphoblastic leukaemia and reject the usual medicines
cannot be treated with the drug Elspar, created to treat
patients with such intolerance, because its sale to Cuba
by the firm Merck and Co. is prohibited. Those children
also deserve compassion and relief.
On 26 October 2010 (see A/65/PV.36), in this Hall
we denounced the fact that our ophthalmologic services
could not use transpupillary thermotherapy to cure
retina cancer, or retinoblastoma, which makes it possible
for children to preserve their affected eye. Since that
date, 15 children — including Lianna Aguilera Feria, 1
year old; Maria Sánchez Rosales and Rochely Mendoza
Rabelo, 2 years old; and Erika Rodriguez Villavicencio,
Fidel Valdés Márquez, Giovanna Alvarez Torrens and
Magdiel Leyva Suárez, 3 years old — have suffered that
loss because the United States Government prevents
the purchase of the necessary medical equipment from
the company Iris Medical Instruments.
Given its express purpose and direct effects, the
blockade against Cuba qualifies as an act of genocide

12-58675

A/67/PV.35

according to subparagraphs (b) and (c) of article II of
the 1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment
of the Crime of Genocide. It is a mass, flagrant and
systematic violation of the human rights of an entire
people.
We strongly oppose the unilateral coercive measures
and the economic sanctions that only cause harm to
human beings. As was expressed at this rostrum by the
historic leader of the revolution, Fidel Castro Ruz,
“we want a world free from hegemonies, nuclear
weapons, interventions, racism, national or
religious hatred, where there is no outrage upon the
sovereignty of any country, where there is respect
for the independence and free determination of
peoples, a world free from universal models that
fully disregard the traditions and culture of all
the components of humankind; free from cruel
blockades that kill men, women, children, youths
and senior citizens like silent atom bombs.”
As stated in the Secretary-General’s report,
the economic damage accumulated over more than
50 years until 2011 amounted to $1,066 billion, more
than a trillion dollars, according to a rigorous and
conservative calculation based on the devaluation of
the dollar against the price of gold. Any sensible person
can imagine the living standards and development
levels that we could have achieved if we had had those
resources.
The blockade is one of the main causes of the
economic problems of our country and the major
obstacle to its economic and social development. It
violates international law. It is contrary to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and a violation of the right to peace, development and
security of a sovereign State. It is an act of aggression
and a permanent threat against the stability of a country.
It is also a gross violation of the norms of international
trade, freedom of navigation and the sovereign rights
of States because of its extraterritorial character. Since
the blockade is a unilateral policy, it should cease
unilaterally.
The United States people, towards which Cuba
has feelings of friendship and respect, have just
re-elected President Barack Obama. During the
electoral campaign, he repeated dozens of times that he
continues to be the President of change and that he will
move forward. President Obama has the opportunity
to launch a new policy towards Cuba, different from

12-58675

that implemented by his 10 predecessors for more than
half a century. It will surely be difficult and he will
face serious obstacles, but the President of the United
States still has the constitutional powers to pay heed to
public opinion and generate the necessary momentum
by means of executive decisions, even without the
approval of the Congress. There is no doubt that this
would be a historic legacy.
He would make a serious miscalculation and would
make things all the more difficult in the future if he
decided to wait for a new generation of Cuban leaders
or for the impossible collapse of our economy. That
option would ensure that he will go down in history as
the eleventh president to make the same mistake.
I reiterate, on behalf of President Raúl Castro
Ruz, the firm willingness of the Cuban Government
to move towards the normalization of relations with
the United States through a respectful dialogue,
without preconditions, on the basis of reciprocity and
sovereign equality, without in any way undermining
our independence and sovereignty.
Today, now, I again submit to the United States
Government the proposal of an agenda for a bilateral
dialogue aimed at moving towards the normalization
of relations, including on such fundamental topics as
the lifting of the economic, commercial and financial
blockade; Cuba’s exclusion from the arbitrary and
illegal list of countries that sponsor terrorism; the
abrogation of the Cuban Adjustment Act and the wet
foot/dry foot policy; compensation for economic and
human damages; the return of the territory occupied
by the Guantánamo naval base; an end to radio and
television attacks; and the cessation of financing for
internal subversion.
An essential element of this agenda is the release
of the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters who remain
cruelly and unjustly imprisoned in this country. An
act of justice or at least a humanitarian solution would
earn the gratitude of my people and a response from our
Government.
The President returned to the Chair.
Likewise, I would also offer the United States
Government the possibility of negotiating several
cooperation agreements in areas of the greatest mutual
interest, such as the fight against drug trafficking,
terrorism and human smuggling, and for the full
normalization of migratory relations, as well as for
the prevention and mitigation of natural disasters and
19

A/67/PV.35

the protection of the environment and our common
oceans. We would also propose returning to the talks
that were unilaterally suspended by our counterpart
concering migration issues and for the resumption of
postal services.
Whatever the circumstances, our people shall
defend its achievements, no matter what the cost. It will
uphold its ideals. It will recover from natural disasters,
such as that which struck Santiago de Cuba and the
eastern and central provinces a few days ago, and will
resolutely continue to update and develop our socialism
with all and for the well-being of all.
On behalf of this heroic people, its children,
its women and its elderly, I ask all Governments
committed to the principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, the norms
of the multilateral trading system, freedom of trade
and navigation and the refusal of the extraterritorial
application of a national law, to vote once again in
favour of the draft resolution contained in document
A/67/L.2, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
the debate on this agenda item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/67/L.2. Before giving the floor to speakers in
explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the desire of the Cuban
people to freely determine their own future. It is the
Cuban Government, however, that continues to deprive
them of that aspiration.
Like other Member States, the United States
determines its conduct of economic relationships with
other countries in accordance with its national interests
and principles. Our sanctions policy toward Cuba is just
one of the tools in our overall effort to encourage respect
for the human rights and basic freedoms to which the
United Nations itself is committed. We therefore stand
in opposition to draft resolution A/67/L.2.
The Obama Administration’s priority is to empower
Cubans to freely determine their own future. The most
effective tool we have for accomplishing that is building

20

connections between the Cuban and American peoples.
Those connections give Cubans the support and tools
they need to move forward, independent of their
Government. United States citizens engaging in welldefined, purposeful travel are the best ambassadors
for our democratic ideals. The hundreds of thousands
of Cuban-Americans who have sent remittances and
travelled to the island since we eased the way for them
early in the Obama Administration are a central part of
a strategy to ensure that Cubans have the opportunities
that they deserve. The Administration’s travel,
remittance and people-to-people policies are helping
Cubans by providing alternative sources of information,
taking advantage of emerging opportunities for selfemployment and private property, and strengthening
independent civil society.
In contrast, Cuba’s draft resolution seeks to
identify an external scapegoat for the island’s economic
problems, when they are principally caused by the
economic policies that the Cuban Government has
pursued for the past half century. While we note and
welcome Cuba’s recent changes to allow greater selfemployment and liberalize the real estate market, Cuba
still has one of the most restrictive economic systems
in the world. Irrespective of United States policy, it
is unrealistic to expect the Cuban economy to thrive
until the Cuban Government opens State monopolies
to private competition, fully empowers Cuban
entrepreneurs, respects intellectual property rights,
allows unfettered access to the Internet, and adopts the
sound macroeconomic policies that have contributed to
the economic success of many of Cuba’s neighbouring
countries in Latin America.
I want to make clear that the United States is in
fact a deep and abiding friend of the Cuban people.
In 2011, the Cuban people received an estimated
$2 billion in remittances, made possible by the Obama
Administration’s policies. In 2011, United States
companies exported $352 million in agricultural
products, medical devices, medicine and humanitarian
items to Cuba. Indeed, by the Cuban Government’s
own account, the United States is in fact one of Cuba’s
principal trading partners. Additionally, in 2011 the
United States authorized over $1.2 billion in private
humanitarian assistance in the form of gift parcels
filled with food and other basic necessities, as well
as non-agricultural and medical donations. Far from
restricting aid to the Cuban people, we are proud to be
one of the leading providers of humanitarian assistance.
As we share with the Cuban people the experience of
12-58675

A/67/PV.35

having withstood the wrath of Hurricane Sandy, we
extend our condolences to them and others in the region.
We remain committed to policies that support
the welfare of the Cuban people, despite the arrest
and continued detention of Alan Gross, a 63-year-old
American citizen who was sentenced to 15 years in
prison for facilitating Internet access for Cuba’s small
Jewish community. The United States again calls on
Cuba to immediately release Mr. Gross.
The United States continues to call on the Cuban
Government to finally allow Cuban citizens to enjoy
the internationally recognized political and economic
freedoms to which this body is committed. The
international community cannot in good conscience
ignore the ease and frequency with which the Cuban
regime silences critics, disrupts peaceful assembly
and impedes independent journalism. As of September
2012, the number of short-term, politically motivated
detentions had already surpassed the nearly 4,000
similar detentions recorded for all of 2011.
The draft resolution before us serves only to
distract from the real problems facing the Cuban
people, and therefore my delegation will oppose it. We
encourage this body to support the desires of the Cuban
people to determine their own future freely. By doing
so, it would truly advance the principles of the United
Nations Charter and the purposes for which the United
Nations was created.
Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me, through you, Mr. President,
to thank our dear comrade Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Cuba,
for the important update he has given us this morning on
the negative impact and consequences of the criminal
and illegal blockade imposed unilaterally by the United
States of America against Cuban children, women and
men.
For the twenty-first time the General Assembly,
representing the people and Governments of the world,
will express in an unequivocal and almost unanimous
way its call for an end to the economic, commercial
and financial blockade. The Assembly will speak out
against the suffering of the Cuban people. It will speak
out for an end to the imperial and irrational policies
of the United States of America and for an end to
its unilateral, extraterritorial economic measures.
Nicaragua will once again vote in favour of draft
resolution A/67/L.2.

12-58675

We reiterate our commitment and thanks to, support
of and solidarity with the generous Cuban nation, whose
only sin has been to set a good example for the peoples
of the world with their unconditional solidarity with
and commitment to the poorest people on the planet,
teaching literacy, caring for the sick and offering
programmes for the disabled. The world benefits
more and more from Cuba’s militant solidarity, its
ambassadorship for peace and development, its doctors,
teachers and engineers, who share their knowledge and
their lives with our peoples, helping us to climb out of
the penury of the poverty we have inherited.
I would like to share with the Assembly what our
comrade President, Comandante Daniel Ortega, said
recently about our cooperation and exchange with Cuba.
“We learn much from our Cuban brothers, we have
learned much and we are learning much right now.
The contributions our Cuban brothers have been
making to us over these years are immense. And
the great deal that they do, they do without making
too much noise about it. Indeed, some things have
to be done in silence, to quote the famous Cuban
television series.”
Cuba contributes support to the whole of humanity.
That derives from the spirit and practice of Fidel
Castro, Raúl Castro, the Cuban people themselves and
the ideals of people in the mould of José Martí.
Today, yet again, sadly, we heard the perpetrator of
the blockade try to justify what the world with one voice
has declared unjustifiable, all in an attempt to break the
spirit of a people who will never surrender, who possess
the will of Martí and an absolute determination, who
have proudly defended their sovereignty and their
socialist revolution and who are exemplars of solidarity
and high thinking in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The Government of the United States obsessively
persists in its criminal blockade at all costs and in
defiance of the General Assembly. The rejection of that
retrograde policy grows ever stronger. Even American
citizens themselves are calling for an end to the
blockade.
After 21 years, and well into the twenty-first
century, it is past time to end those American
measures that violate international law, human rights,
international humanitarian law and the United Nations
Charter. The General Assembly has been categorical in
that demand. The United States must stop disregarding
what is a universal clamour. What a beautiful gesture it
21

A/67/PV.35

would be if the United States finally heeded our voices
and our calls for it to rectify its policies!
The blockade is still the greatest obstacle to Cuba’s
economic and social development. We hope that the
Government of the United States will reconsider and
desist in its criminal blockade. We also hope that it
will reconsider and desist in supporting self-avowed
terrorists who walk the streets freely in North America
and collaborate in planning terrorist attacks against
the people and Government of Cuba. As part of our
call for reconsideration of the wrong-headed United
States policies towards Cuba, we also demand that the
United States immediately and unconditionally free the
five heroic Cuban patriots held in prison in the United
States — heroes who proudly and bravely defended their
country against attacks and terrorist acts perpetrated
from United States soil.
Now more than ever it is our duty to
energetically condemn the criminal blockade against
Cuba — a blockade the United States makes more
intense and harsher every year — and to condemn
all unilateral coercive, extraterritorial measures that
violate international law and accepted norms of free
trade. Those measures represent a grave threat to peace
and multilateralism, a disgrace to human values and
an obstacle to mutual understanding and coexistence
among nations.
Let us once again here in the General Assembly
join our voices in a call demanding that the Government
of the United States, on this twenty-first consecutive
occasion, put an end to its criminal, inhumane blockade
against the heroic and generous people and Government
of Cuba. We will again vote in favour of its removal.
To conclude, I want to say yet again that imperialist
policies and acts of aggression in our Latin American
region are unacceptable. The Latin America and
Caribbean region is now more than ever united and
committed to policies that promote peace and good
neighbourliness, foster friendly relations, unity and
cooperation and support sustainable development and
the people’s well-being, without external interference,
imperialist encroachments, blockades or coercive
economic measures.
The President: The Assembly will now take
action on draft resolution A/67/L.2, entitled “Necessity
of ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.

22

A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde,
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu,
12-58675

A/67/PV.35

Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, Palau, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of)
Draft resolution A/67/L.2 was adopted by 188 votes
to 3, with 2 abstentions (resolution 67/4).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): First of all, we would like
to congratulate the Foreign Minister of Cuba on his
statement. We also wish to thank the delegation of the
United States for its statement explaining its position
in regard to resolution 67/4, which was just adopted by
Member States by an overwhelming majority.
Nigeria is fully committed to the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular the principles of the sovereign equality of
all States, non-interference in their internal affairs and
freedom of international trade and navigation. Nigeria
believes in the inalienable right of every State to decide
on the development model that suits its environment,
people and culture. In that regard, Nigeria favours
the lifting of all unilateral punitive sanctions to
settle political disputes, especially when applied
extraterritorially.
The adoption of the resolution by 188 votes in favour
indicates the desire of the international community and
the overwhelming majority of the Assembly to see an
end of the unilateral sanctions imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba. For decades, the Cuban
people have been subjected to untold hardship due to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
on their country by the United States of America. As
a sovereign and independent nation, the Cuban people
have the inalienable right to self-determination and to
choose the form of Government that they want. They
also have the right to exercise their sovereignty and
self-determination devoid of all threats, pressures and
interference in their internal affairs. The respect of
the territorial integrity of all nations is also a cardinal
principle of international law and of the Charter of the
United Nations.

12-58675

My delegation recalls that, at the seventeenth
ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government, held in June/July 2011, the African Union
(AU) adopted a resolution calling on the United States
of America to end the economic and trade embargo
on Cuba so that the people of that country could enjoy
the legitimate prospect of sustainable development.
Nigeria will continue to abide by that AU resolution
and all United Nations resolutions calling for the end
of the economic blockade against Cuba. We believe
that the continued embargo against Cuba runs counter
to the principles of multilateralism, international law,
sovereignty and free trade that all States hold so dearly
and that the United Nations has admirably championed
over the years.
In that context, we supported the resolution and
oppose the needless and collective punishment of
innocent people. We favour the dismantling not only of
the structures for the enforcement of the embargo, but
also of the underpinning logic for its existence.
Mrs. Tembo (Zambia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for according me this opportunity to contribute to this
important agenda item. Zambia aligns itself with the
statements delivered earlier today by the representatives
of Algeria on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of
Cape Verde on behalf of the African States.
Zambia has been supporting, voting and speaking
in favour of the resolution on ending the embargo
against Cuba for the last two decades that the General
Assembly has considered the issue. Today, we again
remain steadfast and reaffirm our full support for
resolution 67/4.
We unequivocally call upon the Government of
the United States of America to lift the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed on the
people of Cuba. That embargo violates international
law, the principles and purposes of the United Nations
Charter with regard to the sovereignty, equality of
States and non-intervention and non-interference in
their internal affairs. It runs counter to the freedom of
international trade and navigation.
The extraterritorial embargo constitutes a
contravention of a sovereign State’s right to peace,
development and security. Over the past 50 years,
the people of Cuba have suffered heavily due to the
effects of that unjust, unfair and inhumane embargo.
It is unfortunate that the economic, commercial and

23

A/67/PV.35

financial embargo against the people of Cuba has been
maintained and further tightened despite the growing
and categorical demand of the international community,
especially the General Assembly, for its elimination.
The embargo has chained the people of Cuba
and adversely stifled the growth of their economy.
The United States has frozen more Cuban assets and
punished more foreign companies that have conducted
transactions with Cuba. It is estimated that the embargo
has caused economic damage of about $1 trillion in the
past five decades. That loss is not just to the people of
Cuba but to the whole world economy.
My delegation, however, applauds and admires the
people of Cuba and their leaders for their resilience,
hard work and dedication to the advancement of their

great country despite the embargo that was meant to
shackle them. They have remained steadfast and risen
above their problems to succeed in various fields for
the benefit of themselves and friends abroad, including
many Zambians. To the Zambian people, Cuba is an allweather friend and needs the support of the international
community on this issue.
We strongly believe in the principle that injustice
to one is injustice to all. The injustice that has been
perpetuated against the people of Cuba over the past 50
years through the embargo can happen to any Member
State of this great global body — the United Nations.
Therefore, my delegation demands that the Government
of the United States unconditionally lift the embargo
against the people of Cuba.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

24

12-58675
