4

General Anembly-Twenty-ninth Set.ion

poses under appropriate international control, particularly the approval of the procedures in re.sponding to
requests for services related to nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes, and tbe resolution of the Board of
Govemors of 13 September 1974 to establish, within
the Agency, a separate organizational unit for- tbis
purpose;
8. Urges ali countries concemed to ratify or accede
to tbe Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons11 or finalize their safeguards agreements witb
the lntemational Atomic Energy Agency as soon as
possible in accordance witb tbe provisions of that
Treaty, in view of the fact that tbe Review Conference
of the Parties to tbe Treaty on tbe Non-Proliferation
of Nuolear Weapons will take place in May 1975;
9. Requests tbe Secretary-General to transmit to
the Director-General of the lnternational Atomic
Energy Agency the records of thc twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly relating to tbe Agency's
activities.
2277th plen.ary meeting
5 November 1974

3236 (XXIX).

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Palestine,
Having heard the statement of the Palestine Liberation Organization, the representative of tbe Palestinian

people,u.
Having also heard other statements made during the
debate,
Deeply conrerned that no just solution to the problem
of Palestine has yet beco achieved and recognizing that
the problem of Palestine continues to endanger international peace and security,
Recognizing that the Palestinian people is entitled to
self-determination in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,
Expressing its grave concem that the Palestinian
people has been prevented from enjoying its inalienable
rights, in particular its right to self-determination,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the

Charter,
Recalling its relevant resolutions which affirm the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
t. Reaffirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people in Palestine, including:
(a) The right to self-determination without externa]
interference;
·
( b) The right to national independence and sovereignty;
2. Reaflirms a/so the inalienable right of the Palestinians to retum to their homes and property from
which they have been displaced and uprooted, and
calis for their return;
3. Emphaslzes that ful,] respect for and the realization of thcse inalienable rights of the Palcstinian people
are indispensable for the solution of the question of
Palestine;
1 ~ Resolution 2373

14 0/Ticia/

4. Recognizes that the Palestinian people is a principal party in the establishment of a just and lasting
peace in tbe Middle East;
5. Further recognizes the ri~ht of the Palestinian
people to regain its rights by all means in accordance
with the purposes and principies of the Charter of the
United Nations;
6. Appeals to all States and intemational organizations to extend their support to the Palestinian people
in its struggle to restore its rights, in accordance with
the Charter;
1. Requests the Secretary-General to establish contacts with the Palestine Liberation Organization on ali
matters conceming the question of Palestine;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution;
9. Decides to include the ítem entitled "Question
of Palestine" in the provisional agenda of its thirtieth
session.
2296th plenary meeting
22 November 1974

(XXII), annex.

Records of tire Ge11era/ Assemb/y, Twe11n•-11i111/i
Sessio11, Plenary Meetings, 2282nd meeting, paras. 3-83.

3237 (XXIX). Ohserver status for the Pnlet1ti11e
Liberation Organization

The General Assembly,
Having con.ridered the question of Palestine,
Taking into consideration the universality of tbe
United Nations prescribed in the Charter,
Recalling its resolution 3102 (XXVIII) of 12 December 1973,
Taking into account Economic and Social Council
resolutions 1835 (LVI) of 14 May 1974 and 1840
(LVI) of 15 May 1974,
Noting that the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Confticts, the World
Population Conference and the World Food Conference have in eflect invited the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in their respective deliberations,
Noting also that the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea has invited the Palestine
Liberation Organization to participate in its deliberations l!.S an observer,
l. Invites the Palestine Liberation Organization to
participate in the sessions and the work of the General
Assembly in the capacity of observer;
2. Invites the Palestine Liberation Organization to
participate in the sessions and the work of ali international conferences convcned under the auspices of
the General Assembly in the capacity of observer;
3. Considers that the Pa,Jestine Libcration Organization is entitled to participate as an observer in the
sessions and the work of ali international conferences
convcned under the auspices of other organs of the
United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps for the implementation of the present resolution.
2296th plenary meeting
22 November 1974
