S/PV.7282

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7282nd meeting

Wednesday, 22 October 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Perceval .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Argentina)

Members:

Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms. King
Mr. Bante
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Bertoux
Mrs. Kawar
Mrs. Jakubonė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Manzi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2014/708)

14-58286 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1458286*

S/PV.7282

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Unity state, tensions remain high, particularly around
the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu, with the SPLA
continuing to allege that the UNMISS protection site is
an opposition stronghold.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2014/708)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Ellen
Margrethe Løj, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan, and Ms. Zainab Hawa
Bangura, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ms. Bangura,
who is joining today’s meeting via video-teleconference
from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/708, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Ms. Løj.
Ms. Løj: I wish to thank you, Madam President,
for the opportunity to present the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in South Sudan
(S/2014/708). I will provide a brief update on the most
recent developments since the report’s publication,
on 30 September, and highlight some of the major
challenges facing the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) at this time.
On the security front, small-scale skirmishes have
continued between the two parties to the conflict.
Two weeks ago, the opposition forces mobilized from
the Canal area of northern Jonglei state and attacked
and captured Doleib Hill, to the south of Malakal, in
Upper Nile State. The Sudan People’s Liberation Army
(SPLA) subsequently recaptured Dolieb Hill and pushed
the opposition forces back into Northern Jonglei. In
2/6

22/10/2014

Outside of the traditional conflict zone, we are
paying close attention to Lakes state, as intercommunal
violence continues, which, in the most recent spate,
left 30 dead in Rumbek Centre in early October. The
Government is deploying additional security forces to
Rumbek in an attempt to bring the security situation
under control, and UNMISS is looking into ways to
support the efforts of national authorities to end the
violence and foster intercommunal reconciliation.
There was an outbreak of violence in Chukudum,
Eastern Equatoria, this month between the SPLA and
the local community, following the killing of an SPLA
soldier by an unidentified attacker. Tensions are also
continuing in Western Equatoria as a result of the influx
of pastoralists from Jonglei and Lakes states, whose
cattle are destroying the crops of the mainly farming
communities in the Mundri area. On a more positive
note, however, the Greater Pibor Administrative Area
in Jonglei state remains calm and UNMISS and the
United Nations country team are looking into ways to
contribute to the consolidation of peace in the Area.
The humanitarian situation across the country
remains dire. Over 1.8 million people have been
displaced — 1.35 million internally and another 453,000
to neighbouring countries. Around 4 million people,
close to a third of the population, are facing serious food
insecurity. Aid agencies are working hard to support
those in need, with over 3.2 million people having been
reached with some form of humanitarian assistance
over the course of the year. UNMISS will continue to
support the humanitarian community to ensure the key
needs of the people of South Sudan are met. During the
dry season, requests are likely to increase for UNMISS
to provide force protection to relief convoys and sites
where relief is prepositioned and stored. The arrival
of the remainder of the authorized surge capacity,
including the proposed riverine capacity, will be key to
respond to those needs. However, no amount of aid can
solve the crisis or convince people to return home. Only
peace and reconciliation can and, sadly, in the absence
of both, the aid operation will have to be sustained if
we are to continue to prevent the humanitarian situation
from further deteriorating.
UNMISS continues to provide protection to about
100,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) in nine of
14-58286

22/10/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

its protection-of-civilian sites, including about 49,000
in Bentiu, 28,000 in Juba and over 18,000 in Malakal. To
improve living conditions in UNMISS protection sites,
UNMISS and humanitarian partners have invested
substantial resources on existing site enhancements
and the construction of new sites. In Juba, two thirds
of the internally displaced persons — that is, over
10,000 — have been moved from the UNMISS base
in Tomping to the new site in United Nations House.
Within the Malakal site, almost 14,000 persons have
been relocated to areas with improved living conditions,
while construction work continues to accommodate the
remaining 5,000 persons. In Bor, the relocation to the
new site started on 9 October, with approximately 1,200
persons, about 40 per cent, relocated thus far. In Bentiu,
prevailing physical conditions and the lack of financial
and engineering resources have limited options for the
reconstruction of a new site, but planning for necessary
drainage and other works to be carried out during the
dry season is ongoing.
The approaching dry season offers an opportunity
to pursue sustainable solutions for the plight of the
IDPs in our camps. The United Nations family in South
Sudan is working on a comprehensive strategy for
such sustainable solutions. In that regard, discussions
are under way between UNMISS, United Nations
agencies, the Government and all the relevant partners
to commence the process of facilitating voluntary
returns where security conditions allow. I would like to
underline that any return will be voluntary and based
on humanitarian principles.
With regard to the human rights situation, UNMISS
continues to receive reports of gross violations of
human rights, indicating that conditions remain unsafe
for civilians in many parts of the country. In the Greater
Upper Nile area, UNMISS investigated allegations of
civilians killed in the context of hostilities in Renk
during the latter half of September. Likewise, the
Mission is monitoring closely the aggressive posture
of the SPLA towards internally displaced persons
sheltering in the UNMISS protection site in Bentiu.
The recently adopted national security bill, if enacted
into law, could also potentially further undermine
fundamental rights and freedoms and narrow the
political space in the country.
I must say that since I have been on ground, I have
been shocked by the complete disregard for human
life. Those responsible for committing atrocities and
human rights violations must be held to account and

S/PV.7282

face justice. In that connection, I look forward to the
findings of the African Union Commission of Inquiry
on South Sudan.
As of 21 October, the UNMISS troop strength
stood at 10,488 military personnel, and its police
strength at 890 police officers, including 363 formed
police unit personnel. With the arrival of additional
troops, UNMISS has been exerting all efforts to
expand its reach, including through the establishment
of forward bases, proactive patrolling, both military
and integrated, and, where possible, on foot, in order
to provide protection to vulnerable civilians beyond the
UNMISS premises.
The deployment of the remaining authorized
personnel, as well as equipment, therefore remains
vital for the Mission to more effectively deter violence
against civilians. We therefore continue to work with
our Department of Peacekeeping Operations colleagues
and troop- and police-contributing countries to
accelerate the process. I wish to thank all the troopand police-contributing countries for their continued
support to UNMISS and I urge them, as well as other
Member States with the means, to help equip and
accelerate the deployment of UNMISS personnel and
resources.
The Mission continues its strong advocacy with all
the relevant authorities to ensure unfettered freedom of
movement and access for UNMISS peacekeepers and
other personnel, particularly in areas at high-risk of
conflict and with large displaced populations. Although
the relations between the Mission and the national
authorities have improved at the political level and the
number of violations of the status-of-forces agreement
has decreased over the past couple of months, violations
continue.
In that respect, I am seriously concerned by the
recent spate of unlawful arrests and detentions and
abductions targeting United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. Two of our national staff have remained in
detention since August. On 10 October, three UNMISS
individual contractors were abducted at Malakal
Airport, two of whom have since been released, but
the third person is yet to be found. On 16 October, a
United Nations agency national staff member was
abducted at Malakal Airport by unknown persons. I
urge Government authorities to do everything within
their power to see that the captured UNMISS individual
contractor and the United Nations agency staff member
are freed quickly and unharmed.

14-582863/6

S/PV.7282

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The monitoring and verification teams of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
continued to focus on monitoring and reporting on
the cessation of hostilities violations. Eight IGAD
monitoring and verification teams are now deployed,
with one mobile team based in Juba and the Akobo
team operating from Bor. UNMISS is providing the
necessary support, including logistical and force
protection, to facilitate the work of the monitoring and
verification teams, which are vital for the monitoring
of the cessation of hostilities agreement. It is important
to encourage IGAD to continuously take stock of
the operations of its monitoring and verification
mechanism, especially the monitoring and verification
teams, with a view to enhancing their effectiveness
so that their presence can help reduce conflict on the
ground.
There is no alternative to silencing the guns and
concluding, without further delay, a comprehensive
peace agreement in order to return the country to
the path of peace and stability. This is the message I
have consistently conveyed to all my South Sudan
interlocutors, including President Kiir and opposition
leader Riek Machar. I have told them that the guns must
be silenced; peace cannot be delayed even for one more
day. The untold suffering of the people of South Sudan
must stop. After only six weeks in South Sudan, I am
convinced that every day without a political agreement
contributes to a further deterioration of the situation on
the ground. This complicates the work of the Mission
and risks negatively impacting the region. I therefore
call on the Council, regional leaders and all friends
of this young nation to remain fully engaged with
the warring parties so that they make the necessary
compromises required to translate their public
statements of commitment to peace into actions on the
ground. The people of South Sudan deserve no less.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Løj
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bangura.
Ms. Bangura: From 5 to 11 October, I conducted
my first visit to the Republic of South Sudan. The
circumstances that I witnessed, in particular in the
fiercely contested town of Bentiu in Unity state, are
among the worst I have ever experienced. The internally
displaced persons (IDPs) seeking refuge there face
a devastating combination of chronic insecurity,
unimaginable living conditions, acute day-to-day
protection concerns and rampant sexual violence. The
4/6

22/10/2014

character of sexual violent crimes shocked me to my
core, captured in the words of one survivor who told me,
“It is not just about rape. It is to break your dignity; it is
done to cause unimaginable suffering and destruction”.
My visit bears out reports that sexual violence in
South Sudan is widespread, including acts of rape, gang
rape, abductions, forced marriage and sexual slavery,
and mutilation of sexual organs. These violations are
being perpetrated by all sides in the conflict. Sexual
violence predates the December 2013 crisis. However
since the crisis, sexual violence attacks have reached
an alarming level, expressed in a vicious cycle of
retribution and revenge. I am gravely concerned about
the ethnic dimensions, manifest particularly in targeting
and reprisals between Dinka and Nuer communities.
Across the country, women live in appalling
conditions. They have little or no access to medical
services let alone access to justice. They have few
opportunities to secure a livelihood for themselves
and their families. Their views are not represented
in Government or other crucial decision-making
processes. One woman activist told me: “We are living
under the rule of men, not under the rule of law”. When
I visited the Juba Teaching Hospital, I was told that
75 per cent of survivors of sexual violence are girls
under the age of 18. Their youngest victim is 2 years
old, a girl completely destroyed by the rape she suffered.
Civil society groups made me aware also of the acute
vulnerability to sexual violence faced by women with
disabilities.
The challenge of addressing sexual violence is
complicated by a prevailing culture of silence and
blame-game. This exacerbates other critical challenges
such as acute lack of medical, psychosocial and legal
services for survivors, lack of capacity of the police and
the military to investigate sexual violence allegations,
and a lack of capacity of the judiciary to prosecute
perpetrators. At the legislative level, it is essential to
harmonize customary and statutory law. As it stands,
most sexual violence offences are decided under
customary law systems, most often to the detriment of
the survivors.
I believe that national Governments hold the
primary legal and moral responsibility to protect
their citizens from sexual violence and other grave
violations. I am pleased therefore to announce that at
the end of my visit President Salva Kiir and I signed
a joint communiqué on addressing conflict-related
sexual violence, in line with resolution 2106 (2013). I
14-58286

22/10/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

am encouraged by this expression of political will at the
highest level, and pledge the support of my Office and
the United Nations System to the Government of South
Sudan to implement the commitments outlined in that
agreement. That includes the issuance and enforcement
of clear orders through the military and police chains
of command prohibiting sexual violence; developing
concrete action plans specific to the Sudan People’s
Liberation Army and the South Sudan National Police
Service; fighting the impunity of perpetrators and
ensuring survivors’ access to justice through reform
and capacity-building in the justice sector; and ensuring
the provision of appropriate services for survivors of
sexual violence.
I urge the opposition to show a similar commitment
and remind Mr. Riek Machar, leader of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement in opposition, of the
command responsibility he bears to prevent sexual
violence being committed by the forces under his
command. I urge Mr. Machar to issue without delay
a communiqué that clearly outlines the prevention
measures that they will put in place. In the name of the
women and children that I met during my visit, I say
this to the leaders of South Sudan: You cannot wage
war against your own people. You cannot wage war on
the bodies of the women and children of South Sudan.
You must put people, not politics, at the centre of your
relationships.
Although the international community can
accompany the peace process, ultimately only the
leadership of South Sudan can make peace. I implore
them to stand in solidarity with the women and children
of South Sudan, whose lives are being devastated every
moment that they fail to reach a resolution to this crisis.
I implore them to stand on the right side of history, and
surely the international community will continue to
stand with them.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Bangura for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): I express my appreciation
to you, Madam President, for this opportunity to
address the Security Council once again. It was only
about one week ago that I addressed the Council on
Abyei (see S/PV.7276). I realize that the frequency
with which I am honoured to address the Council is a
manifestation of the compelling crises in our country.

S/PV.7282

As I have repeatedly said, while it is painful to listen
to accounts of what is going on in our country, I see no
value in being defensive or in denial.
My remarks today will be very brief and will
focus on a few salient points. I would first like to
express appreciation for the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/708), which, though it paints a very disturbing
picture of the situation in our country, demonstrates his
characteristic compassion for our people’s plight and
his determination to mobilize international support for
us.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation
for the work of the two ladies we have just heard,
Ms. Zainab Bangura, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and Ms. Ellen Margrethe Løj, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
South Sudan. I have had the pleasure of interacting
with both and have been impressed by the way they
balance credibility and compassion in their accounts
and assessment of the situation with sensitivity to the
perspective of the national leadership. I would like
to congratulate Ms. Bangura on her successful visit
to South Sudan and on signing with President Salva
Kiir a communiqué expressing the Government’s
commitment to her mandate’s objectives. And although
Ellen Løj modestly emphasizes how brief her time in
the country has been, she has already made a positive
impression on her interlocutors, especially in the way
she balances sensitivity and diplomacy with candour in
addressing the difficult issues. I believe that both have
adopted an approach that constructively engages the
authorities in a way that fosters productive cooperation.
It is my strong belief that candour in dialogue need not
conflict with a cooperative relationship.
Despite the devastation the conflict has wrought
in our country, the prompt and supportive response
of our subregional and regional organizations, and of
the United Nations and the international community
at large, is a commendable demonstration of shared
responsibility for peacemaking and the protection of
civilians from physical threats and humanitarian needs.
I had the honour of accompanying members of the
Security Council on their field visit to Malakal, where
we saw internally displaced persons (IDPs) in a dire
situation, living in wetlands and without sanitation.
Members of the Council were deeply and visibly moved
both by the conditions they saw and what the IDPs had
to say. The challenges are formidable for South Sudan,

14-582865/6

S/PV.7282

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

22/10/2014

a country that had already been devastated by war for
half a century before the latest outbreak of violence.
South Sudanese society has not only been shattered, it
has been heavily militarized by small but deadly arms
that have been spreading for decades. That cancer must
be urgently addressed.

witnessing now is a breakdown of the traditional social
order and related cultural values. It is my opinion that
we must reorient our people so that they can appreciate
that current behaviour patterns in our country violate
not only international norms but their own cultural
values as well.

It has been correctly noted that the current
conflict is primarily a political rather than an ethnic
one between Dinka and Nuer. However, its ethnic
character has increased, both in perception and where
there have been targeted killings, which have created
deep cleavages between groups that otherwise have a
great deal in common. Nevertheless, there are Dinkas
and Nuers living peacefully side by side, and there are
members of all groups in the national Government, as
there are also ethnic representatives on both sides of
the conflict.

For historical reasons whose roots continue to feed
into their current internal and cross-border conflicts,
the Sudan and South Sudan are paradoxically bound
together by conflict. We call on the international
community to support the improving relations between
the two countries and help them resolve their internal
conflicts, since that is the only way their bilateral
relations can be substantially grounded on a sound and
constructive foundation.

In this conflict, leadership is of course critical to
restoring peace, unity and reconciliation, but a great
deal more must be done to sensitize the population
to the challenge and promote a broad-based healing
process leading to sustainable peace and national
reconciliation. The recent intra-party talks in Arusha
facilitated by President Jakaya Kikwete of the United
Republic of Tanzania are an encouraging step towards
putting South Sudan on the path to national healing,
justice and accountability. It is also a significant
complement to the peace process facilitated by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
As I have had occasion to listen to both Ms. Bangura
and Ms. Løj, I have said that sexual violence and
military exploitation of children are antithetical to our
cultural values. In the traditional society in which I
grew up and that I studied in depth, if a man committed
any form of rape, he would have been so ostracized that
he would have been forced to leave the community and
migrate to an area where his background was unknown.
In battles, women and children could not be harmed.
Far from it — if a woman protected a wounded warrior,
that man could no longer be targeted. What we are

6/6

On a different but related issue, while we appreciate
the reasons for reconsidering the priorities of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, we believe
that capacity-building remains critical to assisting the
country to live up to standards of good governance,
respect for human rights and civilian protection. In
particular, building the capacity of the police and
associated security elements is vital if we are to achieve
the objectives we would all like to see pursued.
Finally, while we recognize that there are many
challenging issues to be resolved in our relationship with
the United Nations and the international community,
we remain deeply appreciative of our joint cooperation
and would like to assure the Council of our willingness
to continue to improve it.
Once again, I would like to thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the opportunity to address the
Council on this issue of vital importance to my country.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

14-58286
