SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

,YEAR

2479th

MEETING:

NEW

22 SEPTEMBER 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

. .. ... ... ... ... .. .. ... .... .. .. .... ..

1

. .. ... .. .... .. .. ... ... ... .. ... ... ... ... . .... ...

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2479)
Adoption of the agenda

Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 19 September 1983 from the Prime Minister of Saint Christopher
and Nevis addressed to the Secretary-General (S/15989) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

WPV.2479

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2479th MEE’JXNG
Held in New York on’ Thursday, 22 September 1983, at 3 p.m.

President: Mr. Noel G. SINCLAIR

Assembly is currently in session. I take it that it is so
decided.

(Guyana)..

Presenr: The representatives of. the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo; Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

3. I take it that the Council is ready to vote on the draft
resolution contained in the Committee’s report. Accordingly, I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in paragraph 4 of the Committee’s report concerning the
application of Saint Christopher and Nevis for membership in the United Nations.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2479)
A vote was taken by show of ha&.
1. Adoption

of the agenda
The draft resolution was adopted unanimbusly /resolution
53 7 (1983)j.

2. Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 19 September 1983 from the Prime
Minister
of Saint Christopher
and Nevis
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/15989)

4. The PRESIDENT:
I shall immediately convey this
decision to the Secretary-General for transmission to the
General Assembly in accordance with the provisions of
rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure.

Yore meeting was called to order at 3.50 p.m.

5. A number of representatives have inscribed their
names on the list of speakers following the voting. The first
such speaker is the representative of the United Kingdom,
on whom I now call.

Adoption of the agenda
IIRe agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Letter dated 19. September 1983 from the Prime Minister
of Saint Christopher and Nevis addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/15989)

6. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): One of the
pleasantest duties that falls to a member of the Security
Council to perform, and one that is also an honour, is to
congratulate States which have recently attained their independence and to welcome their admission to the United
Nations. It gives me particular pleasure to do so in the case
of Saint Christopher and Nevis, with which the United
Kingdom has been bound by close ties of friendship
stretching back more than 350 years.

1. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received a letter from the representative of Ecuador in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the representative of
Ecuador to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. AIbomoz (Ecuador)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
chamber.

7. The Island’s link with Britain in fact began in 1623,
when the first British colony in the West Indian islands
was established on Saint Christopher. For most of their
history, Saint Christopher and Nevis was administered as
‘part of the Leeward Islands. In 1956, with the abolition of
the Federation of the Leeward Islands, Saint Christopher
and Nevis and Anguilla became a separate dependency.

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Council will now consider
the report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning. the application of Saint Christopher
and Nevis for membership in the United Nations
[S/15997). In paragraph 3 of its report, the Committee has
recommended that the Council have recourse to the provisions of the last paragraph of rule 60 of its provisional
rules of procedure, in view of the fact that the General

8. In 1967, the United Kingdom created six Associated
States in the Eastern Caribbean as a transitional stage to
full independence, retaining responsibility only for defence
and certain aspects of external affairs., The accession of
Saint Christopher and Nevis to independence on 19 Sep
tember of this year-Anguilla
having separated in 1980was therefore of particular significance: it was the last of
those six territories to become independent, following in
I

the footsteps of Grenada in 1974, Dominica and Saint
Lucia in 1978, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in 1979
and Antigua and Barbuda in 1981.

independence, the Organization is once again demonstrating its belief in the principle of universality, and we are
very glad of this.
/
2
14. Furthermore, ‘France has always had excellent relations as good neighbours with the peoples of that country,
and .we hope that the decision the Council has just taken
will enable ___,
us ,I.to develop these relations even further.

9. The status of Association with Britain negotiated in
1967 was from the outset voluntary and terminable at any
time at the request of the Associated State. As in the case
of the other Associated States, the Government of Saint
Christopher and Nevis requested the British Government
to terminate the Associated status through an ‘Order in
Council. The British ‘Government took the view, that it was
right to take such action provided it was satisfied that the
majority of the people had agreed that the status of Association should be terminated and that the proposed independence constitution made proper provision for fundamental
rights and the rule of law. The British Government, satisfied that these conditions had been met, agreed to the
request of the Saint Christopher and Nevis Government
that the status of Association should be terminated. Parliament approved orders to this effect in May of this year,
and these were subsequently signed by Queen Elizabeth II
on 22 June.

15. Finally, Saint Christopher and Nevis has undertaken
to discharge the obligations set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations. We have no doubt but that this commitment will enable it to make its contribution to the Organization’s efforts in support of peace and development.
16. My country wel.comes this opportunity today to offer
its best wishes for the happiness and well-being of the
peoples of this new State.
17. Mr. LING Qing (China) (inrerpretation from Chinese): We are happy to see that Saint Christopher and
Nevis, a beautiful island country in the Caribbean, proclaimed its independence on 19 September 1983, thus joining the ranks of the independent States of the world. This
is the result of the long struggles waged by the people of
Saint Christopher and Nevis and a new victory in the
whole struggle of decolonization. The Chinese delegation
would like to take this’ opportunity to express its warm
congratulations to the Government and people of Saint
Christopher and Nevis and sincerely wish Saint Christopher and Nevis prosperity and its people well-being.
..I
18. The Chinese ‘delegation is delighted to welcome
today the application of Saint Christopher and Nevis for
admission to membership in the United Nations and
endorses the recommendation of the Security Council to
the General Assembly for admitting Saint Christopher and
Nevis to membership in the United Nations.
r,.
19. We have persistently maintained that all countries in
the world, irrespective -of their size, can play their own
parts in international affairs. We believe that, upon admission to membership in the United Nations, Saint Christopher and Nevis will, together with all other peace-loving
and justice-upholding countries of the world, make positive , contributions to. the maintenance of international
peace and-security and the realization of the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

10. The Government of Saint Christopher and Nevis has
made commendable strides in economic development.
Agriculture is the main economic activity; manufacturing
is now the dominant sector in terms of providing new
employment opportunities. Tourism is also becoming a
major growth area. The Government is actively encouraging private investment in manufacturing enterprises. The
Government has received development assistance both
through direct bilateral aid from the United Kingdom and
from the World Bank, the European Development Fund
and the Caribbean Development Bank.
11. The independence celebrations that took mace in
Saint Christopher and Nevis last week were attendid by the
Princess Margaret and the Minister for Overseas Development, Mr. Raison. They marked the beginning of a new
chapter in the history of Saint Christopher and Nevis. The
enthusiasm of the inhabitants and their obvious delight at
the attainment of a new political status augur well for the
future and the’challenges that lie ahead. I am confident that
Saint Christopher and Nevis will go from strength to
strength as an independent State and that they will be able
to count on the support and succour both of this Organization and of its Member States, support that will be so vital,
particularly in the early days of nationhood.
_
i 2 The Unit&d ‘Nations for its part can only benefit from
the membership of Saint Christopher and Nevis and the
fresh ideas which its Government will bring to our deliberations. I am therefore delighted that the Council has
decided unanimously to recommend to the General
Assembly the admission of Saint Christopher and Nevis.
We very much,look forward to welcoming its representa*tives to New York.

20. On the occasion of the proclamation of the independence of Saint Christopher and Nevis, Premier Zhao
Ziyang of the State, Council of the People’s Republic of
China sent a message to Prime Minister Kennedy Simmonds, extending heartfelt congratulations of the Chinese
Government and people to the Government and people of
Saint Christopher and Nevis and announcing the decision
of the Chinese Government to recognize Saint Christopher
and Nevis. Both China and Saint Christopher and Nevis
are’ third-world countries. Our two peoples had similar
experiences in the pastand are now facing the same task of
rbuijdmg their coun$$,,h
is our earnest hope that the
relations between our two countries and the friendship

13. Mr. LOUET (France) (interpretation from French): It
was with particular pleasure that my delegation voted in
favour of the admission of Saint Christopher and Nevis to
membership of the United Nations. Indeed! ,i welcoming
,,thisnew,State
.~
,,.. today,
,., just a few days after its accession to
2
..

between our two peoples will witness constant develop
ment in the future.

Saint Christopher and Nevis will enhance the universality
of the United Nations, which indeed is the intrinsic
strength and the unique hallmark of the Organization.

21. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (inrerpretation from~Ru.wian): The delegation of the
Soviet Union notes with satisfactidi the statement by Saint
Christopher and Nevis that it accepts the commitments set
forth in the Charter of the United Nations and also its
formal undertaking to abide by those commitments. The
Soviet delegation supported the recommendation of the
Council for the admission of that State to membership in
the United Nations.

25. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): Mr. President; it must be a
source of special pleasure to you that the unanimous
recommendation for the admission of Saint Christopher
and Nevis, a fellow Caribbean country, should occur
under your presidency. We, too, from the Mediterranean,
are delighted to speak briefly in favour of the admission of
this new island State to membership in the United Nations.
26. Apart from contributing further to the universality of
the Organization, the new applicant augments the ranks of
the Commonwealth and of the small developing island
countries, now almost 50 in number, just under a third of
the entire membership of the United Nations. I have noted
with admiration the solemn undertaking given by the
Prime Minister on behalf of his country, accepting all the
tights and duties of membership. As another small country
with only a relatively brief history of independence behind
us, we welcome in particular the abiding faith in the
United Nations evidenced by small countries, especially
against a background of unhelpful onslaughts against the
Organ&ion
that sometimes hit the headlines. Therefore
we rejoice that one more voice will be heard in the halls
and corridors of the United Nations staunchly upholding
the imperatives of development and peace.

22. On the day of the proclamaticjn of the independence
of the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis, the
Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union sent to the Prime
Minister of that country, Mr. Kennedy Simmonds, a cablea’
gram stating as follows:
._
“On the occasion of the proclamation of the independence of the Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis,
please accept, Mr. Prime Minister, our sincere congratulations and our best wishes for the prosperity and success of your people as you mo& along the path of
independent national development.
“The Soviet Government, cdtistantly guided by the
principles of equality and mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity atid non-interference in
internal affairs, hereby declares that it recognizes the
Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis as an independent and sovereign State and expresses its readiness
to establish diplomatic relations with it.”

27. Malta and Saint Christopher and Nevis have much in
common. Sharing their ideals and their aspirations, my
delegation looks forward to a long and fruitful collaboration with the newly independent nation of Saint Christopher and Nevis, and we shall be honoured, as a first step,
to co-sponsor the draft resolution on its admission as a
Member of the General Assembly, with the same warm
feelings of solidarity and friendship as we express in the
Council today.

The Soviet delegation would like to take this opportunity
to address our warmest congratulatioris to this newly independent State and to its people.
23. Mr. SHAH NAWAZ (Pakistin): I have great pleasure in expressing, through ourpositive vote in favour of
the recommendatioti in the rep&t of the Committee on the
Admission of New Members [ibid], ,our support for the
admission of Saint Christopher and Nevis to membership
in the United Nations. On behalf of the Government of
Pakistan and my delegation, I warmly welcome the entry
of Saint Christopher and Nevis into the fold of the intemational community. The Govemmenf of the United Kingdom deserves congratulations for: . taking the riecessary
steps to facilitate the independence ‘of Saint Christopher
and Nevis and its membership in the United Nations.

28. We should like to extend a word of praise to the
Government of the United Kingdom for the practical help
it has extended in acceding to the wishes of the inhabitants
of Saint Christopher and Nevis in their peaceful quest for
independence after such a long association in the past.
29. We are very pleased to share in this moment of history, on the accession of a new country to independence
and in a unanimous recommendation of the Council for
admission to membership in the United Nations, which is
certain to be implemented. We extend warm congratulations to the people and Government of Saint Christopher
and Nevis.

24. We rejoice in the independence of Saint Christopher
and Nevis and greet its people, who are-entering a new
phase in their history as a free nation poised to devote its
energy to the cause of peace arid progress. We are confident that Saint Christopher and Nevis will play an active
role in the United Nations, making its valuable contribution towards the advancement of the principles and purposes of the Organ&lion.
In this common endeavour,
Pakistan greatly looks forward to the establishment of
friendly relations with Saint Christopher and N&is ,atid
the development of fruitful co-operation and contacts with
its delegation at the United N&i&s.
The admission’df

30. Mr. NATORF (Poland): It is with profound satisfaction that the Polish delegation has supported the recommendation of the Security Council that Saint Christopher
and Nevis be admitted to membership’ of the Uniad
Nations.
.’
31. We have studied carefully’ the letter dated 19 Setitember.1983 from the Prime Minister of Saint Chriitqpher and
Nevis, Mr. Kennedy Simmonds;to the Secretary-G&e&d,
noting in harticular hi< ‘declaration that the newljr %om
-3

nation accepts the obligations contained in the Charter of
the United Nations and solemnly declares its readiness to
fulfil them.

for the right of peoples to self-determination. We trust that
the common sense of its leaders and the ideological pluralism which has characterized the family of nations to which
it belongs are two important elements that will make this
new State an important factor for peace and balance in the
region.

32. The delegation of Poland welcomes the application,
being firmly convinced that the admission of Saint Christopher and Nevis to the United Nations will strengthen the
principle of equal rights and the right to self-determination
of peoples as well as the principle of universality of the
Organization.

40. The natural trend of Latin American countries to
non-alignment will be strengthened by the decision of this
new sister country to become a Member of the United
Nations. We arc fully confident that in this new condition,
added to that of an independent Latin American State, it
will abide fully by the obligations of the Charter and spare
no effort to ensure the achievement of the great and important objectives of the ‘Organization.

33. Poland will be happy to see Saint Christopher and
Nevis a Member of the United Nations international
community.
34. Mr. MEESMAN
(Netherlands): As a representative
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I have much pleasure
in joining those who have welcomed the application for
membership in the Organization of this new State. It goes
without saying that we had no difficulty whatsoever in
supporting the recommendation
in paragraph 4 of the
report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members [ibid].

41. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): As the oldest new nation and the first former British colony in this
Western hemisphere to gain its independence, the United
States warmly congratulates Saint Christopher and Nevis
on its independence and welcomes it to the ranks of the
nations of the Americas. In our capacity as host country to
the United Nations, we welcome the representatives of
Saint Christopher and Nevis to New York, and as a fellow
Member we welcome Saint Christopher and Nevis to the
United Nations.
‘.

35. As the Council knows, my country has always attached great importance to the principle of universality of
the United Nations, and we are therefore grateful to note
that one of the first acts.of the newly established sovereign
nation of Saint Christopher and Nevis has been the decision .to apply for membership of the Organization.
Moreover, we are confident that this new Member, with
which the Kingdom of the Netherlands hopes to continue
to maintain good-neighbourly
relations, will fulfil the
requirements for membership: namely that it is able and
willing to carry out its obligations under the Charter. We
are particularly ‘glad that the Council has unanimously
decided to recommend Saint Christopher and Nevis for
membership of the United Nations and thereby to pave the
way for its admission to the community of nations.

42 Mr. ADJOYI (Togo) (interpretation from French):
The Government and-people of Togo welcomed the accession to independence of Saint Christopher and Nevis on 19
September.
43. The application for admission to membership, which
was duly tiled by the Prime Minister, Mr. Kennedy Simmonds, was not, in the view of my delegation, a mere
formality. It demonstrated the faith of that young State in
the United Nations and its determination to bring to the
Organization the optimism which the Organization is
beginning to lack. The admission to the Organization of
Saint Christopher and Nevis will strengthen our vocation
of universality and help our work. My delegation therefore
voted in favour of the recommendation
for admission
which the Council is making to the General Assembly.

36. May I conclude by extending our warm congratulations to the people and Government of our new Member.
37. Mr. TINOCO
FONSECA (Nicaragua) (interpretution from Spanish): The delegation of Nicaragua would like
to express its satisfaction at the attainment of independence by Saint Christopher and Nevis, with all the more
emphasis in view of our position as a Latin American
country member of the Council, country of Central America, a region which has very close historical ties of friendship and co-operation with the community of countries to
which this new State belongs. This represents a further step
in the as yet incomplete process of decolonization in Latin
America.

44. In conclusion, my delegation would like once again
to salute this new sister State of Saint Christopher and
Nevis and wish it every success in its contribution to our
common search for a world of peace, a world of solidarity,
in short, the better world to which we all aspire.
45. Mr. CHIKETA
(Zimbabwe): It is always a great
occasion for my country when any part of the colonized
world is granted independence. There are many more
people who remain under the yoke of colonialism and
imperialism. The attainment of independence by Saint
Christopher and Nevis demonstrates the efficacy of the
United Nations as an instrument of liberation of peoples
all over the world. I am sure that we speak for ail
oppressed persons when, we say that the freedom of Saint
Christopher and Nevis serves as an inspiration to those
that have yet to be granted independence.

38. We are convinced that in enlarging the Caribbean
community, Saint Christopher and Nevis will contribute to
the important role which the countries of the Caribbean
play in the international arena.
39. This new State emerges at a time and in a region
where there is political upheaval caused by social inequalities, precarious economic conditions and lack of respect
4

46. We look forward to the day when certain members of
the Security Council will facilitate the arrival of the occasion for us to admit a new independent State of Namibia.
We welcome the independence of Saint Christopher and
Nevis and we take this opportunity to congratulate its
people. My Government stands ready to co-operate with
the independent State in the pursuance of the objectives of
the Charter of the United Nations.

ican States at the United Nations, which I have the honour
to preside over, in order to congratulate the,Council on the
unanimous adoption of the resolution and to welcome
Saint Christopher and Nevis, a country which comes to
strengthen the universality of the Organization, bringing
the total number of members to 158 when the resolution is
adopted in the General Assembly, and increasing the
number of members of the Latin American Group to 33.

47. Mr. MAPANGO
ma KEMISHANGA
(Zaire) (inferpretation from Ei-ench): The admission of Saint Christopher and Nevis to the United Nations which the Security
Council has just decided to recommend to the General
Assembly is closely related to the policy of decolonization
and the emancipation of peoples enshrined in General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) and to the universal character of the Organization. Therefore, my delegation joins
those whose representatives have already spoken in ,welcoming the Council’s positive vote, which embodies the
international community’s determination to be enriched
quantitatively as well as qualitatively, to the benefit of the
ideals of peace and security.

54. The cause of the eradication of colonialism has been
a characteristic of Latin America, both in its 20 years of
struggle to achieve independence in the nineteenth,century
and in the firm and tenacious action of those Latin Americans who in our generation drafted the San Francisco
Charter or those who are today members of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples..

48. I should like to take this opportunity to congratulate
most warmly, on behalf of my Government, the valiant
people of Saint Christopher and Nevis and its Government, and to wish them every success in the great family
that is the United Nations.
49.

Mr.

BURAYZAT
(Jordan) (inrerprerarion from
The delegation of Jordan wishes to state that it
welcomes the recommendation that Saint Christopher and
Nevis be admitted as a member of the United Nations. We’
feel great satisfaction in congratulating this young State
upon its independence, since the declaration of independence by the people of Saint Christopher and Nevis on 19
September is but an expression of aeprinciple that is dear to
us all and to Jordan in particular-the
principle of selfdetermination.
The representative of Zimbabwe mentioned one people which still awaits’the implementation of
this principle, and I believe that other people await the
implementation
of the same principle.

Arabic):

SO. The declaration by the Prime Minister of Saint Christopher and Nevis that his State will abide by the principles
and provisions of the Charter of the United Nations gives
us great satisfaction. We believe that declaration was made
at the right place and at the right time,
51. We look forward to establishing the best possible
relations with this new State. That is why Jordan was
among those States that supported the draft resolution
that Saint Christopher and Nevis be admitted as a member
of the United Nations.
52. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Ecuador. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
53. Mr. ALBORNOZ
(Ecuador) (interpretation from
Spanish): I thank you, Mr. President, and members of the
Council, for the opportunity that you have given me to
speak in this forum on behalf of the Group of Latin Amer-

55. Thus, 92 countries have already gained independence
since then and have become Members of the United
Nations. Twelve countries-today
13-have been-added to
the original group of 20 Latin American founding fathers
of the Organization.
56. Saint Christopher and Nevis is not an unknown, faraway country. It is older in world geography than almost
all the other American countries. The islands of the Lesser
Antilles were discovered, during the second voyage of
Admiral Christopher Columbus. This successful landing
during his first voyage, on 12 October 1492, led to his fame
and to support from the Crown, which enabled him to
organize a major expedition, this time with 17 vessels. During this expedition, upon returning to the Antilles, when he
sailed past islands on his way to the island of Espaniolatoday the Dominican Republic-he
brought the Leeward
Islands to the notice of the rest of the world on 12
November 1493.
57. To the first island where Columbus was able to find
safe shelter to drop anchor he originally gave the name St.
MartIn, but it was later dedicated to Our Lady of the
Snows, the object of an old Roman religious devotion, a
name which has survived as the Anglicized “Nevis”.
58. It was from the island of Nevis that he saw the other
three islands-St. George, later called St. Christopher in
honour of the saint whose name he bore, known in English
today as St. Kitts; Statia, dedicated to St. Anastasia, and
later St. Eustatius; and Saba.
59. All these islands are part of our reality and also part
of our legend. For the peoples of Latin America, the
Caribbean is the Mare Nostrum of our history. This is
where the known dimensions of the planet were reshaped;
from here began the expeditions of discovery and colonization of the countries of the whole American continent,
today independent.
60. The presence of indigenous Caribbean and Spanish,
French, English, Dutch and African elements in those
islands gives a wondrous content to a history rich in universal contributions and is a symbol of the great blending

it is through the full participation of all States in the deliberations of the Organization that the international community can best attain those goals which the overwhelming
majority of nations justly strive for-peace, justice,
prosperity-goals
which should be the corner-stone of all
human endeavour. We are satisfied that the application by
Saint Christopher and Nevis for membership in the United
Nations conforms to the requirements of Article 4 of the
Charter of the United Nations. My delegation is therefore
delighted that the Security Council has decided unanimously to recommend acceptance of the application of
Saint Christopher and Nevis and stands ready to welcome
this new State to our midst. We are confident that Saint
Christopher and Nevis will make a valuable contribution
to the work of the Organization, in accordance with the
Charter, and we look forward to working in close cooperation with the delegation of that State in our joint
effort to grapple with the problems that confront the world
today. It is our firm hope and expectation that the bonds of
friendship which bind us will be further strengthened by
that co-operation.

of races, free from discrimination, which gives vigour and
grace to the great mixture of the human resources of Latin
America.
61. The Latin American community
at the United
Nations welcomes with open arms the new brother country of Saint Christopher and Nevis. We express our warm
wishes for its prosperity and happiness, and we are ready
to offer it the co-operation of the bodies, services and
programmes of the system of the Organization, together
with the solidarity and affection which are the hallmarks
of our Latin American world.
62. The PRESIDENT:
As. there.are no further speakers
on my list, I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of GUYANA.
63. It is with a feeling of special pride that Guyana participates in this consideration by the Council of the application for membership to the United Nations by Saint
Christopher and Nevis, inasmuch as this State is from our
Commonwealth and in the Caribbean subregion, and
Guyana shares with it a common bond of history.
64. Along with these common historical ties, geography
and a close cultural identity have destined Saint Christopher and Nevis and Guyana to have close fraternal cooperation. This cooperation is manifested particularly in
our subregional organization, the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM),
where our two States labour together with
our neighbours to increase our. collective strength.

67. In ioining the Oraanization. Saint Christonher and
Nevis will fallknder thi protection of the ChaAer. This,
therefore, gives rise to particular duties for all Member
States, the first of which is the guarantee to this newly
independent country of full enjoyment of its sovereign
rights: its territorial integrity, its security, its political and
economic autonomy, as well as its right to development.

65. In our Caribbean Community therefore, Saint Christopher and,Nevis has iong been considered a full member,
and we have always respected it as such. In saluting the
attainment of formal independence by Saint Christopher
and Nevis, my country’s President expressed the view that
CARICOM
wouid undoubtedly be strengthened by the
islands’ new status. “Guyana looks forward”, he said, “to
our continuing collaboration with Saint Christopher and
Nevis in a common cause of regional integration”.

68. In closing, I reiterate the sincere congratulations of
the Government and the people of Guyana to the Govemment and the people of our newly independent sister State.
We wish it every success in its task of nation building.
69. As PRESIDENT
of the Council, I declare that the
Council has now concluded its consideration of the item
on its agenda.

66. Guyana is committed to the goal of universality of
membership of the United Nations, and it is our belief that

The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

6

I’
I,’
.‘.
.t

.,

. .;.

,‘I’

.I
‘..‘,’

.
‘L

idI+
i&l

3

I+

+I

. ,,JWl
. h+

.Li

c,)
4 ,i

ejiJl,,+
h-4

a1Jft.

~jL;ul?

3 &l

rj

~LGLI
‘ i&-All

(+LI

?3I

Js
~jlJ+
: J! +A

J+l
J.c

w
J&l

&

,i l&u JAG $1

$~!mYkRx8la3l!s%
B~~~t~~f~WP~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
IgFml#l~~o

isIk#~a~~&4E~t~3~zHABm

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT SE PROCURER LES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dam les librairies et les agences depositaims
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

I-IOJIYYKl-b

kl3,&4HIUI

OPTAHH3Ai&H4
OE’bEJe@iHEI-IHbIX
Haunti MOXHO KJnrtTb B KHSiXCHblX

M3EIHPifl
optXHH3ZWiIt
G6aenuuemibix
EiXeHTCTBaX
BOBCeXpatiOHaXM~a.&BOilHTeCnpaBKII

Mara3mie
wm
npoiWKeH3JIaHH8,

rmumTe
II? anpecy:
?ibIO-k'iOpKRJni

OpraHn3aWx
KeHeBa.

HAUm
MaTa3UHaX

06 W3LlaHBRXB
BCiUIt?MKHIIXHOM
O6'beLViHeHHblX
HauufI, CeIWix

no

COMO CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS
Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in

United

Nations,

New

York

00300

90-6020%January

1992-2.050
