S/PV.9306

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9306th meeting

Tuesday, 18 April 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Nebenzia/Mr. Polyanskiy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Kelley

Agenda
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (S/2023/248)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-10996 (E)
*2310996*

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2023/248)
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representative of Libya to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/248, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Bathily and Mr. Kimihiro Ishikane,
Permanent Representative of Japan, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Bathily.
Mr. Bathily: Since my previous briefing, on
27 February (see S/PV.9270), where I announced our
elections-enabling initiative to allow Libyans to choose
their leaders in 2023, I launched its implementation,
along multiple parallel axes that together make up
a comprehensive approach to achieve that goal. As
indicated, our proposal is meant to enable elections in
Libya this year by widening the scope of actors involved
in that national issue of paramount importance. The
active mobilization of all stakeholders — including the
Presidential Council, the Government, the House of
Representatives and the High State Council— is key
to achieving consensus on political matters, security
issues and questions pertaining to the participation of
women and youth. The electoral process offers a unique
opportunity to mobilize the entire national community
2/18

18/04/2023

so that elections are peaceful, inclusive, free and fair
and pave the way for a new dispensation for Libyans.
Lessons learned elsewhere have shown that inclusive
and consensus-based elections are the driver of peace
and stability.
In that spirit, because of the difficulty of bringing
them all together face to face in one place at this point,
I engaged key Libyan political leaders through shuttle
diplomacy to seek common ground and encourage them
to make compromises that will clear the path to elections.
I held separate meetings with President of the Presidency
Council Mohamed Al-Menfi, Vice-President Abdullah
Al-Lafi, Prime Minister Abdulhamid Al Dabiba, High
State Council President Khaled Mishri, Speaker of the
House of Representatives Aguila Saleh Issa, Libyan
National Army Commander Khalifa Haftar and House
of Representatives-appointed Prime Minister Fathi
Bashagha. I also engaged individual political parties and
coalitions of political forces, traditional leaders, notable
persons and women and youth group leaders from all
regions. They all expressed their readiness to discuss the
parameters for the organization of elections. That action
will continue and intensify, as relevant actors will need
to negotiate and agree on the most contentious issues
pertaining to the holding of inclusive elections this year.
I welcome the commitment of those actors and call for
the translation of their engagement into concrete steps
on the ground.
For purposes of promoting the country’s
territorial integrity, furthering national reconciliation,
strengthening the ceasefire and mobilizing all armed
actors for election security, I facilitated the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission’s engagement with Libyan
security and military actors, including armed groups
from all three regions of Libya. At the invitation of the
Commission, I facilitated meetings in Tunis, Tripoli,
Benghazi and Sabha on 15 and 26 March and on 7 and
9 April. On those occasions, leaders and representatives
of military units and security formations operating
in western, eastern and southern Libya committed to
supporting all stages of the elections, to reject violence
throughout Libya, to take practical steps for the safe
return of internally displaced persons and to release
detainees and address the missing persons issue in the
context of national reconciliation.
The meetings between military units and security
formations from the east, west and south undoubtedly
represent a breakthrough. Those meetings were of great
symbolic value on the path to reconciling and unifying
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

the country. As a result of those consultations, on
8 April, Libyan National Army authorities released six
detainees from western Libya as a confidence-building
measure. In the same vein, on 13 April, the Chiefs of
Staff of the Libyan army and the Libyan National Army
respectively — Lieutenant General Al-Haddad and
Lieutenant General Al-Nadhouri — met in Benghazi
and affirmed their commitment to furthering the
reunification of the military and supporting the electoral
process. I welcome the patriotism of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and of the two Chiefs of Staff and
encourage them to continue promoting national unity. I
urge political actors to follow the example set by military
and security leaders.
Furthermore, I held several rounds of consultations
in Tripoli, Benghazi and Sabha with Libyans from all
three regions, representing civil society, women, youth,
political parties and notable and cultural components,
to hear and amplify their views on elections and their
demands for greater inclusion among Libya’s leadership
and institutions. That axis of engagement is also aimed at
ensuring the adoption of a code of conduct that commits
all candidates and stakeholders to engage in the electoral
process in a constructive manner and accept the results.
I in particular encouraged women and youth to continue
their engagement with all actors so that their concerns
are addressed in the road map to elections. It is vital for
the success of elections that all parts of Libyan society
are involved and have their voices heard, and that the
electoral campaign provides an opportunity for peaceful
competition between visions and programmes, not an
occasion that triggers hate speech and violence.
Last but not least, I have offered the technical
expertise and logistical support of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to the 6+6
committee of the House of Representatives and High
State Council to enable its work in preparing the
electoral laws. Both chambers have announced their
respective members to the committee based on regional
representation. Regrettably, however, the committee
does not include any women. Although the committee
as a whole has yet to convene, on 5 April its six High
State Council members met for the first time with three
of their six House of Representatives counterparts to
discuss their workplans and identify priority issues to be
tackled by the committee.
I am pleased to announce that, over the course of recent
days, I received a positive answer from the designated
committees of both the House of Representatives and the

S/PV.9306

High State Council to accept UNSMIL’s support. I hope
that genuine political will and wisdom will guide their
deliberations. I urge the leaders of the two chambers to
expedite the work of the 6+6 committee and publish a
time-bound work programme. For elections to take place
this year, the electoral laws must be completed in time
for the High National Elections Commission to begin
implementing the electoral process by early July.
Gaps and concerns being raised about constitutional
amendment No. 13 will also need to be addressed by
that time for a viable electoral process. The Chair of
the High National Elections Commission informed me
that, while awaiting the electoral laws and the provision
of necessary funds, the Commission has started initial
preparations for the implementation of the electoral
process. I call on the Government to provide the High
National Elections Commission with all necessary
resources to complete its mandated tasks in a timely
manner. For their part, UNSMIL and United Nations
Headquarters are considering the Government’s request
for electoral assistance.
Besides finalizing the constitutional and legal
framework for elections, a level playing field is needed
so as not give undue advantage to particular candidates
and in order to engender trust in elections among all
sides. I call on Libyan leaders and all relevant actors to
follow their stated commitment to elections and seek
tangible, mutually acceptable solutions to achieve that.
I commend the Presidential Council for its efforts to
establish a national financial oversight mechanism for
the transparent and equitable spending of Libya’s vast
public resources — an important element to ensure that
public funds are not used to the advantage of any side.
While the overall security situation remains tense,
the ceasefire continues to hold and there were positive
developments on cooperation between the Libyan army
and the Libyan National Army and on the withdrawal of
foreign fighters and mercenaries.
On 16 March, I co-chaired the security working group
of the Berlin process, attended by the Chiefs of Staff of
the Libyan army and the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.
The Chiefs of Staff asked for international support to
equip a planned joint military brigade to secure Libya’s
southern borders as a step towards the reunification
of the armed forces. On the margins of that meeting,
liaison committees from Libya, the Sudan, Chad and
the Niger met to discuss strengthening cooperation and
the exchange of information on mercenaries and fighters

23-109963/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

from Libya’s southern neighbours present in the country.
UNSMIL also convened Libyan ceasefire monitors from
both sides, together with focal points from the Joint
Military Commission, to highlight the capacity-building
needs of Libyan monitors and to discuss activating their
joint operations centre.
From 29 March to 4 April, I travelled to the Sudan,
Chad and the Niger to discuss with their leaders how
to improve conditions for the return of foreign fighters
and mercenaries from Libya. My interlocutors offered
their support for achieving that goal while highlighting
the challenges to it, which include porous borders, local
and national dynamics in their countries and the varying
motives for the presence of those armed elements in
Libya. The withdrawals of foreign fighters should be
coordinated, sequenced and synchronized to ensure
that they do not become a threat to the security of their
home countries. The process should also contribute to
combating terrorism, illegal mining, human and drug
trafficking and all the forms of criminality that affect the
border areas.
The human rights situation continues to be tense.
During the reporting period, the civic space has been
further restricted and operations of civil-society
organizations have been deemed illegal. On 27 March,
the Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya issued
its final report (A/HRC/52/83), which expresses concern
about the situation and recommends further efforts to
combat impunity. Furthermore, on 15 March, the Working
Group on International Humanitarian Law and Human
Rights of the Berlin process presented the Presidential
Council with a set of principles resulting from the
dialogue on human rights in order to address Libyans’
concerns. I urge the Libyan authorities to live up to their
human rights obligations, end impunity and provide
more space for the work of civil-society organizations.
In conclusion, since my 27 February briefing to the
Security Council (see S/PV.9270) there has been a new
dynamic in Libya, with intensive consultations taking
place among security actors. Institutional and political
leaders have also acted to move the political process
forward. I urge Libya’s leaders to deliver on all their
commitments in order to meet the people’s expectation
that they will be able to choose leaders this year. My
interaction with the majority of the stakeholders,
the citizens of Libya and their initiative all point to a
new national dynamic that must be sustained and
amplified. The international community should also
remain mobilized and vigilant to further enable Libya’s
4/18

18/04/2023

institutions and political actors in taking action aimed
at the holding of elections. All international partners
should support the current momentum and speak with
one voice on Libyan matters. We are seeing a historic
opportunity opening up for overcoming the decade-long
crisis. UNSMIL will intensify its facilitation and
mediation through the multiple, interdependent and
mutually reinforcing axes of our comprehensive
approach in support of the realization of all political,
legal and security requirements so that elections can be
held this year. The people of Libya are eager to enter
a new dawn of peace, stability and prosperity during
their lifetime. Let us support them in achieving that
legitimate aspiration.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Bathily
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ishikane.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): In accordance with paragraph
24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011) of 26 February 2011, I
have the honour to report to the Security Council on
the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya. The report
covers the period from 17 December 2022 to 18 April
2023, during which time the Committee met once in
informal consultations and conducted additional work
using the silence procedure.
I would like to begin by saying that since this is
my first periodic report to the Security Council, I am
looking forward to working with all the members of the
Committee this year. During the informal consultations
held on 3 March, the Committee heard a presentation
by the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the
interim report of the Panel, submitted to the Committee
on 21 February in accordance with resolution 2644
(2022). After discussions, the Committee agreed to
take action on one of the recommendations addressed
to it. As a follow-up, the sanctions list was updated by
incorporating previous changes to the list entries into
the respective narrative summaries. The interim report,
which highlights aspects related to the implementation
of the travel ban, assets freezes, the arms embargo
and measures in relation to attempts to illicitly export
petroleum, including references to incidents of
non-compliance, was submitted to the Security Council
on 15 March.
With respect to the implementation of the arms
embargo measures, the Committee received a subsequent
written report on a seizure of cargo previously reported
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9306

and an attempted inspection report from the European
Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI. The
Committee also received a letter from Libya on matters
related to the arms embargo. The Committee considered
a request submitted by Morocco to authorize the export
of explosive items and non-explosive products to Libya
and concluded that the transfer did not fall within the
scope of the arms embargo. In both cases the Committee
received letters from the Panel of Experts with their
technical inputs. During the reporting period, the
Committee further received a note verbale from Malta
in connection with an arms embargo exemption request
previously approved and dispatched a letter to Libya
requesting updated information on some aspects of the
arms embargo’s implementation.

received a letter from Switzerland, as the country of
destination, notifying on the matter and a communication
from a representative of Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi
confirming her return to Egypt.

In connection with the measures aimed at preventing
illicit exports of petroleum from Libya, including crude
oil and refined petroleum products, the Committee is
considering a letter to Libya requesting updates on the
focal point pursuant to resolution 2146 (2014). Regarding
the assets-freeze measures, no negative decision was
taken by the Committee on exemption notifications
invoking paragraph 19 (a) of resolution 1970 (2011),
submitted by Bahrain, Luxembourg and Switzerland.
In addition, the Committee approved an exemption
request submitted by Luxembourg under paragraph
19 (b) of resolution 1970 (2011). The Committee had
no objection to the transfers of frozen assets from one
financial institution to another requested by the Bahamas
and Bahrain, respectively. The Committee responded to
a note verbale from Türkiye with further queries on the
scope of paragraph 27 of resolution 1973 (2011).

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
Committee’s commitment to contributing to the
promotion of peace and stability in Libya.

The Committee received three letters from Libya on
various aspects of the assets freeze, one of which has
been responded to while the other two remain under
the Committee’s consideration. The Committee is also
considering the response to a note verbale from Bahrain.
On 6 April, the Committee dispatched a note verbale to
all Member States on the exemptions and exceptions to
the assets-freeze measures. The Committee received a
follow-up letter from the Panel of Experts in connection
with two assets-freeze-related recommendations
contained in its final report under the previous mandate
(see S/2022/427). With regard to the travel ban measures,
the Committee received a travel notification from
Ms. Safia Farkash Al-Barassi for travel from Egypt to
Switzerland under a travel exemption granted previously
for unlimited travel within a six-month period for
humanitarian purposes. Subsequently, the Committee

With regard to the sanctions list, the Committee
received a letter from the Panel of Experts referring to
a recent case of a listed individual using forged United
Nations documentation in an attempt to circumvent the
travel ban and assets-freeze measures imposed on him as
a designated individual in Libya. The Committee is still
considering a de-listing requested by Libya.
Lastly, during the reporting period, the Committee
received four implementation reports, from Malta,
Serbia, Japan and Switzerland.

The President (spoke in Russian)
Ambassador Ishikane for his briefing.

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
Let me start by thanking Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Bathily and Ambassador Ishikane
Kimihiro for their briefings today. I would like to focus
on the political process, the role of security actors and
civil society.
The United Kingdom continues to support fully
Special Representative Bathily and his work in Libya. I
welcome Special Representative Bathily’s consultations
with an inclusive set of stakeholders. All Libyans, from
social leaders to civil society, have an important role to
play in Libya’s long-term efforts towards stability.
First, mediation, under the auspices of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), is key
for elections to succeed. It is vital to bind Libya’s
powerbrokers into an agreement that will enable the
holding of elections as soon as feasible, without risking
the progress achieved on peace and stability to date.
Mediation should take place between those empowered
to resolve key sticking points that have long delayed
Libya’s progress towards long-term security.
Secondly, I note positively the efforts of security
actors to come together in support of delivering successful
elections. Their initial commitments are welcome and

23-109965/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

should be the foundation for more substantive political
compromises that create the conditions for successful
elections. Security actors also have an important role
in committing to and upholding the security guarantees
necessary to enable Libyans’ access to safe, free and
fair elections.
Finally, as Special Representative Bathily said, the
crackdown on civil society is deeply concerning. Civic
space must be protected to empower all Libyans to play
a role in developing an open and democratic society. It is
incumbent on the Libyan authorities to rapidly develop
and clarify a sustainable legal mechanism that allows
for freedom of association, operation and assembly,
as guaranteed in the constitutional declaration.
Additionally, I encourage Special Representative Bathily
to continue to undertake meaningful engagement with
civil society to ensure that a wider range of Libyan voices,
including — as he mentioned — those of women and
young people, are heard throughout the political process.
There has been a positive start already to helping
Libya to find the solutions to its problems. We must
continue to work together constructively to support
the Libyan people to address long-standing issues. It is
only through coordinated efforts, with a leading role by
UNSMIL, that we can help to pave the way for elections
and beyond, to ensure that Libya achieves the stability
and prosperity its people deserve.

18/04/2023

regional initiatives to promote intra-Libyan dialogue and
provide support to that process.
Finally, we recall the responsibility to safeguard
the participation of women in political roles, including
elected women representatives, to ensure that they
contribute to political processes at all levels, free from
threats or reprisals.
In the light of the most recent developments in the
neighbouring country of the Sudan, which will have
consequences for the region, we welcome the recent
progress made in Libya on the security track by the 5+5
Joint Military Commission through the establishment
of a joint military force and liaison committees with
neighbouring countries, and we hope that this trend
will continue.
Any progress on the security track must be
accompanied by progress on the political front. That
is why, in order to organize free and fair elections, an
environment in which the rights to freedom of association,
expression and peaceful assembly can be exercised is
required. Switzerland is concerned about the arbitrary
arrests, intimidation and harassment that are preventing
civil society actors from expressing themselves freely.

Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Representative Bathily for his briefing. I
would also like to thank the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya for his briefing and his work as Chair
of the Committee. I welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Libya in today’s meeting.

Moreover, bureaucratic restrictions in the form of
registration requirements are stifling and criminalizing
the work of Libyan and international civil society
organizations. We need to be clear on this point: civil
society plays a fundamental role in promoting human
rights and the rule of law, and concrete steps must be
taken to protect the civil society space. For that reason,
Switzerland calls for the adoption of a law on civil society
organizations in Libya that complies with international
law. Several proposals for such a law have already been
drafted by Libyan organizations.

“We care for our homeland, for civil rights, and
we want our living conditions to be improved.” That
is a sample of what Libyans said during the series
of inclusive human rights dialogues organized by
Switzerland, as co-Chair of the Working Group on
International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights of
the Berlin process. That call by the Libyan people should
not be ignored. That is why we join others in calling for
free and fair elections and call on all Libyan stakeholders
to engage constructively and resolutely in that process.
In order to ensure that elections are held as soon as
possible, the international community must consistently
and unwaveringly support the Special Representative
and his recent initiative. Switzerland also welcomes the

Finally, we would like to express our alarm that the
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on Libya, mandated
by the Human Rights Council, has found that it has
reasonable grounds to believe that war crimes and
crimes against humanity have been committed in Libya,
including against migrants. The perpetrators of those
crimes must be held responsible and brought to justice.
Switzerland urges the Libyan authorities to cooperate
fully with the International Criminal Court. Migrant
children, in particular unaccompanied children, are
one of the most vulnerable groups. Nevertheless, they
continue to be held arbitrarily, together with adults, in
detention centres across the country, with limited access
to basic protection, health services and legal assistance.

6/18

23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

That injustice must stop. Switzerland firmly believes
that respect for human rights is essential to achieving
peace and stability in Libya, and we remain committed
to working with the international community to that end.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the
African members of the Security Council (A3), namely,
Gabon, Ghana and my own country, Mozambique.
We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his very
important and insightful briefing. We also thank His
Excellency Mr. Kimihiro Ishikane for his very insightful
briefing, and his updates as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya. We also welcome the participation of
the Permanent Representative of Libya, Ambassador
Taher Elsonni, at today’s meeting.
The A3 welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(S/2023/248).
Our statement will address the political, security,
economic and human rights issues of refugees and the
situation of migrants in Libya.
On the political front, we strongly commend the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bathily, for his engagement with Libyan actors in
addressing the current political situation in Libya in
an inclusive manner. We recognize his efforts to pave
the way for inclusive and credible presidential and
parliamentary elections in Libya, through dialogue
with various political and security figures, Government
officials, members of the House of Representatives,
the High State Council, the Presidential Council,
representatives of cultural components, tribal leaders
and civil society in general.
(spoke in English)
We highlight with appreciation the initiative by
Special Representative Bathily of establishing a highlevel panel for elections, aimed at assisting in the
organization and conduct of presidential and legislative
elections in the course of the current year 2023. In that
regard, we would like to encourage the collaborative
approach and support that the panel would provide
to the 6+6 committee so that Libyans can quickly
reach consensus on contentious issues, including the
development of a constitutional framework and a clear
road map for the holding of inclusive elections. We call

S/PV.9306

on the parties to come up with well-defined terms of
reference and timelines for the Committee for acceptance
by all relevant political actors. The parties must engage
constructively and in a spirit of compromise so that the
elections can take place in 2023, as the Libyan people
ardently wish. We also call on the parties to include
women and youth in this process.
The A3 wishes to reiterate that the peace process in
Libya must be Libyan-led and Libyan-owned, facilitated
by the United Nations and supported by the international
community, guided by an inclusive dialogue conducive
to national reconciliation. The A3 wishes further to
emphasize its call for the national-reconciliation process
to be part of any political arrangements, as this helps in
healing the political wounds among the Libyan political
actors. In this regard, we welcome the critical role of the
African Union, the Libyan Presidential Council, regional
organizations and the neighbouring countries.
We note, in particular, the communiqué of the
1136th meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council held on 1 February 2023, on the situation in
Libya, which called on the Libyan stakeholders to adhere
to the reconciliation process supported by the African
Union and the United Nations under the umbrella of the
Presidential Council in order to pave the way for the
inclusive national reconciliation conference expected to
take place in May 2023. We call on all political actors to
participate in this conference in good faith.
In order to enable a successful Libyan-led and Libyanowned political process, the Libyan political actors must
place the interests of Libyans above all considerations.
They must undertake prompt steps forward to finalize
the pending issues and lay the groundwork for fair,
inclusive and peaceful elections. In this regard, we urge
the different segments of Libyan society to engage in
the talks in good faith, so that all the efforts undertaken
so far will have made a meaningful contribution in the
promotion of inclusiveness and sustainable peace and
security in Libya.
With regard to the security situation, we take positive
note that the 2020 ceasefire agreement continues to hold,
despite the tense situation and security incidents in Libya.
We call on the parties to continue showing restraint by
fully complying with the ceasefire agreement, in order
to preserve the current path conducive to lasting peace
and security.
Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique strongly condemn
the presence of foreign forces on Libyan soil. This

23-109967/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

18/04/2023

presence undermines Libya’s territorial integrity
and the country’s ownership of the peace process.
The forces’ immediate departure is essential for a
favourable environment conducive to the advancement
of the ongoing political process leading to the holding
of elections in the course of the current year. In this
regard, we commend the 5+5 Joint Military Commission
and the liaison committees for their efforts to facilitate
the full withdrawal of foreign forces, as well as foreign
fighters, from Libya. We commend the efforts deployed
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in engaging different regional partners on this very
important matter.

resources, which must be accountable, transparent,
equitable and efficient for the benefit of the Libyan people.

We further commend the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission for bringing together military and security
leaders from the western, eastern and southern regions
to discuss how they can contribute to an environment
conducive to advancing the political process.

We reiterate our call for full respect for Libya’s
territorial integrity, sovereignty and national unity in
line with resolution 2656 (2022). Gabon, Ghana and
Mozambique reiterate their support to Mr. Bathily
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya in
their efforts to de-escalate tensions and build mutual
trust among the relevant Libyan actors, with a view to
finding a pathway towards the holding of presidential
and legislative elections conducive to lasting peace and
stability in Libya.

While we call for the full withdrawal of foreign
forces and foreign fighters from Libya, we are concerned
about the possible spillover effects in the Sahel and
their consequences for the security situation in the
region, which has continued to deteriorate as terrorism
has spread in West Africa. In the context, we call for
coordinated action to help manage the threat posed to
stability in the Sahel by the return of those foreign fighters
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
We further urge that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration efforts be concentrated not only in Libya
but also undertaken through a collaborative approach
with neighbouring countries and regional organizations.
Turning to the economic situation, the A3 is
concerned about the fact that the protracted conflict
and ongoing political crisis in Libya continue to
impact macroeconomic indicators and have a negative
effect on access to essential services, including in the
areas of health and education, particularly for the most
vulnerable. In particular, the disruptions to oil production
constrain economic growth and prevent Libyans from
fully harnessing their vast natural-resources potential in
order to finance development programmes and accelerate
progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals.
We want to emphasize here that Libya’s frozen assets
belong to and are protected and preserved for Libyans.
The delays in promulgating the national budget, as well
as reforming and reunifying the Central Bank of Libya,
are further exacerbating the problem. The situation
is jeopardizing the management of Libyan wealth and
8/18

With regard to human rights, the A3 strongly
condemns violations of the human rights of refugees and
migrants, including human trafficking, torture, sexual
and gender-based violence and extortion, as presented in
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/248). We demand
that refugees, migrants and asylum seekers be treated
humanely as a basic requirement of international law
and related legal instruments. We echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for alternatives to detentions in order to
manage migration in line with international law and
international human rights law.

Mr. Kelley (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Bathily for his
briefing on the situation in Libya, as well as the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) on Libya for his report.
We continue to unequivocally support the Special
Representative’s efforts to reach the political consensus
needed for Libyans to hold elections as soon as possible.
The frustration among the Libyan people over the
political stalemate is evident. Powerful actors continue to
undermine the path to elections. The interference has only
become more public since the failure to hold elections in
December 2021. It is time to build on past achievements
and the current momentum by constructively engaging in
the inclusive process outlined by Special Representative
Bathily towards a United Nations-facilitated road map to
elections as soon as is feasible. The United States urges
the 6+6 committee to contribute to that United Nationsled effort by immediately addressing the remaining
barriers to elections.
On sanctions, we remain concerned about the uptick
in trafficking both in illicit petroleum and arms. We
urge all Member States to prevent any illicit petroleum
shipments outside the National Oil Corporation, which
often fund destabilizing actors in Libya and steal
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

S/PV.9306

resources that rightly belong to the Libyan people. We
also continue to support strict adherence to the arms
embargo. We applaud the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI for the diversion of
vessels found to contain arms and related material that
could enable renewed conflict in Libya. The United
States welcomes the ongoing work of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission to unify Libya’s security forces
and fully implement the ceasefire agreement.

accompanied by the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of militias and the withdrawal of foreign
forces and mercenaries from Libya. France welcomes the
establishment of liaison committees for Chad, the Niger
and the Sudan to coordinate the withdrawal of African
mercenaries. The stability of Libya and its neighbours is
a priority for France, which will continue to support the
efforts of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
assist in the work of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission.

The withdrawal of foreign forces, foreign fighters and
mercenaries remains an essential element in maintaining
stability throughout Libya. The expulsion of Wagner
Group mercenaries is critical. The war in Ukraine has
laid bare what civilians in Libya and elsewhere in Africa
have known for years, which is that the Wagner Group is
a brutal organization that seeks only to advance its own
interests — and those of Russia — in Africa.

Libya’s political class must build on the security
gains made and meet the expectations of the Libyan
people for 2023, which are concurrent, inclusive, credible
and transparent presidential and parliamentary elections
throughout the country. The electoral process should
be free of corruption and intimidation and guarantee
equal opportunities for all candidates. To that end, the
executive must be able to organize the elections in an
absolutely neutral and transparent manner. Agreement
on a legal framework for the holding of elections and a
new political road map are imperative, and the process
should be finalized as quickly as possible. In that regard,
the House of Representatives and the High Council of
State have a responsibility vis-à-vis the Libyan people.
France reaffirms its full support for the efforts of the
Special Representative and his initiative to establish
an inclusive high-level panel to oversee the holding of
the elections.

With respect to human rights, the final report of
the Human Rights Council’s Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya (A/HRC/52/83) is dismaying. The
enumerated violations and abuses of the human rights
of men, women and children — and particularly
migrants — are horrific, and the situation appears to
be getting worse. The impunity with which State and
non-State actors have operated demonstrates an utter lack
of regard for the welfare of human beings in the pursuit
of money and power. There must be accountability for
those violations and abuses if national reconciliation is
to be achieved. The people of Libya have waited long
enough. It is time for Libya’s leaders to show progress
and demonstrate a willingness to put their nation’s
interests above their own.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Representative Bathily for his briefing.
France welcomes the recent progress achieved in the
implementation of the 2020 ceasefire agreement under
the auspices of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission,
with the two Chiefs of Staff and all security actors,
under the impetus of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General. Libyan security actors have
committed to reunifying the Libyan army and securing
the holding of elections, which gives reason for hope.
France welcomes the meeting of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission in Tripoli, the joint visits to Tripoli and
Benghazi by the Chiefs of Staff from western and
eastern Libya and their initiative to establish a joint
military force. That sends a strong message in terms of a
unified, sovereign and stable Libya. The process must be

Serious human rights violations are being
committed in Libya. Militias and foreign mercenaries
are acting with complete impunity. France condemns
the forced disappearances, arbitrary detentions and
torture and sexual violence committed against both
migrants and Libyans. The restrictions on freedom
of expression and association are disturbing. We call
on the Libyan authorities to end such violations and
combat impunity for those responsible. France calls for
an equitable and transparent redistribution of revenue
for the benefit of the entire population. The process of
reunifying the Central Bank must be accelerated. France
is committed to respecting the arms embargo and will
continue to support the European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI. All countries operating
in the Mediterranean should cooperate with IRINI and
abide by the relevant Security Council resolutions. A
sovereign, united, stable and democratic Libya is vital to
regional stability. In order to achieve that, the legitimacy
of political institutions must be restored through the
holding of national elections. France reiterates its full

23-109969/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

support for Special Representative Abdoulaye Bathily to
that end.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Bathily and Ambassador Ishikane for their briefings,
and I welcome Ambassador Elsonni, the Permanent
Representative of Libya, to this meeting. In the light of
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/248), I would like
to emphasize the following points.
First, we need to build synergy to advance the
political process. The House of Representatives
and the High State Council recently announced the
establishment of a joint 6+6 committee and held a
meeting to discuss the constitutional framework for
the holding of elections. Special Representative Bathily
has been in extensive communication with the Libyan
parties, while Egypt and other countries of the region
have made determined efforts through their good offices
and mediation work. In the current situation, there is a
consensus among all the parties on the need to break the
political deadlock, and synergy must be created to that
end. All the Libyan parties should continue to build on
their previous efforts to conduct dialogue, resolve their
differences and create the conditions necessary for the
holding of general elections as soon as possible. The
international community should follow the principle of
ensuring that the processes are Libyan-led and Libyanowned and should address the legitimate concerns of all
parties, give the political process constructive support
and avoid imposing external solutions. China supports
Special Representative Bathily in leading the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya to continue to step
up its good offices and mediation efforts to facilitate the
intra-Libyan dialogue.
Secondly, we need to consolidate the peace and
security mechanism. Under the chairmanship of
Mr. Bathily, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission has met
frequently in Tripoli and Benghazi, and the parties have
actively discussed the establishment of a unified security
institution. Libya and its neighbouring countries have
also agreed on establishing a coordination mechanism,
all of which China welcomes. At the same time, we
continue to see armed clashes and security incidents
in Libya. All parties should fulfil their ceasefire
commitments, increase their coordination, ensure a
balanced and coordinated withdrawal of foreign fighters
and mercenaries and avoid any action that might have a
negative impact on Libyan stability and regional security.
With the protracted fighting and turmoil, national
10/18

18/04/2023

reconciliation is a significant key to building consensus
on peace and reconstruction and on eliminating the root
causes of conflict. China supports the African Union in
taking the lead on convening a national reconciliation
conference with Libyan parties and looks forward to
its success.
Thirdly, we need to accelerate development and
reconstruction. Libya recently resumed exporting oil,
with increased momentum. All parties should make
compromises with a view to advancing the country’s
overall development and make additional efforts
in the areas of fiscal management, public services
and the improvement of people’s livelihoods. The
international community should participate actively in
Libya’s reconstruction and provide further support for
its economic recovery and development. All parties
should also cease any political interference, negotiate
to resolve their differences in managing the oil industry
and its revenue distribution and ensure that Libya
continues to manage its own oil industry and that more
of its oil revenues benefit its people. Lastly, the Libyan
Government has long been concerned about the loss of
the use of its frozen assets. The Security Council and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya should pay more attention to
that and take practical measures.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): We thank
Ambassador Ishikane, the Permanent Representative
of Japan, for his briefing in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, and I would like to congratulate him on
assuming its chairmanship earlier this year. He can count
on my delegation’s support as he steers the Committee’s
work during our term on the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Mr. Bathily, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, for his briefing. Brazil
supports his goal of enabling the Libyan stakeholders to
agree on the needed constitutional and legal framework
for the realization of elections in Libya in 2023, as well
as his approach to that goal. We further commend his
commitment to the principle of national ownership in
his extensive engagement with all Libyan stakeholders.
We underscore the importance of the fact that under his
leadership, the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) has continued to provide mediation and
good offices across Libya in support of a Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political transition, in compliance with
the Mission’s mandate. And I welcome the Permanent
Representative of Libya to this meeting.
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

We are hopeful that the Special Representative’s
proposal to establish a high-level panel for elections will
contribute to bringing all Libyan stakeholders together
in a manner that fosters a genuine intra-Libyan dialogue.
In our view, that dialogue should build on the progress
on the constitutional framework already achieved by the
House of Representatives and the High State Council,
whose continued role the Council acknowledged in its
latest presidential statement on Libya (S/PRST/2023/2).
The agreement between the two Libyan chambers
to establish a joint 6+6 committee may well help to
achieve the shared goal of holding elections in 2023. We
encourage the 6+6 committee to deliver concrete and
measurable results, with the necessary sense of urgency,
on the remaining issues in preparation for national
elections. Swift progress would help to dispel concerns
that the establishment and work of the new Committee
might compete with or stall the Special Representative’s
efforts to break the current political deadlock.
Brazil welcomes the fact that several Libyan
military and security leaders from all parts of Libya
have come together in meetings in Tunis, Tripoli and
Benghazi over the past weeks and months under the
auspices of UNSMIL. Their commitment to creating
an environment conducive to elections will be key to
ensuring the success of the political transition through
the ballot box. We also commend their efforts towards
unifying the armed forces.
The recent reinvigoration of the liaison committees
with neighbouring countries by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission represents an important step towards
the coordinated withdrawal of foreign fighters and
mercenaries from Libya. Given the relationship between
the situation in Libya and that of the Sahel, we further
emphasize the importance of regional coordination and
greater coherence among United Nations actors, including
UNSMIL and the missions and agencies operating in the
Sahel, as well as collaboration with the Peacebuilding
Commission. We acknowledge the efforts of Egypt in
support of the Joint Military Commission’s activities.
Brazil would like to remind the Council of the
role that the Peacebuilding Commission could play, at
Libya’s request, to help promote an integrated, strategic
and coherent peacebuilding approach in the country.
The Council acknowledged that role relative to the
situation in Libya last year in its adoption of resolution
2656 (2022), which renewed UNSMIL’s mandate. We
therefore encourage the Libyan authorities to engage

S/PV.9306

with the Peacebuilding Commission in order to mobilize
support for Libya’s national peacebuilding priorities in
full respect for its sovereignty.
Finally, Brazil remains concerned about the reports
by the Panel of Experts of violations of the arms embargo
established under resolution 1970 (2011). We reiterate
our call for strict compliance with the terms of the arms
embargo and with the sanctions regime generally. We
also reiterate our commitment to Libya’s sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special Representative
Bathily and the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya for
their briefings, and I would like to assure the Chair of
our full collaboration with the work of the Committee.
I also welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Libya in our meeting today.
The situation in Libya continues to warrant the
international community’s focus and support. Despite
the present calm, we remain concerned about the fragility
of the situation. We are encouraged by the Special
Representative’s inclusive efforts and consultations
with a broad range of actors to address the political
stalemate. Malta supports the high-level panel for
elections proposed by the Special Representative with
the aim of generating the impetus and consensus needed
to overcome the political impasse in Libya. We continue
to urge all Libyan parties and key stakeholders to engage
fully, constructively, transparently and in a spirit of
compromise with the Special Representative.
We take positive note of the decision by the House
of Representatives and the High State Council to task
a joint 6+6 committee to finalize the constitutional and
legislative framework for the elections. It is important for
such efforts to be complementary and mutually supportive
and to share the common objective of establishing the
legal and political consensus needed to conduct free,
fair, transparent, inclusive and secure elections. Malta
also emphasizes the importance of gender equality and
of ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all political processes. Civil-society
organizations and young people also have an important
role to play. In that regard, we regret the fact that there
are no women on the 6+6 committee, as Mr. Bathily
informed us today, and we urge him to act quickly to
remedy that.
It also remains crucial for the international community
to provide the necessary assistance and political support

23-1099611/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

to the United Nations and to the Libyan authorities for
the holding of such elections. The continued political
uncertainty continues to create a fragile and tense
security situation. The 5+5 Joint Military Commission
plays a crucial role in seeking to improve the situation
in Libya. In that regard, we welcome its recent meetings
with military and security commanders from across the
country, which are essential if progress is to be made
on the demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of
armed groups.
We are equally concerned about the continued
presence of foreign fighters, foreign forces and
mercenaries in Libya. Their full withdrawal should be
prioritized. We welcome the continuing work to achieve
that goal by the Joint Military Commission, in conjunction
with liaison committees from Libya, the Sudan, and the
Niger. We agree with Special Representative Bathily that
the withdrawal must be efficiently coordinated so to as
prevent potential ancillary problems from occurring.
Libya’s stability is being further undermined by the
proliferation of weapons controlled by various State and
non-State actors. Malta strongly believes in the full and
rigorous implementation of the sanctions mandated by
resolution 1970 (2011), as well as the compliance of all
Member States with the arms embargo. In that context,
we emphasize the role of European Union Naval Force
Mediterranean Operation IRINI. Malta underscores
the importance of supporting further efforts to enhance
Libya’s capacity to ensure its security and stability. We
also want to remind the Council that anyone obstructing
the political process, including by providing support
for armed groups in Libya, may be subject to United
Nations sanctions.
As the findings of the Independent Fact-Finding
Mission on Libya illustrate, the human rights situation
in Libya is a cause for concern. We are alarmed by the
previous cases and reports of intimidation, torture, sexual
assault and murder of women human rights defenders, and
we welcome the High National Elections Commission’s
efforts to track online violence against women. We stress
that human rights must be protected in Libya and apply
to all, without distinction. The continued shrinking of
the civic space in Libya is equally worrisome. We call
on all Libyan actors to promote freedom of expression,
opinion, association and peaceful assembly.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Malta’s
support for all efforts that seek to secure an inclusive,
peaceful, stable and prosperous present and future for all
12/18

18/04/2023

Libyans. We call on all regional and international players
to speak and act with one voice in advancing that goal.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Special Representative Bathily and
Ambassador Ishikane for their comprehensive briefings.
I also welcome Ambassador Elsonni to today’s meeting.
Since our last briefing on Libya (see S/PV.9270),
we have seen the Libyan parties take some positive
and encouraging steps in conjunction with intensive
engagement by Mr. Bathily. The Council has also spoken
in one voice in support of Libya and the United Nations
efforts in that regard, as reflected in its last presidential
statement (S/PRST/2023/2).
Considering those developments, we welcome
the progress achieved on the constitutional path with
respect to elections and the constitutional amendment
No. 13. We hope that the 6+6 joint committee meetings
in Tripoli will lay the legal foundation for the elections
process. We call on the parties to set a clear and serious
time frame that fulfils the expectations of the brotherly
people of Libya. In that regard, we commend the role
of the Arab Republic of Egypt in bringing the parties’
views closer together.
We reiterate the importance of prioritizing
reconciliation and dialogue among Libyan parties from
all regions and call on Mr. Bathily to continue his efforts
and good offices to achieve that goal, including through
his recent initiative to push for an inclusive political
process led and owned by Libyans. We also underscore
our support for the efforts of the Libyan Presidential
Council aimed at achieving real national reconciliation
as the main pathway towards achieving a comprehensive
and just political settlement that ends all transitional
stages. In that context, we stress the importance of
ensuring the full, meaningful and equal participation of
women in those efforts.
Establishing security remains a prerequisite
to achieving political stability and creating a safe
environment for holding concurrent presidential and
parliamentary elections that are free, fair, transparent
and inclusive. That requires a concurrent, phased,
gradual and balanced withdrawal of all foreign forces,
foreign fighters and mercenaries from Libya. My country
commends the efforts made by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) in facilitating and
holding the recent meetings of the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission (JMC) in Tripoli and Benghazi, in addition
to the most recent meeting between the Chiefs of Staff.
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

All of that constitutes extremely important steps forward.
We would also like to thank the members of the JMC for
their devoted and patriotic spirit, which demonstrates the
true Libyan will towards unifying military and security
institutions, including through creating a joint military
force, while continuing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts.
The international community must continue its full
support for those Libyan efforts aimed at strengthening
the values of tolerance and peaceful coexistence. Libyans,
in turn, must address and reject hate speech and extremist
voices seeking to undermine reconciliation efforts and
the recent convergence between Libyan parties. The
interests of the Libyan people and the country’s stability
must remain above all other considerations.
It is important to safeguard the gains achieved
by Libya in its fight against terrorism, including by
preventing Security Council measures from hampering
the efforts of Libyan forces to address security threats,
especially in southern Libya. That requires the Council
to give serious consideration to the sanctions regime
imposed on Libya, to ensure that it fits the current reality
and supports national efforts, rather than becoming a
disruptive tool.
To achieve stability in Libya and the surrounding
region, the international community must support the
Libyan efforts aimed at addressing irregular migration
and its root causes. The support must also be expanded
to include countries of origin and transit, as well as those
responsible for securing Libya’s southern borders.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates emphasizes
its support for the efforts made by Special Representative
Mr. Bathily and UNSMIL towards building peace and
achieving stability in Libya.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily for his briefing and
welcome the participation of the representative of Libya
at today’s meeting.
Since the previous Security Council briefing on
Libya (see S/PV.9270), we have witnessed some positive
developments towards the long-awaited elections. While
that is welcome, it is imperative that Libya and the
United Nations work together to ensure that the elections
are held before the end of this year. Japan fully supports
Special Representative Bathily’s initiative to achieve
that aim by launching the Libyan high-level panel for
elections. We encourage all international and regional

S/PV.9306

stakeholders to support this initiative. We highlight
the fact that the initiative is aimed at bringing together
all relevant Libyan actors, including representatives of
political institutions and political figures, tribal leaders,
civil society organizations, security actors, women and
youth. That will allow the panel, once it is established,
to pave the way for an inclusive, truly Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned political process.
At the same time, we commend the role played
by Egypt in facilitating talks between the House of
Representatives and the High State Council. Japan urges
both entities to finalize electoral laws as soon as possible
in order to bring about complete, final and time-bound
arrangements for holding elections before the end of
this year.
Turning to the security track, Japan commends the
military and security institutions’ positive engagement
towards creating an environment conducive to
advancing the political process and holding free and fair
elections. It is also laudable that the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission continues to play a positive role in moving
towards the reunification of security institutions and in
implementing the ceasefire agreement. In that regard,
we take positive note of the recent efforts by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya to further the dialogue
with neighbouring countries to the south and to reach out
to civil society on security sector reform.
On the economic track, we are concerned that
almost no step forward has been taken in the past
two months. A fair distribution of revenue through a
transparent participatory process is crucial. We welcome
the submission of seven human rights principles and
recommendations to the President of the Presidential
Council, which were prepared through dialogues in the
working group on international humanitarian law and
human rights.
Let me conclude by again reiterating our full support
for Mr. Bathily and his Mission and for the people
of Libya.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): I would also like to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Bathily
for his briefing. We support his efforts in the process of
enabling national elections in Libya this year through
a comprehensive and inclusive approach. I also thank
Ambassador Ishikane for his briefing in his capacity as
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

23-1099613/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

While we recognize the new momentum and
dynamics in Libya, the overall situation remains a source
of concern. We are happy to see positive developments in
the security and military field, and we welcome the 5+5
Joint Military Commission meetings with military and
security leaders. Every effort towards the unification of
the Libyan army is a step towards national reconciliation
and unity. We are particularly encouraged by the
engagement of military leaders in providing support for
the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2023.
Unfortunately, on the political front, despite the
efforts being made, the impasse continues, and so
does the legitimacy crises of the institutions, leaving
unanswered the hopes of millions of Libyans who
want and deserve to be heard about the future of their
country. The political leaders must respond to those
aspirations, leave behind their narrow interests and
embrace a firm path towards holding the presidential
and parliamentary elections across the country in 2023.
The leaders must understand that the Libyan transition
must go through agreed solutions based on political
will to secure the legal foundation for an environment
conducive to the holding of national elections. Just like
their military counterparts, they should not get locked
into playing tricks that generate indefinite delays that
perpetuate the unsustainable status quo. Such a process
should be participatory, transparent and consensual. The
involvement of women, young people, civil society and
all factions of Libyan society is crucial for its credibility
and outcome.
We reiterate our call for the withdrawal of all foreign
forces, foreign fighters and mercenaries. Libya should
build its future without any foreign interference.
Needless to say, the political deadlock is also
having a detrimental impact on the Libyan economy and
the well-being of the Libyan people. We reiterate our
position that Libya’s national resources should be used
for the benefit of all Libyans and must be redistributed in
a fair and equitable manner.
While Libya struggles to find the entry point to
its future, the human rights situation has seriously
deteriorated. War crimes and crimes against humanity
such as arbitrary detention, murder, rape, enslavement,
extrajudicial killings and enforced disappearances,
including against migrants, committed by State
security forces and armed militia groups must be fully
investigated, and those responsible must be held to
14/18

18/04/2023

account. We reiterate our call on the Libyan authorities
to take decisive steps to provide justice and redress
to the vast number of victims suffering from longstanding violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Libya needs, without delay, a responsible political
process leading to free and fair elections. It needs a
national reconciliation process based on the principles of
transitional justice and respect for human rights and the
needs of all Libyans, including victims of violations and
abuses. That is the only way to help Libyans to heal the
wounds of the past and chart the path ahead.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, and the Permanent Representative
of Japan, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for their informative briefings.
We also welcome the Permanent Representative of Libya,
Ambassador Taher Elsonni, to this meeting.
Ecuador welcomes the continued efforts and
initiatives of Special Representative Bathily to find a
lasting solution to the political crisis and to achieve peace
and stability in Libya. His extensive interactions with all
parties in the country and the region are most decisive.
With regard to the most recent developments in
Libya, I would like to make the following points.
First, the progress recorded on the political front
is encouraging. The establishment of the joint 6+6
committee of the High State Council and the House of
Representatives, as well as the initiative of the Special
Representative to establish a high-level panel, are all
important steps towards completing Libya’s political
transition and holding fair, transparent, inclusive and
secure national presidential and parliamentary elections
in 2023. We hope that, within a framework of cooperation
and transparency, those initiatives will consolidate the
progress made, resolve outstanding issues and reach
agreements as soon as possible on key issues, such as
the constitutional basis for elections. There is no doubt
that the holding of elections represents an important
path towards peace and stability, as it will allow for
the establishment of legitimate public institutions
that contribute to the rule of law. We therefore call for
the elections to be held in a peaceful, transparent and
inclusive environment that guarantees the participation
of the population.
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

Secondly, Ecuador welcomes the work of the 5+5
Joint Military Commission on upholding the 2020
ceasefire agreement, as well as the discussions held and
the commitments reached with various armed groups.
Thirdly, we express our deep concern about the
deteriorating humanitarian and human rights situation,
as reflected in the final report of the Independent FactFinding Mission on Libya. We are particularly alarmed by
the continuing violations of the human rights of migrants
and refugees, especially children. Libya must comply
with its obligations under international law regarding the
detention and return of migrants and refugees.
All those responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity must be brought to justice. Truth
and justice are fundamental elements for achieving
peace. Cooperation from the Libyan authorities is thus
indispensable in preventing impunity.
Fourthly, regarding the situation of women, we
appreciate the presentation of a draft law to combat
violence against women to the Committee on Women’s
and Children’s Affairs. We hope that violence against
women and girls will now cease and that their rights
to participate in public and political life, including in
the ongoing political and reconciliation processes, will
be guaranteed. We commend the efforts of the Libyan
experts in charge of drafting that law, as well as the
facilitation role played by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, UN-Women and the United Nations
Population Fund.
In conclusion, I reiterate Ecuador’s respect for
Libya’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, as well
as our support for the country in its quest for peace
and stability, through an autonomous and nationally
owned process.
The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.
We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily, for his briefing. We also
thank Ambassador Ishikane Kimihiro, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for his report on the activities
of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
We continue to closely follow developments in the
situation in Libya. The achievement of normalization

S/PV.9306

and the maintenance of stability and security in Libya
are important not only for that country and its people,
but also plays a key role in ensuring the continued
development of North Africa as a whole. The main goal
at this stage is to promote a just, lasting and sustainable
settlement through a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned
political process, without any external interference.
The cornerstone of that process is the holding
of general presidential and parliamentary elections.
We hope that the stated intentions of the House of
Representatives and the High State Council to finalize
the legal framework for the upcoming elections will
materialize as scheduled — that is, by June 2023. We
welcome the steps being taken to that end, including
the approval of an updated version of the constitutional
declaration and the establishment of the specialized joint
6+6 committee.
We call on Libyan leaders to continue to seek
reasonable compromise. We emphasize that the
entire spectrum of Libyan political forces, including
representatives of the former Government, must be
included in the electoral process in a non-discriminatory
manner. That is the only way to ensure harmony within
society on the outcome of the upcoming elections and
avoid any further deterioration of the politico-military
situation, which would be dangerous. A similar principle
would also guarantee the success of the national
reconciliation process. In that regard, we welcome
the efforts of the African Union to organize a panLibyan conference.
Of equal importance is cooperation on the security
track. We welcome the outcome of the most recent
meeting of the 5+5 Joint Military Commission in
Benghazi, Libya, during which participants reaffirmed
their readiness to provide as much support as possible to
ensure the security of the upcoming elections. Besides
that, we note how essential it is to ramp up efforts to create
the conditions needed to integrate the country’s disparate
military components into a unified Libyan army. That
will take a great deal of energy and political will. We
also support the ongoing work to eliminate the foreign
military presence in Libya, including the establishment
of liaison subcommittees with Libya’s neighbours under
the auspices of the Joint Military Commission. Our
position on the issue has not changed. The withdrawal of
all non-Libyan armed forces, groups and military units
must be carried out in a synchronized, balanced, gradual
and phased manner in order to maintain a balance of
forces on the ground.

23-1099615/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

We want to emphasize the particular importance of
coordinating the consolidated good-faith efforts of the
international community aimed at putting an end to this
protracted conflict. The role of the United Nations and
its key tool, UNSMIL, are more important than ever in
resolving the crisis. We once again express our support
for Mr. Bathily in his tireless efforts to find acceptable
ways out of the internal political impasse, advance
the political dialogue in a meaningful way and assist
in holding inclusive, representative and transparent
elections as soon as possible. At the same time, we
believe that a political settlement in Libya should not
create an arena for international competition. That is
first and foremost because the Libyan people need to be
able to finally emerge from the crisis provoked by the
NATO aggression in 2011 and put an end to all forms
of foreign interference. We therefore consider any
unilateral initiatives aimed at creating parallel formats
for a settlement without the participation of Libya itself
and other stakeholders to be counterproductive.
Unfortunately, the situation is not helped by the
short-sighted policies of various international actors
that continue to use the pretext of their commitment to
reach a political settlement to exploit Libya’s instability
for their own interests, not least among them the energy
sector. We believe that all issues related to the control
of oil infrastructure and export operations should be
resolved by the Libyans themselves. We should take a
similar approach to safeguarding Libya’s frozen assets,
which in future should be used for the benefit of the
Libyan people. The key players in that regard must
not be allowed to have a double agenda. We want to
remind the Council that both the revenue from the sale
of hydrocarbons and the frozen assets are intended for
fostering economic recovery and improving the lives of
ordinary people, and we call on all our colleagues on the
Council to approach the settlement of the Libyan issue
in that spirit.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elsonni (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on presiding over the Security Council this month
and to thank you for convening this meeting. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Ishikane, Permanent
Representative of Japan, in his new capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
16/18

18/04/2023

1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his briefing. I wish
him every success. I also thank Mr. Abdoulaye Bathily
for his briefing, his efforts during the reporting period
and his many meetings within and outside Libya. In
addition, we align ourselves with the statement made by
the representative of Mozambique on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council.
Almost a year ago, we made a statement to the
Council (see S/PV.9047) in which we tried to convey
the voice of Libyan citizens by directly posing their
questions to Council members. Today I want to try once
again to honestly convey their voices as well as I can,
in the hope that members can find convincing answers
to their questions. Last year we said that our people
believe that many of the members have made the same
statements again and again with no effective or real
result, and that frequently nothing new is said. That is
sadly the opinion of most of our citizens, regardless of
their affiliation, especially as they follow current events
and wonder what to expect next. And that is why many
of them keep asking me to remind Council members of
their moral responsibility vis-à-vis the events that have
unfolded in Libya since 2011. Just to show that nothing
has changed, I want to cite part of my statement from one
of the Council’s meetings on Libya last year.
“We are facing another dilemma that Libyan
citizens cannot really understand. On the one hand,
the Council calls for compliance with Security
Council resolutions, international agreements,
dialogues and road maps, while, on the other hand,
it calls for respect for a genuine Libyan-led and
Libyan-owned solution....
“Libyan citizens and political leaders are
confused. Libyans hope for a Libyan consensus
in order to end this vicious cycle. We also hope
that the dialogue ... will be successful and reach a
constitutional agreement that will lead to elections.
However, the same questions arise. Where will things
stand if the [consensus] fails? ... What will be the
Security Council’s position against the obstructers if
[the consensus is only partial]?
“Those are the questions being asked by the
Libyan people, who are hoping that the Security
Council will be able to answer them. Libyan citizens
do not care for provisions of laws. What really matters
to them is stability and safety.” (S/PV.9047, p.15)
I believe that all those questions continue to be
legitimate and to apply to the current situation in Libya.
23-10996

18/04/2023

The situation in Libya

Despite all the challenges, we always try to remain
optimistic. After exhausting negotiations with Council
members, we took note of presidential statement
S/PRST/2023/2, adopted on 16 March, which stresses the
importance of renewing the momentum for establishing
the legal and constitutional framework for holding free,
fair, transparent comprehensive and safe presidential
and parliamentary elections in Libya this year in order to
complete the country’s political transition process.
In that regard, we once again stress the importance
of focusing all efforts and initiatives on supporting the
ongoing dialogues in order to achieve a comprehensive
Libyan consensus on a just and fair constitutional
foundation, along with non-exclusionary election laws
that give everyone the opportunity to participate based
on a clear timetable. That should take place in conditions
conducive to holding presidential and parliamentary
elections. Let the Libyan people be the decisive factor
in ending all the fragile transitional phases and avoiding
past mistakes.
In that regard, we welcomed the Security Council’s
response in its presidential statement, because it
responded to the Government’s request that a team be
sent to assess the need for technical and logistical support
for the electoral process. We call on the United Nations
to support the High National Election Commission,
together with all the relevant national and civilsociety institutions, while coordinating with regional
and international organizations. We need the all the
technical preparations necessary for voter registration,
vote counting, supporting polling stations and providing
monitors. That will guarantee the holding of fair and
transparent elections whose results will be accepted
by all. For our part, we held our first meeting with the
United Nations Electoral Assistance Division to discuss
those issues in which we confirmed that the assessment
team will visit Libya in the next few weeks and meet
with most of the parties concerned throughout Libya. A
summary of the Government’s activities was presented
at the meeting, along with the existing challenges. We
are currently collaborating in order to determine the
support we need from the United Nations to make this
national entitlement a success across the country.
As we have said many times, we continue to be
optimistic and commend the patriotic spirit that has
prevailed during the ongoing meetings between the
members of the Joint Military Commission and a number
of security leaders in the east, west, north and south of
the country, in which they all positioned themselves

S/PV.9306

independently of political interests. Those meetings,
which are considered a continuation of work that began
last year and are aimed at strengthening and building
trust, are an important and essential step in the work of
beginning to unify the military institutions and building
the nucleus of a unified Libyan army under civilian
authority. In turn, the army will work to protect Libya’s
territory, secure its borders and end every form of
foreign presence in the country. As we heard today, the
military and security leaders have repeatedly reiterated
that they are ready to provide all the support needed to
secure the elections at every stage and to take practical
measures to address problems related to the return of
displaced persons and refugees and uncovering the fate
of missing persons.
With regard to the issues of border security and the
stability of the region, we cannot ignore the precarious
current situation in our brother country and neighbour
the Sudan, where we hope that the ongoing fighting will
stop, bloodshed will be prevented, and the ongoing cycle
of conflict will end as soon as possible. That situation will
undoubtedly have a direct and negative impact not only
on the Sudan but on its neighbours and Libya, especially
southern Libya, which continues to suffer more from the
scourges of war, division and foreign interferences. The
events of the past years have taught us lessons. We again
call on all the countries concerned with the Libyan file
to work seriously and effectively to find a comprehensive
political solution and to support our stability, because it
inevitably has a direct effect on the stability, safety and
security of its neighbours and the region. In that context,
we welcome the recent meetings and rapprochement
among influential countries in the region, which we hope
will help to create a consensus of views in support of the
desire of Libyans to end the conflict and emerge from
this crisis, without any of the negative interventions that
have happened in previous years.
Today we listened to many statements that focused
in particular on issues related to human rights, migration,
terrorism and even civil society. We should all know
that those issues, especially immigration and terrorism,
are the consequences of the crisis situation in Libya for
which all share responsibility, because had there been
no negative interventions over the years and matters
had been left in the hands of the Libyan people, we
would not be dealing with the situation we have today.
While undoubtedly there are some aspects that must be
improved, the responsibility is nonetheless shared.

23-1099617/18

S/PV.9306

The situation in Libya

The migration issue does not originate from inside
Libya, because as we all know very well, Libya is a
transit country. We all know that there are international
networks that finance human trafficking. They also
finance hotbeds of terrorism. That being so, where did
Council members discuss holding those international
networks accountable, from the countries of origin to the
receiving countries? We heard nothing about that. That
does not mean that we are abandoning our responsibility
to consider humanitarian cases. But if the international
community really wants to solve the crisis, let us start by
resolving the political issues and the division, and then
we can ensure that the problem is solved and the issue
of our immigrant brothers can be contained. If Council
members really find the situation so distressing, why
do they not themselves take in those migrants, those
children and women, until the political problems within
my country are resolved? We should all understand that
the responsibility for this is shared.
Despite all that has been said today, we are
optimistic, and we have begun to see some stability
throughout the country during this period, especially in
the blessed month of Ramadan, when we have sensed
a mood of tolerance, brotherhood and communication
between the people of the country, with those who were
enemies not long ago now cordially shaking hands. That
does not mean that all the wounds have healed or that the
fight for victims’ rights has been abandoned. However,
the path to achieving stability and building State and
law institutions needs concessions and sacrifices. We
have great confidence in Libya’s citizens, especially
the new generation of young men and women who have
matured and become more aware. We are also confident
that we will overcome the crisis through our national
efforts. Whatever the challenges, we are moving towards
achieving reconciliation, bridging the rifts and restoring
our national sovereignty while ensuring that Libya has
the international and global status that it deserves.

18/18

18/04/2023

Before I conclude, as we speak about the holy month
of Ramadan and at a time when last night and today the
entire Islamic world is celebrating Laylat Al-Qadr, the
night on which the noble Qur’an was revealed to our
Prophet Mohammed, I want to reaffirm in this Chamber
Libya’s strong condemnation of the recent acts of some
extremists, specifically in Europe, in which they set the
Qur’an on fire in a desperate attempt to provoke Muslims
on a pretext of exercising freedom of expression before
the eyes and ears of their countries. It comes at a time
when we are all working on the basis of international
resolutions to combat the problem of Islamophobia.
We therefore call on all the countries concerned
to work to stop those acts, educate their citizens and
abandon double standards, especially when it comes to
freedom of expression, because such acts fuel violence
and threaten peace within society as well as international
peace and security. That is because those people and
their backers who profit from such acts employ extremist
and terrorist ideologies, using such acts to justify their
crimes in the name of religion. The Islamic religion
rejects them all, because Islam is as far as it can be
from hatred, radicalism and extremism. It is a religion
of mercy, tolerance, coexistence and peace. To quote the
Holy Qur’an,
“We created you from a single (pair) of a male
and a female, and made you into nations and tribes,
that ye may know each other. Indeed, the most noble
of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous
among you.” (The Holy Qur’an, XLIX:13).
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at noon.

23-10996
