S/2003/1077

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 November 2003
Original: English

Letter dated 10 November 2003 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As you will recall, I dispatched a multidisciplinary assessment mission to the
Central African subregion from 8 to 22 June 2003, pursuant to a request of the
Security Council, contained in its presidential statement of 31 October 2002
(S/PRST/2002/31), to explore ways to implement a comprehensive, integrated and
resolute approach to the issues of peace, security and development in Central Africa.
The mission visited all 11 States members of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), and submitted its report to me on 10 September 2003.
I am pleased to bring to the attention of the Security Council the findings of
the mission. I am in general agreement with the assessment made by the mission. I
also believe that there is a need for greater coordination and coherence in the
activities of the different components of the United Nations system. While the
assessment of the peace and security aspects adequately covers all the key issues,
there is a need to undertake further examination of the root causes of the conflicts
that have plagued some of the countries in the subregion. I have, therefore,
requested that a thorough review of the programmes of the United Nations be
carried out, with a view to enhancing their coherence and effectiveness. I intend to
keep the Council informed of developments in this respect.
The United Nations will continue to be involved in the search for long-term
peace and stability in the subregion, providing the necessary support to the States
members of ECCAS. During meetings with the mission, most of the Governments in
the subregion expressed their desire for an enhanced United Nations presence,
including through the establishment of a United Nations office. I am however
concerned about the proliferation of offices, bearing in mind that there are already a
number of United Nations structures in the subregion, including three offices headed
by Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
There are also numerous initiatives that encompass a large number of the 11
ECCAS member States, some of which are also part of other subregional groupings.
As the Council is aware, many of the countries concerned will be involved in the
International Conference for the Great Lakes region, which is expected to result in a
regional framework to enhance stability, security, cooperation and development.
Under these circumstances, and without first carrying out the review mentioned
above, it would not be possible to make an objective assessment of the need for
establishing a new office in Central Africa.

03-57255 (E)

121103

*
0
3
5
7
2
5
5
*

S/2003/1077

I am proposing, however, to appoint a Special Envoy who would be
available — as required — to work on political issues with Governments in the
subregion, and who would also interface with the United Nations entities involved in
development and humanitarian activities in Central Africa. One of the key priorities
will be to identify concrete measures to support the capacity of ECCAS and other
mechanisms that the countries in the subregion have established. I shall ensure that
the Special Envoy works in full consultation and collaboration with my Special
Representatives in the subregion so as to avoid duplication of effort.
With the concurrence of the Council, I intend to proceed with the approach that
I have outlined as early as possible. I should be grateful if you would bring the
present letter and its attachment to the attention of the members of the Security
Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

S/2003/1077

Interim report of the multidisciplinary assessment mission
to the Central African subregion
Summary
A United Nations multidisciplinary assessment mission visited Central Africa
from 8 to 22 June 2003 to undertake a review of the priority needs and challenges
confronting the subregion, focusing especially on issues of peace, security,
economic development, humanitarian affairs, human rights and HIV/AIDS, and to
define the appropriate subregional strategies to address those challenges. The
assessment was conducted in partnership with the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), the principal subregional institution responsible for peace
and security in Central Africa. The Secretary-General authorized the mission
pursuant to the request of the Security Council in its presidential statement of 31
October 2002 (S/PRST/2002/31), to explore ways in which the United Nations could
support Central African States in developing a comprehensive and integrated
subregional approach to the issues of peace, security and development in Central
Africa.
The mission, headed by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Tuliameni Kalomoh, visited all of the 11 States members of ECCAS. It sought to
define the strategies that could be employed to strengthen the effectiveness of
subregional institutions in the area of peace and security. The mission held extensive
consultations with Governments, political and civil society leaders, business leaders
and representatives of trade unions, subregional institutions, members of the
diplomatic community, and United Nations agencies and programmes.
The mission concluded the visit to the subregion with a strong sense of a
striking paradox, namely, that Central Africa is potentially one of the richest
subregions in Africa but also contains the largest number of States that fall among
the lowest in almost all human development indices. Central Africa is also mired in
armed conflicts, many of them recurrent and persistent over many years, countless
crises of governance, proliferation of small arms, the fragility of the security sectors,
cross-border movement of weapons, drugs and armed groups, mass movements of
refugees, underdevelopment of infrastructure, widespread poverty and weak State
institutions, all of which have had a debilitating effect on the subregion’s overall
socio-economic and political performance.
The mission concluded that, as a result of the cross-cutting and other
challenges that transcend national boundaries, an integrated and holistic subregional
approach is required to complement national solutions and lay a durable foundation
for the solutions.
Despite the many problems that are highlighted in the present report, the
mission also concluded that the prospects for positive change remain high,
especially if the international community maintains and intensifies its partnership
with subregional organizations, Governments and civil society groups to address the
problems confronting Central Africa.
All the countries visited, except one, specifically called for the setting-up of a
political presence of the United Nations in the subregion, through the establishment
of an office in Central Africa. Such an office would, they argued, facilitate the
implementation of a comprehensive and integrated approach to the issues of peace,
security and development in the subregion.

3

S/2003/1077

I. Introduction
1.
At the open meeting of the Security Council held on 22 October 2002 on
strengthening cooperation between the United Nations system and the Central
African region in the maintenance of peace and security, which was attended by
several Foreign Ministers from the subregion, Council members called for
international support for regional initiatives to consolidate recent progress towards
peace in the area. On 31 October 2002, in continuation of its discussion on the item,
the Council issued a presidential statement (S/PRST/2002/31) in which it affirmed
the need to promote and strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and the
Central African States in the field of peace and security. The Council called on the
Central African States, with the support of the United Nations, to improve the
effectiveness, coordination and cohesion of organizations in the subregion. The
Council also emphasized the importance of a comprehensive, integrated, resolute
and concerted approach to the issues of peace, security and development in Central
Africa and, in that connection, invited the Secretary-General to report to the Council
within six months on ways to implement such an approach for Central Africa,
including through the dispatch to the region of an inter-agency evaluation mission.
2.
On 17 April 2003, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Tuliameni Kalomoh, on behalf of the Secretary-General, briefed Council members
on the various efforts undertaken by the United Nations to promote durable peace in
Central Africa. He informed the Council of the Secretary-General’s intention to
dispatch a multidisciplinary assessment mission to Central Africa to explore ways
and means to implement a comprehensive and integrated approach to the issues of
peace, security and development in the subregion.
3.
In a statement to the press following that meeting, Security Council members
re-emphasized the importance of a comprehensive, integrated, resolute and
concerted approach to the issues of peace, security and development in Central
Africa and welcomed the Secretary-General’s intention to dispatch a
multidisciplinary assessment mission to the subregion. They furthermore invited
him to submit to the Security Council at the end of that mission a report with
recommendations on measures to be taken for the implementation of such a global
approach. The present report is submitted pursuant to the Council’s request.

II. Establishment and activities of the mission
4.
The multidisciplinary assessment mission visited the Central African
subregion from 8 to 22 June 2003. Headed by the Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs the mission comprised representatives of the following
departments, offices, agencies and programmes of the United Nations system:
Department of Political Affairs, Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
Department for Disarmament Affairs, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Office
of the United Nations Security Coordinator, United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat). As the role of the United
Nations in this endeavour is essentially to support the efforts of regional States and
institutions, the mission was carried out in close partnership with the main
subregional institution responsible for issues of peace, security and subregional

4

S/2003/1077

integration in Central Africa, namely the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS). The Deputy Secretary-General of ECCAS and a senior military
officer therefore also participated in the mission.
5.

The mission’s terms of reference were the following:

(a) To identify priority needs and challenges in Central Africa in the areas of
peace, security, economic and social development, humanitarian affairs and human
rights, including the inter-linkages between those needs and challenges;
(b) To consult with Governments and subregional institutions in Central
Africa on ways and means of enhancing cooperation with the United Nations in
addressing those needs and challenges;
(c) To identify subregional measures to be implemented by the Economic
Community of Central African States 1 and the Central African Economic and
Monetary Community (CEMAC), 2 with the cooperation of the United Nations, to
help to address the needs and challenges identified;
(d) To make recommendations on how best the international community can
support specific programmes designed to strengthen the effectiveness of subregional
efforts and institutions in the area of peace and security.
6.
The mission visited all 11 States members of ECCAS, namely, Gabon,
headquarters of ECCAS (8, 10 and 22 June), Sao Tome and Principe (9 June), the
Republic of the Congo, current chair of ECCAS and CEMAC (10 and 11 June),
Angola (12 and 13 June), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (13-15 June),
Burundi (15 and 16 June), Rwanda (16 and 17 June), Cameroon (17 and 18 June),
Equatorial Guinea (19 June), Chad (19 and 20 June) and the Central African
Republic, CEMAC headquarters (21 and 22 June).
7.
The mission met with heads of State or Government, other senior government
officials, leaders of main political parties, representatives of civil society and nongovernmental organizations, business and religious leaders and members of the
diplomatic community. The mission also held working sessions with the United
Nations country teams in all the countries visited. In Libreville, Kinshasa,
Bujumbura and Bangui, the mission was briefed, respectively, by the military
components of CEMAC, the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), the African Union, the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central African Republic as well as
CEMAC officers in Bangui. In addition, the mission held discussions with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, and
with the Secretary-General and other senior secretariat officials of ECCAS.
8.
The various interlocutors welcomed the mission as an important reaffirmation
of the United Nations commitment to remain engaged in the subregion and to assist
them in dealing with the numerous problems confronting Central Africa. Among the
issues discussed were the economic and political relations among and within
ECCAS member States, peace and security concerns, peace-building and
peacekeeping efforts in the subregion, conflict situations in the Central African
__________________
1 The following 11 countries are members of ECCAS: Angola, Burundi, Cameroon, Central

African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
Rwanda and Sao Tome and Principe.
2 The following six countries are members of CEMAC: Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon.

5

S/2003/1077

Republic and the Great Lakes region, in particular the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Burundi, disarmament, reintegration and repatriation of former
combatants, cross-border incursions, illegal arms trafficking, illegal exploitation of
national resources, proliferation of arms and cross-border movements of bandits and
militias, landmines, the need to promote national reconciliation and political
dialogue, governance, human rights and humanitarian issues, the weaknesses of
subregional institutions and the need to strengthen their capacities and to enhance
cooperation with the United Nations, the HIV/AIDS pandemic, poverty reduction
and other economic and development issues, the need for capacity-building and
regional integration, and issues affecting children, including child trafficking,
prostitution, teenage pregnancies, the problems of street children and child soldiers.
9.
Most interlocutors called on the United Nations to be more proactive in the
prevention and management of conflicts in the subregion. Pointing to the
weaknesses of their subregional institutions, regional leaders specifically requested
the assistance of the United Nations in strengthening the operational capacities of
those organizations. Many also underlined the need for enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and subregional organizations, especially in the
implementation of a comprehensive and integrated subregional approach to dealing
with the issues of peace, security and development in Central Africa. To that end, all
the countries visited, except one, called for the setting-up of a political presence of
the United Nations in the subregion, through the establishment of an office in
Central Africa. Such an office would, they argued, facilitate the implementation of
the proposed approach.

III. Background
10. The Central African subregion, which comprises the 11 ECCAS member
States, has a combined population of approximately 115 million and covers a land
area estimated at about 6.6 million square kilometres. A particularly striking
paradox in Central Africa is the fact that it is potentially one of the richest
subregions in Africa, greatly endowed with a wide variety of natural resources (for
instance eight ECCAS countries 3 are either current or future oil producers) but, at
the same time, it is the subregion containing the largest number of countries that
rank lowest in almost all of the human development indices. The subregion is also
characterized by the recurrence of armed rebellions and conflicts that have
hampered its development efforts over decades. In 7 of the 11 countries visited, over
50 per cent of the population lives below the poverty line. Seven of the countries —
Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda — are either in conflict or in post-conflict
situations. Only Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Sao Tome and Principe
have been unaffected by direct conflict and appear to be enjoying relative stability.
11. Many critical cross-cutting challenges, including ethnic tensions, refugee
movements, armed rebellions, cross-border incursions, non-inclusive governance,
fragile national dialogue and reconciliation processes, nationality concerns,
widespread poverty and deprivation are common to the subregion and would need to
be addressed if sustainable peace and progress are to advance in the countries
concerned. As a result of those critical problems, subregional integration, vital for
__________________
3 Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon

and Sao Tome and Principe.

6

S/2003/1077

long-term stability and development, has been slow in coming. The fact that some
ECCAS member States belong to other subregional organizations, such as CEMAC,
the Southern African Development Community and the Common Market for Eastern
and Southern Africa, has also not facilitated regional integration in Central Africa.
12. Sustained efforts have been made at various levels to help Central Africa to
stabilize the situation and lay the foundations for durable peace and stability. To that
end, the six States members of CEMAC, the members of the Community of SaheloSaharan States, 4 and the African Union and the United Nations have been
particularly active. In addition, Central African States have benefited through
bilateral efforts with countries and institutions outside the region to enhance their
capacities to manage crisis situations and participate in peacekeeping operations.
13. United Nations support has included the development and enhancement of
capabilities for early warning and conflict prevention, and the deployment of peacebuilding offices and peacekeeping operations. Currently, United Nations peacebuilding offices are deployed in two countries in Central Africa, Burundi and the
Central African Republic, while a peacekeeping operation (MONUC) is deployed in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, based in
Nairobi, and the dispatch of several special envoys to the subregion further
contribute to United Nations peace endeavours in Central Africa.
14. United Nations contributions have also included the establishment, in May
1992, of the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa, with the objective of promoting arms limitation, disarmament and
confidence-building measures among members of ECCAS. Since its establishment,
the Committee has provided the main forum under which ECCAS member States
meet on a regular basis to discuss and exchange information on peace and security
challenges in the subregion.
15. Despite these various efforts, Central Africa continues to encounter enormous
pressures in the political, economic, social and security areas, which have
perpetuated politico-military crises in the countries directly affected and beyond,
especially as many of the crises and their consequences frequently affect or
otherwise threaten to spill over into neighbouring countries.

IV. Priority needs and challenges
A.

Peace and security
16. The continuing fragility of democratic political processes in the subregion was
demonstrated most recently by the coup d’état in the Central African Republic in
March 2003 and the attempted coup in Sao Tome and Principe in July 2003. In his
report of 13 April 1998 on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa (A/52/871-S/1998/318), the SecretaryGeneral observed that the causes of conflict in Africa vary, reflecting the diversity
and complexity of the continent. They include historical legacies, internal and
external factors and economic motives. The root causes of the current situation in
the Central African subregion can, in particular, be traced to at least two main

__________________
4 Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea, Gambia, Libyan

Arab Jamahiriya, Mali, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Togo and Tunisia.

7

S/2003/1077

internal sources, namely, the crisis of governance and the widespread poverty, which
have, in several cases, been compounded by external factors. Thus, despite the
enormous natural wealth of the subregion, mismanagement and unconstitutional,
non-inclusive rule have not only retarded its development but also polarized its
societies, leading in extreme cases to recurrent armed rebellions and prolonged
wars. The dire consequences of the conflicts have seriously undermined Central
Africa’s efforts to ensure sustainable peace and development.
17. In most of the countries visited by the multidisciplinary assessment mission,
particular concern was expressed about the impact of extreme and widespread
poverty and especially high levels of unemployment among young people, who
could easily be pushed into banditry or armed mercenary activities. Women’s
groups, in particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, voiced strong
criticism of what they said was a common practice of unequal treatment and the
exclusion of women from political decision-making processes and the management
of public affairs. As women have been the most affected by conflicts in the
subregion, they called for more balanced representation and participation in conflict
prevention and peace processes as well as in political decision-making.
18. Insecurity in many post-conflict countries in the subregion is often fuelled by
armed rebellions, banditry, the proliferation of small arms, and the inability of the
security forces to maintain law and order. Frequently, security forces in many
countries of the subregion are selected on an ethnic basis and are therefore unable to
engender broad confidence or provide effective security to all sectors of society.
19. The proliferation of small arms is both a cause and consequence of the
subregion’s recurrent conflicts. According to UNDP, in the Great Lakes region alone
there are more than 1 million illegal small arms in circulation. In the Congo, there
were approximately 40,000 illegal weapons in circulation in 2001.
20. Unless addressed successfully, the issue of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, especially in post-conflict situations, could
jeopardize the consolidation of peace and stability in the countries concerned. Large
numbers of former fighters, if they do not receive proper assistance to resume
constructive civilian life, could be forced to resume destabilizing activities, either as
mercenaries or as members of militia groups, thus increasing the threat of transborder violence and urban criminality.
21. Several disarmament programmes have been designed by Central African
countries but not yet implemented, owing to the lack of resources. These include the
programme of priority activities relating to the illegal trade in small arms adopted
by the ECCAS Foreign Ministers at the nineteenth ministerial meeting of the
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, held at
Brazzaville in May 2003. Progress has, however, been made under the MultiCountry Demobilization and Reintegration Programme in the Great Lakes region, a
four-year initiative (2002-2006) coordinated by the World Bank and regrouping 30
donor countries and United Nations partners and designed to promote the
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration of about 350,000 ex-combatants in
nine countries. ECCAS is involved in the implementation of that programme, which
covers six of its members, namely Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic,
the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
22. The mission noted that, given the proximity and porosity of the borders linking
the countries in Central Africa, as well as the long-standing and complex
interrelationships among the countries and peoples of the area, unsettled crises and

8

S/2003/1077

conflicts in any State of the subregion frequently impact on or spill over into its
neighbours. Government officials in Cameroon and Gabon in particular expressed
concern at what they characterized as a “risk of contamination”. The regional impact
of the conflict situations in the Central African Republic and the Great Lakes region
were repeatedly mentioned as telling examples.
23. Furthermore, the cross-border circulation of weapons and the movement of
armed groups, bandits and refugees in Central Africa vividly illustrate this linkage,
the repercussions of which have affected the prospects for peace, security and
development throughout the subregion. This was the conclusion drawn by Amara
Essy, whom the Secretary-General had dispatched as his Special Envoy to the
Central African Republic and the Congo in December 2000 to assess the impact of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on those two neighbouring
States. The Special Envoy found that the subregional humanitarian, economic and
security consequences of that conflict were devastating, and were likely to linger so
long as the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo persisted.
24. Subsequently, in his report of 21 September 2001 on the situation in the
Central African Republic (S/2001/886), the Secretary-General indicated that the
problem of security in that country needed to be addressed in a broader context of
the pursuit of the restoration of peace and stability to the subregion as a whole.
25. The impact of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the
nine countries bordering it was also highlighted during the visit of the mission.
Many interlocutors strongly believed that the restoration of lasting stability to that
country was a condition sine qua non for sustainable stability for its neighbours and
for the subregion as a whole. In this regard, government officials in Cameroon,
Chad, the Congo and Gabon deplored the fact that they were not included in the
consultations concerning the peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, even though they suffered from the direct impact of the conflict in that
country. Consequently, they requested that their countries be included as full
participants in the proposed international conference on the Great Lakes region. A
number of subregional leaders also stressed the urgent need for the Security Council
to provide MONUC with a robust enforcement mandate to enable it to assist
effectively in restoring peace and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
26. Despite the many challenges that remain, the mission noted that prospects for
the subregion, albeit still fragile, had shown signs of great improvement. In Angola,
for example, peace has been steadily taking root since the signing of the
Memorandum of Understanding at Luena, Angola on 4 April 2002 by the
Government of Angola and UNITA. The transformation of UNITA from an armed
movement into a political party has contributed positively to the peace process. In
Burundi, despite the fact that the overall security and political situation remains
volatile, there are positive developments in the implementation of the transitional
arrangements provided for under the Arusha Agreement. While the deployment of
the African Mission in Burundi is not yet complete, essentially for lack of funding,
the setting-up of assembly points for the cantonment of the armed opposition’s
combatants is ongoing. The issues of security, land, property claims and restitution
are some of the unresolved challenges that continue to face the country. In Sao Tome
and Principe, regional peace efforts have successfully returned the constitutional
order to power following the attempted coup d’état of 17 July 2003.
27. In the Central African Republic, there was widespread lawlessness, looting and
destruction of property in the immediate aftermath of the overthrow of the
government of the former President, Ange Félix Patassé, in March 2003. The

9

S/2003/1077

situation has improved markedly since the deployment of 300 French troops,
however, as well as 500 Chadian soldiers to support the CEMAC force, which
includes troops from Gabon and the Congo. Furthermore, the efforts of the regime to
promote dialogue and reconciliation appear to have greatly reduced political tension.
The Central African Republic is currently actively engaged in transitional
arrangements aimed at restoring democratic and constitutional government by 2005.
28. Security in Chad continues to improve despite recurrent tensions in parts of the
country and the continuing circulation of arms within the civilian population. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the installation of the transitional government
and agreement on the integration of combatants from the armed opposition into the
national armed forces has improved prospects for sustainable peace. Security
remains an issue of the utmost concern, however, especially in the Ituri district and
other areas in the eastern part of the country.
29. Efforts are continuing to consolidate the important gains made as a result of
agreements reached by the Government of the Congo and armed militia groups to
enhance prospects for broad-based national reconciliation and peace. Relief agencies
operating in the country continue to express concern, however, at the acute
humanitarian challenges in the Pool region, where the destruction of infrastructure,
poor sanitary conditions, inadequate health services and malnutrition, especially of
children, could discourage the full return of internally displaced persons and
refugees to their homes. It is also considered that greater political overture,
especially to opposition members still in exile, could strengthen the process of
national reconciliation and help reduce recurrent rebel activities.
30. In Rwanda, the Government continues to work on reconciliation efforts,
putting in place confidence-building measures such as the recent release from
custody of 40,000 persons facing various allegations connected to the genocide of
1994, the initiation of the Gacaca justice process (a traditional justice system
similar to the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission), the conducting
of a referendum on a new constitution in May 2003, and the organization of
multiparty presidential elections in August 2003.

B.

Challenges of poverty
31. The protracted crises in the region have had a considerable negative effect on
the living conditions of the people of Central Africa and have increased poverty in
the subregion. Governments of countries in conflict or post-conflict situations have
had to divert meagre resources to meet increased security requirements. As a result,
investments in vital social sectors such as education, health and housing have
suffered, and infrastructure has deteriorated.
32. Today, poverty is pervasive in the subregion and more than half of the
population lives below the poverty line. Although many countries have prepared
commendable poverty reduction strategy papers, it would be unrealistic to expect
poverty challenges to be addressed effectively without peace and stability.
33. It is worth noting that several political leaders and other stakeholders who met
with the mission stressed that, without trust and confidence among the leaders in the
subregion, economic integration, necessary for sustainable growth, which in turn
was vital for poverty reduction, could not be achieved.
34. Private sector representatives were of the view that the fight against corruption
and impunity should be addressed more effectively and that new regulatory

10

S/2003/1077

frameworks more conducive to private investment should be promoted. In so doing,
governments in the subregion would not only help to combat poverty but also
prevent future conflicts since improved economic opportunities could generate
greater employment, especially for young people who might otherwise drift towards
destructive activities such as banditry or participation in armed militia groups.
35. Africa’s heavy debt burden was evoked as one of the key factors hindering
investment in social sectors. For many countries in the region, the proportion of debt
to gross national income was said to have reached an unbearable point: 137.9 per
cent in Angola, 221.4 per cent in the Congo, 309.5 per cent in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and 548.1 per cent in Sao Tome and Principe.

C.

Humanitarian issues
36. The mission was informed that the number of displaced persons in the
subregion (internally displaced, asylum seekers and refugees) had reached
approximately 3 million. 5 It was also stressed that, while many of the States in the
subregion have generously hosted refugees from neighbouring countries, large
population movements can be politically, socially and environmentally destabilizing.
The high costs of such cross-border movements, including the rapid spread of the
HIV/AIDS virus and other infectious diseases, represent additional pressures for
those developing countries already overburdened by many other challenges.
37. In Angola, the armed conflict that was the major cause of forced internal and
external displacements of people is over, but daunting humanitarian challenges
remain. The steady return of relative security in the country has increased the
potential for the return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their homes.
Indeed, the Memorandum of Understanding of 4 April 2002, between the
Government of Angola and UNITA has paved the way for peace and national
reconciliation. In July 2003, the Government of Angola, UNHCR and asylum
countries launched a programme for the voluntary repatriation of 450,000 Angolan
refugees from southern Africa. At the same time, the Government of Angola has
undertaken to reintegrate approximately 400,000 former UNITA combatants and
their dependants. The repatriation and reintegration programme is impeded by
logistical and safety constraints, such as damaged infrastructure, limited availability
of public services, and the presence of landmines and unexploded ordnance.
38. In Burundi, insecurity constitutes the main impediment to the implementation
of humanitarian relief operations, especially in the southern and eastern regions of
the country. The United Nations and the African Union are cooperating to support
the return of Burundian refugees in safety and dignity.
39. Widespread lawlessness and the looting of property, including property
belonging to humanitarian relief agencies, followed the coup that overthrew the

__________________
5 The precise figure is 2,997,434 (Angola: 202,000 internally displaced persons and 12,830

refugees/persons of concern; Burundi: 100,000 internally displaced persons and 54,210
refugees/persons of concern; Cameroon: 52,597 refugees/persons of concern; Central African
Republic: 50,204 refugees/persons of concern; Chad: 17,000 refugees/persons of concern;
Congo: 111,670 refugees/persons of concern; Democratic Republic of the Congo: an estimate of
2 million internally displaced persons and 331,241 refugees/persons of concern; Gabon: 18,952
refugees/persons of concern; Rwanda: 46,730 refugees/persons of concern; figures for Sao Tome
and Principe and Equatorial Guinea were not available). The figure is derived from UNHCR
reports.

11

S/2003/1077

democratic government in the Central African Republic in March 2003. That event
affected the provision of protection not only to refugees but also to foreign
nationals, particularly Chadian nationals living in the Central African Republic.
That provoked a large influx of displaced persons into Chad, including both Central
African refugees and Chadian nationals who had fled instability in the Central
African Republic. Meanwhile, the stabilization of the political situation in Chad
offers the potential for the return of approximately 30,000 Chadian refugees who
have been living in northern Cameroon for more than a decade. UNHCR is currently
engaged in assisting Central African refugees located in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Congo to return home voluntarily.
40. As a result of the encouraging political dispensation evolving in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, humanitarian conditions are said to have begun
to improve. However, owing to the persistent insecurity in the eastern part of the
country, particularly in the Ituri district, relief agencies continue to experience
limited access to internally displaced persons and displaced refugee populations.
41. The consolidation of peace in the Congo could pave the way for the voluntary
repatriation of refugees, especially from neighbouring Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Gabon. UNHCR is also assisting in efforts to repatriate refugees from
other subregional States, including Angola and Rwanda, who have been living for
many years in the Congo.
42. As a result of the improving conditions for return in Rwanda, UNHCR has,
since October 2002, been actively promoting voluntary repatriation to Rwanda.
UNHCR plans to repatriate approximately 60,000 Rwandan refugees during the
course of 2003-2004. Indeed, approximately 23,000 Rwandan refugees were
repatriated from the United Republic of Tanzania during the last quarter of 2002
and, in the first half of 2003, more than 6,000 Rwandan refugees have been assisted
to return home.

D.

Human rights issues
43. The prevalence of civil wars, rebellions and banditry in the subregion has
heightened threats to individual and community rights, especially as the conflicts
have eroded the capacity of governments to provide effective security, guarantee
respect for human rights and safeguard the rule of law.
44. Furthermore, the subregion is characterized by rapidly increasing urbanization
without development or adequate social services. The population is therefore
exposed to grave pandemics with no access or only very limited access to adequate
health care, limited access to educational systems and inadequate development of
local governing structures. Not only is the development process hampered, but the
fundamental principles of a rights-based approach to development are not applied,
including the right to participation by all and the inclusion of vulnerable groups.
45. Despite, or perhaps as a result of, having abundant natural resources, the
subregion is plagued by problems related to conflicts over natural resources. This
situation fuels xenophobia, discrimination against migrant workers and human rights
violations relating to the exploitation of natural resources. The exploitation of the
subregion’s natural resources has not significantly advanced human development
and social solidarity in the countries concerned. Major transnational companies
operating in those countries have not always demonstrated sufficient social and

12

S/2003/1077

environmental sensitivity, leaving the conditions of the people and of the local
communities unimproved.
46. Some encouraging signs can be found in the untapped potential of women in
the countries of the subregion, the resilience and even the expansion of civil society
in many countries and the enactment of groundbreaking legislation such as the “oil
law” in Chad, which commits the Government to using its oil revenues for poverty
reduction. The law stipulates that 10 per cent of royalties and dividends will be set
aside for future generations, 80 per cent will be devoted to health, education, social
services, rural development and public infrastructure, while 5 per cent will be
invested back in the oil-producing region. It should be noted that within the
framework of the law an oversight committee including representatives of civil
society, Parliament, the Supreme Court and the Government has been created. This
law, representing a kind of self-binding initiative, is almost unique.

HIV/AIDS
47. Central Africa is severely affected by the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the majority of
countries in the subregion being confronted with a prevalence rate of over 5 per cent
among the sexually active population. In 2001, the prevalence rate ranged from 5.5
per cent in Angola to 14.8 per cent in the Central African Republic. The rate
increased from 0.5 per cent in 1987 to 11.8 per cent in 2000 in Cameroon and from
1 per cent in 1986 to 7.7 per cent in 2001 in Gabon.

HIV/AIDS prevalence in Central Africa

Ch
ad

pe
nd

Pr

in

ci

Rw
an
da

go
on
eC
th

ea

of

Sa

o

To

m

ic
bl

D

em

oc

ra

tic

Ce

nt

Re

ra

pu

lA

Eq

fri

ua

to

ca

n

ria

Re

lG

pu

ui

bl

ne

ic

a

G
ab
on

Co
ng
o

n
oo
er
m
Ca

Bu
ru
nd
i

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
A
ng
ol
a

Prevalence rate %

E.

Source: Country reports, 2002.
48. The number of people affected by HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa as a whole
is estimated at more than 4 million of the area’s total population of around 640
million inhabitants. The pandemic is increasingly striking young people.

13

S/2003/1077

49. The infection rate is even more serious among the security forces and urban
dwellers in the subregion, ranging from 8 per cent to 20 per cent among security
personnel and from 20 per cent to 50 per cent among prostitutes in the major cities.
The full extent of the pandemic is still not known in areas ravaged by armed
conflicts.
50. The high mortality rate associated with AIDS deprives families of their loved
ones and support, and further impoverishes those who are already poor. This
negative impact is also responsible for absenteeism and the reduction in productivity
observed in the workplace, resulting in declines in savings, increased social
expenditures and dwindling investment capacities. The combined effect of the
pandemic has resulted in drastically curtailed development efforts in ECCAS
countries.
51. Moreover, hospital structures are overburdened with the care and treatment of
patients. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, patients suffering
from AIDS-related diseases occupy 50 per cent of hospital beds. In all the countries
concerned, families and communities lack the necessary resources to care and cater
for those infected.
52. Since the outbreak of the pandemic, in the 1980s about 319,000 people are
estimated to have died of AIDS in ECCAS countries, which have also seen a sharp
drop in life expectancy. In Angola and Cameroon, for example, it is estimated that
life expectancy has been reduced by about 5 years and 10 years, respectively, largely
because of HIV/AIDS.
53. Early mortality caused by HIV/AIDS has produced more than 2 million AIDS
orphans in Central Africa, nearly half of them (930,000) in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and 210,000 in Cameroon. In Rwanda, the 240,000 AIDS orphans have
added to the thousands of other children orphaned by the conflicts that have ravaged
the country during the past decade.
54. As everywhere else in Africa, countries in Central Africa started to put in
place, as early as 1987-1988, national HIV/AIDS control programmes, with the
support of the World Health Organization. As from 1996, with the support of
UNAIDS, African countries started to develop strategic plans which facilitated the
intensification of partnerships between the different actors involved in AIDS
control. Despite those efforts, however, the epidemic is still spreading, owing to
inadequate responses related to a poor level of national coordination and timid
political commitment, late implementation of a multisectoral and decentralized
response with greater involvement of the civil society, and extensive delays in the
application of sound strategies of access to voluntary testing and treatment. It is to
be noted that Central African countries are still not benefiting fully from
opportunities to mobilize additional resources: for instance, only 4 of the 11 ECCAS
countries are benefiting from the World Bank’s AIDS assistance programmes, while
only 3 countries have so far gained access to resources from the Global Fund to
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. It is also noted that the implementation of
the Abuja Declaration of April 2001, in which African leaders pledged to devote 15
per cent of their national budgets to health and AIDS control, is not yet fully
effective.

14

S/2003/1077

F.

Subregional institutions
55. ECCAS, which has its headquarters in Libreville, was established in 1983,
initially with the goals of promoting economic development and integration and
fostering a common market among member States. Recognizing that economic
progress could not be achieved in a climate of conflict and crisis, the goals were
later expanded to include efforts to promote peace and security. The mission noted
that the mechanisms set up by ECCAS to promote economic integration and
sustainable peace and security in the subregion had not yet become fully
operational. They include the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa, the
Early-Warning Mechanism for Central Africa and the Central African Multinational
Force. In addition, the fact that CEMAC is increasingly active in the areas of peace
and security, as shown by its deployment of a regional peace force in the Central
African Republic, a task which essentially falls outside its mandate, is further
evidence of the vacuum that exists as a result of the inability of ECCAS to discharge
fully its responsibilities in this field. Following the mission’s visit to the subregion,
the protocol on the Council for Peace and Security in Central Africa came into force
after its recent ratification by two additional member States, bringing the total
number of full parties to 8 of the 11 member States.

G.

United Nations presence in the subregion
56. The United Nations currently operates two mechanisms that deal with issues
relating to peace and security in the Central African subregion. One of these is the
Subregional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy, based in Yaoundé, which was
established in June 2002, at the request of the Governments of the subregion, to help
to build national capacities in the areas of human rights and democracy by providing
support to Governments, national institutions and non-governmental organizations.
The second mechanism is the Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa, established in 1992 to promote arms limitation, disarmament and
confidence-building measures among States members of ECCAS. Since its creation,
the Committee has served as the main forum at which ECCAS member States meet
on a regular basis to discuss the challenges relating to peace and security in their
subregion. The Department for Disarmament Affairs currently serves as the
secretariat of the Committee. Several United Nations programmes and agencies,
such as the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), have
established subregional offices to deal with cross-cutting issues and implement
regional projects.

H.

Regional integration
57. Despite its great potential, the process of subregional integration has made
only modest progress so far in Central Africa. The fact that Central African
countries belong to different economic and political subregional entities, that they
lack viable communication infrastructure, and that they have not fully implemented
agreements on the free circulation of people and goods, has not facilitated
integration. Most of the mission’s interlocutors stressed the importance of such
integration and called for the implementation of “integrating projects” to promote
transnational economic infrastructure, telecommunications, transport, water and
energy. Progress is gradually being made in the area of the free movement of

15

S/2003/1077

peoples, the leaders of CEMAC having decided to establish a CEMAC passport for
their citizens. It should be noted that the ECA subregional development centres for
Central and Eastern Africa, based respectively in Yaoundé and Kigali, have both
developed integrating projects on water, energy, transport and communications.

V. Observations
58. The attempted coup d’état in July 2003 in relatively stable Sao Tome and
Principe, barely a month after the mission’s visit, demonstrates vividly the
continuing volatility of the Central African subregion. The quick restoration of
constitutional rule in that country, through the joint efforts of regional leaders and
leaders of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, is a testimony to the
potential role of regional organizations and to the growing determination of African
leaders to promote democratic governance and the rule of law. At the same time,
that event demonstrates that, while the restoration and consolidation of lasting peace
in Central Africa remains the primary responsibility of the Governments and peoples
of the subregion, the international community should continue to be supportive, for
peace to be sustainable.
59. Issues of peace and security lie at the core of the challenges that confront the
subregion. While United Nations offices and missions in Burundi, the Central
African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are focused on
country-specific problems of peace consolidation and peacekeeping, there is an
urgent need for the United Nations to help to implement subregional policies to
support efforts to address cross-cutting challenges, including the promotion of good
governance, and to stem the illegal flow of arms, drugs and militia.
60. As a result of the close linkage between poverty and conflict, it is essential for
the United Nations and its agencies to develop a holistic and integrated approach to
the problems of Central Africa in order to address conflicts at their core and to
enhance the ability of the national, subregional and international actors to be more
proactive in identifying and preventing future threats.
61. Subregional approaches are also required for effective security sector reform to
mitigate the illegal flow of arms and armed elements from one country to another in
the subregion. United Nations agencies operating in Central Africa should continue
to enhance their efforts in support of the country-specific disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in the subregion, especially in
countries that are not covered by the Multi-Country Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme.
62. Cross-border challenges, such as population movements, drugs and small arms
trafficking, as well as the transnational movements of mercenaries and militias
should be addressed more vigorously and proactively, with the support of the United
Nations. Joint programmes in border areas, such as health, education and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes, would be one way of
combating such phenomena. Those issues should also be integrated into a more
systematic planning of “exit strategies” for United Nations peace operations. To that
end, for instance, the United Nations should report more frequently and
systematically on the patterns of arms flows into the region, and especially on the
activities of producer countries and arms merchants.

16

S/2003/1077

63. The liberalization of cross-border trade, especially in agricultural products,
would help to improve market access and promote relationships between the local
populations living in border areas.
64. A United Nations system-wide integrated approach in partnership with other
humanitarian and development actors should be implemented to deal with the
interrelated challenges of repatriation, reintegration, rehabilitation and
reconstruction in the Central African subregion.
65. Poor governance practices, such as the lack of accountability and transparency,
impunity, exclusion, socio-economic marginalization, absence of the rule of law and
respect for human rights have often triggered or exacerbated conflicts. Policies to
promote respect for human rights, the rule of law and the development of inclusive
and responsive governance would facilitate the establishment and consolidation of
peace and stability in the subregion.
66. There is a need to strengthen institutional capacities of governance at the
national, subregional and regional levels to enhance conflict prevention through the
promotion of good governance practices. In this regard, the capacity of civil society
to play a key role in democratization and peace-building should be strengthened.
67. It would also be important to strengthen the justice systems in the countries of
the subregion to ensure predictability and reliability in the discharge of justice; these
are essential attributes of good democratic practices and good governance and for
the promotion of human rights.
68. In setting human rights policies, the following elements should be taken into
account:
• National human rights protection systems should be strengthened by enhancing
national institutional capacity. A subregional judicial training centre could be
established as a concrete contribution to this goal. Allowing lawyers from the
subregion and beyond to assist anyone requiring help before national
judiciaries is also important and may be facilitated by the United Nations
system.
• Human rights education, the promotion of a culture of peace and tolerance and
reconciliation should be facilitated and promoted in the subregion.
• To fight against impunity and promote reconciliation, a mechanism should be
established to address the fate of victims of numerous conflicts in the countries
of the subregion, including by providing compensation and rehabilitation.
Special attention should be paid to women and children.
69. The HIV/AIDS pandemic poses a serious and potentially explosive threat to
the subregion, including for subregional peace, security and development. Efforts to
promote greater awareness of this danger and to prevent and fight HIV/AIDS should
be intensified and coordinated at the subregional level, especially given the porosity
of borders and the increasing cross-border movements of people. The United
Nations should cooperate with ECCAS to ensure effective subregional leadership
and coordination of such efforts.
70. Central African subregional institutions, including ECCAS, CEMAC and the
Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries, should integrate the problem of
HIV/AIDS into the agenda of peace, security, and political, economic and social
issues that they deal with. The Organisation de coordination pour la lutte contre les
endémies en Afrique centrale should ensure the coordination of the subregional

17

S/2003/1077

monitoring of health issues, in order to establish a regional HIV/AIDS strategy and
to develop a United Nations assistance programme; to intensify the integration of
HIV/AIDS issues into the concept of operations of the peacekeeping missions in
Burundi, the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
to integrate HIV/AIDS into the demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
rehabilitation programmes in Angola, Burundi, the Central African Republic, Chad,
the Congo and the Democratic Republic of the Congo; to enhance the presence of
UNAIDS in Central Africa and to address HIV/AIDS at the International
Conference on the Great Lakes region.
71. I wish to express my deep gratitude to the Governments of the subregion, the
secretariat of the Economic Community of Central African States, the United
Nations country teams and members of civil society, including the business
community and trade union organizations, for the effective support and cooperation
they extended to the multidisciplinary mission in each of the countries visited.

18

S/2003/1077

Annex
List of participants
The mission was led by the Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Tuliameni Kalomoh.
Department of Political Affairs
Margaret Vogt, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary-General
Angèle N. Makombo-Eboum, Political Affairs Officer
Jean-Francis Joh Epoko, Political Affairs Officer
Suzanne Biloa, Personal Assistant to the Assistant Secretary-General
Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Gérard Gerold, Senior Political Affairs Officer, MONUC
Department for Disarmament Affairs
Ivor Fung, Director, Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, Lomé
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
Pierre Gelas, Regional Disaster Response Adviser, Regional Support Office
for Central and East Africa
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Bacre Ndiaye, Director, New York Office
Office of the United Nations Security Coordinator
Innocent Gabriel Dassanou, Security Coordinator in Cameroon
United Nations Development Programme
Babacar Cissé, Senior Country Programme Adviser (Central and Eastern Africa)
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Wairimu Karago, Regional Coordinator for operations in the Great Lakes region
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
Pierre M’Pele, Team Leader for West and Central Africa
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
Joseph Guiebo, Senior Human Settlements Officer, Regional Office for Africa
and Arab States

19
