A/69/926*–S/2015/409*

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
5 June 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 64
Promotion and protection of the rights of children

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Children and armed conflict
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, which covers the period from January to December 2014,
is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2068 (2012), by which the
Council requested that I continue to submit annual reports on the implementation of
its resolutions and presidential statements on children and armed conflict.
2.
The report highlights recent global trends regarding the impact of armed
conflict on children and provides information on grave violation s committed against
children in 2014. The main activities and initiatives with regard to the
implementation of relevant Security Council resolutions and the conclusions of its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict are outlined. In line with the
resolutions of the Council pertaining to children and armed conflict, the report
includes in its annexes a list of parties that engage in the recruitment and use of
children, sexual violence against children, the killing and maiming of children,
attacks on schools and/or hospitals and attacks or threats of attacks against protected
personnel, in contravention of international law.
3.
All information presented in the present report and its annexes has been
documented, vetted and verified for accuracy by the United Nations. In situations
where the ability to obtain or independently verify information is hampered by such
factors as insecurity or access restrictions, it is qualified as such. The preparation of
the report and its annexes involved broad consultations within the United Nations,
at Headquarters and in the field, and with relevant Member States.
4.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), and in identifying
situations that fall within the scope of her mandate, my Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict is guided by the criteria found in international
humanitarian law and international jurisprudence for determining the existence of
an armed conflict. Reference to a situation is not a legal determination, and
reference to a non-State party does not affect its legal status.
* Reissued for technical reasons on 4 August 2015.

15-06098* (E)

120815

*1506098*

A/69/926
S/2015/409

II. Addressing the impact of armed conflict on children
A.

Trends and developments
5.
There were unprecedented challenges in 2014 with regard to the protection of
tens of millions of children growing up in situations affected by conflict. In
particular, children in several countries affected by major crises, namely, the Central
African Republic, Iraq, Israel/State of Palestine, Nigeria, South Sudan and the
Syrian Arab Republic, were exposed to the most egregious violations. This added to
existing violations against children in protracted conflicts, such as in Afghanistan,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia. Most recently, the security
situation in Yemen deteriorated further with reports, in April 2015, of significant
numbers of child casualties.

B.

Abductions as an increasing trend
6.
Mass abductions of civilians, including children, have become an increasingly
prevalent feature of conflict in many situations described in the present re port. The
abduction of children had primarily been a precursor to other violations, such as
killing and maiming, recruitment and use, or sexual violence. In many instances,
abducted children were also arbitrarily detained by Governments and armed groups.
While these trends continued in 2014, armed groups abducted children in greater
numbers and increasingly used abductions as a tactic to terrorize or target particular
ethnic groups or religious communities.
7.
In Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, over one thousand girls and boys were
abducted by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In one incident in the
Syrian Arab Republic, ISIL abducted approximately 150 young boys on their way
home from having taken school exams in Aleppo. They were released from captivity
after a few months, during which they were physically abused, indoctrinated and
made to observe violent practices. Towards the end of the year, ISIL issued a
document justifying its sexual slavery of Yezidi girls abducted in Iraq. In Nigeri a,
Boko Haram abducted hundreds of women and girls in major attacks in Chibok and
across the country’s north-eastern region. Video statements released by Boko Haram
indicated that the abductions were in retaliation against the Government for the
detention of relatives and served as punishment for schoolchildren attending
Western-style schools.
8.
The information contained in the present report demonstrates that the increase
in the frequency and scale of abductions has resulted in greater protection needs for
children. The children require safe release, family tracing, medical, psychological
and legal assistance and facilitation of voluntary repatriation in the context of crossborder abductions.
9.
The long-term consequences of abductions are of concern. Dominic Ongwen
of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) was transferred to the International Criminal
Court in January 2015. Abducted by LRA in 1989 on his way to school, Dominic
Ongwen rose to the rank of major at 18 years of age. His transfer to The Hague
25 years later is a reminder of the long-term consequences of such violations.
10. Rising concerns about abductions were highlighted by Member St ates in the
March 2015 open debate of the Security Council on children and armed conflict. In

2/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

the light of those concerns, my Special Representative will explore new ways to
respond to the increasing occurrence of abductions. I call upon the Security Counc il
to expand the tools available to child protection actors to gather information and
report on the abduction of children, including through adding abductions as a trigger
violation for listing within the annexes of this report.

C.

Responses to extreme violence
11. Extreme violence rose to unprecedented levels in 2014, leading to a dramatic
increase of grave violations against children. Children have been disproportionately
affected and were often the direct targets of acts of violence intended to in flict
maximum casualties, terrorize entire communities and provoke worldwide outrage.
12. A tactic of extremist groups is the targeting of schools since they
fundamentally object to the goal of universal education for children because they
are an emblematic target. In other instances, schools located in areas controlled by
extremist armed groups have had their curriculum changed to reflect the groups ’
ideology.
13. The military responses to the threat caused by extreme violence have also
raised serious child protection concerns. In a number of situations where extreme
violence is prevalent, military operations led by regional or international coalitions
or by neighbouring countries have resulted in the killing and maiming of children.
Children have also been subjected to sexual violence and recruited and used by
pro-Government militias.
14. An area of particular concern related to the response to extreme violence is the
deprivation of liberty of children due to their alleged association with extremist
groups. Children have been detained on suspicion of being associated with an
extremist group without review of the lawfulness of the deprivation of liberty. These
children should be treated primarily as victims and their rights protected at all times.
At a minimum, Member States should ensure that procedures or trials are consistent
with international juvenile justice standards, with deprivation of liberty as a
measure of last resort.
15. The reintegration of children recruited and used in extreme violence rais es
new challenges. Reintegration has always required significant and long -term
resources. However, the impact of exposure to the severity of the violence
committed in 2014 across a number of situations will cause particularly serious and
long-term distress. Comprehensive programmes are needed to address the
reintegration needs of these children. Only through concerted action will it be
possible to establish measures to mitigate the harm done to them.
16. Responding appropriately to extreme violence is comp lex, but it is imperative
that all responses be conducted in full compliance with international humanitarian
law, refugee law and human rights law. These international legal obligations are the
minimum that must be in place in all national, regional and in ternational responses
to security threats. The Security Council, African Union, European Union, League
of Arab States, North Atlantic Treaty Organization, coalition Member States and
individual Member States should ensure that responses include specific mi tigating
measures for the protection of children. I also encourage all concerned Governments
to ensure that the recruitment and use of children and other grave violations against

15-06098

3/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

children, are criminalized, allegations of violations investigated and perpet rators
held to account. It is also critical that military operations be complemented by
efforts to address the root causes that lead to the emergence of extremist groups.
Recognizing and addressing social deprivation and alienation of communities,
strengthening efforts to grant access to education and other key social services will
contribute to isolating the leaders of extremist groups through delegitimizing their
discourse and reducing the numbers who willingly enlist.

D.

Engagement with non-State actors
17. Forty-nine armed groups are listed in the annexes to the present report because
they have committed grave violations against children. Engaging with that group of
actors is inherently challenging, given their variety, number and often changing
nature. The emergence of extremist groups has compounded the challenge.
Notwithstanding those limitations, the United Nations has sustained dialogue with
armed groups in several situations of conflict during the period under rev iew with
the aim of ending and preventing violations, negotiating the separation of children
and facilitating their reintegration. As a result of that engagement, the leadership of
a number of armed groups have issued command orders to prohibit and sanctio n
child recruitment and use and other grave violations against children.
18. Engaging with armed groups requires a case-by-case approach. My Special
Representative has utilized engagements with mediators, special envoys and
regional organizations to integrate the protection of children into peacemaking
initiatives, such as the Agreement on the cessation of hostilities in the Central
African Republic, which was signed in Brazzaville in July by parties to the conflict
in the country. This approach has contributed to gaining commitments from a
number of non-State actors to end the recruitment and use of children and prevent
other grave violations throughout the reporting period.
19. However, the nature of many armed groups listed in the annexes to the present
report, combined with limitations on the access of the United Nations, presents
challenges for monitoring commitments. While it is commendable when an armed
group pledges to better protect children, such commitments need to be translated
into concrete and verifiable actions that make a difference in children’s lives.
20. With child protection partners in the field, my Special Representative will
continue to identify opportunities to engage in dialogue with armed groups, obtain
concrete commitments and sign action plans. The sustained and complementary use
of multiple tools is needed to accelerate progress in compliance by armed groups
with international child protection standards. In order for those tools to be effective,
Member States should allow independent access to the United Nations in order to
facilitate monitoring and reporting.

E.

“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign
21. In March, my Special Representative and the United Nations Children ’s Fund
(UNICEF) launched the campaign “Children, Not Soldiers” to end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by government security forces by the end of 2016.
The campaign generated wide support from Member States, United Nations and
civil society partners and provided opportunities for the countries involved to have

4/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

an exchange on experiences and best practices. In the campaign ’s first year,
progress was steady. Six of the seven countries concerned — Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen —
have signed or recommitted to action plans. I encourage the Sudan to sign an action
plan with the United Nations.
22. A first country, Chad, fully complied with the measures detailed in its action
plan, and its armed forces were delisted from the annexes to the present report in
2014. Other Governments have enacted laws to criminalize underage recruitment,
released children from army ranks, conducted national awareness campaigns, and
developed and implemented age-assessment mechanisms.
23. Throughout the coming year, my Special Representative will continue to reach
out to Member States concerned with the campaign, the international community,
regional organizations and all relevant partners to mobilize politica l, technical and
financial support to address challenges faced by countries in the implementation of
their action plan. This is necessary in order to put in place mechanisms strong
enough to safeguard the progress accomplished to protect children from recr uitment
if a new crisis strikes. In the campaign’s second year, United Nations efforts and
advocacy will be directed to encourage all countries concerned with the campaign
that have not yet done so to criminalize and prosecute the recruitment and use of
children. Accountability remains far too rare, even in countries that have
criminalized the recruitment of children.
24. Putting in place strong age-assessment procedures for troop screening and
recruitment is another challenge faced by most countries invol ved in the campaign.
It is an essential, yet often difficult, step to execute accurately, especially in
countries lacking well-established national birth registration systems.
25. The release of children found in the ranks of national security forces is a n
essential step, and must be followed by adequate and properly resourced
reintegration services that also take into account the particular needs of girls.
Resources must be available for community-based programmes that provide
psychosocial assistance and help children build their future through educational and
vocational opportunities.

III. Information on grave violations committed against children
during armed conflict and progress made by parties on
dialogue, action plans and other measures to halt and
prevent violations against children
A.

Situations on the agenda of the Security Council
Afghanistan
26. The Government of Afghanistan faced sustained security challenges in the
reporting period, most notably following the presidential electio ns. In my previous
annual report, I highlighted the significant spike in the killing and maiming of
children in Afghanistan. In 2014, the reported number increased by 48 per cent, to
2,502 child casualties.

15-06098

5/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

27. The United Nations documented the recruitment and use of 68 children
(65 boys, 3 girls) of which 22 were verified (all boys), one each by the Afghan
National Police and the Afghan local police and 20 associated with the Taliban and
other armed groups. This marks a decrease in child recruitment and u se in
Afghanistan compared with 2013, when 97 children were reportedly recruited and
used. However, owing to widespread underreporting, these figures do not accurately
reflect the situation. In a worrisome trend, the Taliban continued to recruit children
to carry out suicide attacks and to plant improvised explosive devices, and used
them in active combat and as spies. For example, on 9 February, a 14 -year-old
suicide bomber detonated explosives near an Afghan National Security Forces
checkpoint in Sharan district, injuring six civilians and five national police officers.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack.
28. The pilot child protection units in the national police in four provinces
reportedly prevented 156 children from enlisting, indicating a potential for a large
and beneficial impact if such units are replicated across the country. In addition, the
local police reported 55 cases of rejected underage applicants.
29. As at December, according to the Ministry of Justice, 258 boys were held in
juvenile rehabilitation centres across the country on national security -related
charges, including association with armed groups. Of 105 child detainees
interviewed by the United Nations between February 2013 and December 2014,
44 reported having been subjected to ill-treatment or torture.
30. The increase in child casualties included at least 710 children killed and 1,792
injured in 1,091 separate incidents. Armed groups, including the Taliban and the
Hizb-e-Islami, were responsible for 1,343 child casualties (392 killed, 951 injured),
Afghan national security forces for 396 (126 killed, 270 injured), and international
military forces for 38 (24 killed, 14 injured). Cross-border shelling from Pakistan
resulted in 57 child casualties (5 killed, 52 injure d). The United Nations was unable
to attribute 668 child casualties (163 killed, 505 injured), particularly in incidents of
crossfire.
31. Ground engagements were the leading cause of child casualties, resulting in
the killing of 311 children and injury to 920 others, nearly double the number in
2013. Attacks with improvised explosive devices by armed groups caused 664 child
casualties. Suicide attacks resulted in 214 child casualties, up by 80 per cent
compared to the previous year. Explosive remnants of war killed or maimed
328 children. Air strikes by international military forces resulted in 38 child
casualties, including eight from drone strikes.
32. In nine incidents, eight boys and six girls reportedly were victims of sexual
violence. Of these, five cases, affecting four girls and two boys, were verified. Four
verified incidents were attributed to the national police, and one incident to a
pro-Government militia commander. On a positive note, regarding accountability, a
local police member from Laghman Province was sentenced in March to 10 years of
imprisonment for sexual assault and attempted rape of a seven -year-old boy.
33. Schools were attacked in 163 verified incidents, including 29 attacks or threats
of attack against protected personnel and 28 incidents of placement of improvised
explosive devices inside school premises. Several attacks were related to the use of
schools as polling stations. A total of 94 incidents were attributed to the Taliban and
other armed groups, 1 to international forces and 68 incidents that could not be

6/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

attributed. Girls’ education was particularly targeted by the Taliban, including the
distribution of leaflets with serious threats against students, intimidation of female
teachers, attacks on school personnel for not complying with the Taliban’s demand
to close schools, and attacks on students on their way to school. At least 469 Afghan
schools remained closed because of insecurity.
34. At least 10 health-care personnel were killed and 14 were abducted. Health
facilities continued to be attacked directly or as collateral damage. A total of
38 verified incidents were attributed to armed groups, including 13 to the Taliban,
and 4 to the Afghan national security forces, including forced entries into health
facilities in search of alleged armed group elements.
35. The United Nations verified 11 cases of military use of schools by the
Taliban (3), Afghan National Army (3), the local police (3), the national police (1),
and other Afghan national security forces units (1), as well as 3 incidents of military
use of hospitals by the national police and the Taliban.
36. Twenty-four boys and two girls were abducted in 17 separate incidents,
resulting in the killing of at least four boys by the Taliban, the rape of two girls by
the local police, and the rape of a boy by a pro-Government militia. Overall, the
Taliban abducted 15 boys, accusing them of being Government spies.
37. The United Nations verified 72 of 83 reported incidents affecting humanitarian
access to children. There were 125 abductions of humanitarian personnel, the killing
and injuring of 41, and 9 attacks on humanitarian convoys, including 2 United
Nations convoys. Armed groups, notably the Taliban, were responsible for 85 per
cent of all verified incidents, including intimidation of humanitarian personnel.
38. In a welcome development, in July, the Government officially endorsed a road
map for compliance with the action plan to end and prevent child recruitment into
its security forces. Significant progress was made o n three of five priority actions,
in particular the adoption of a presidential decree criminalizing child recruitment by
Government security forces, which came into effect on 2 February 2015.
Furthermore, the Ministry of the Interior issued and disseminated a directive
prohibiting the use of children at national police and local police checkpoints,
including in support roles, stating that the perpetrators would be sanctioned. Efforts
also continued to strengthen age assessment procedures and disseminate gui dance to
recruitment units.
39. Despite the progress achieved, significant efforts are needed by all actors to
fully implement the action plan. The lack of services for children rejected from
recruitment or released from active service remained a significant concern.
Moreover, I urge the Government of Afghanistan to address widespread impunity
for violations of children’s rights, particularly within the national police and local
police, and investigate the allegations of torture. I condemn the grave violat ions
committed against children by armed groups, including the Taliban, the Haqqani
Network and Hezb-i-Islami and urge them to immediately end all grave violations
against children.
Central African Republic
40. The situation of children in the Central African Republic worsened as fighting
between armed groups, including anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka, and attacks targeting
civilians continued. In line with its mandate, the United Nations Multidimensional

15-06098

7/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

Integrated Stabilization Mission (MINUSCA) supported consultations to revitalize
an inclusive reconciliation and political dialogue which resulted in the cessation of
hostilities agreement, including commitments to end violations against children,
signed in Brazzaville in July.
41. The United Nations verified 464 cases of new recruitment, including 446 by
anti-Balaka (86 girls, 360 boys) and 18 boys by ex-Séléka. However, violations are
thought to be largely underreported because of lack of access and limited
monitoring capacity on the ground.
42. The period was characterized by a sharp increase in the number of documented
cases of killing and maiming of children as young as three months old, with
146 killed (109 boys, 37 girls) and 289 injured (182 boys, 107 girls). A total of 58 of
the killings were attributed to ex-Séléka, 49 to anti-Balaka, and 20 to unidentified
armed men. Children were caught in crossfire, hacked to death with machetes and
killed or injured by bullets. For example, in January, four boys between 9 and
10 years of age were beheaded by ex-Séléka in retaliation for an attack against
Muslim community members in Bangui. Between January and February,
22 children, including 9 girls, were killed during attacks by anti-Balaka against
ex-Séléka and Muslim communities. In August, Muslim youths associ ated with
ex-Séléka attacked the Saint Joseph Cathedral in Bambari, killing 20 children and
injuring 4.
43. Rape and other forms of sexual violence against children continue to be of
great concern. The rape of 405 girls and 1 boy, between the ages of 7 an d 17, were
documented throughout the country; 205 by ex-Séléka, 187 by anti-Balaka, 12 by
unidentified persons and 2 by the national police. Sexual violence incidents
remained largely underreported. Also of concern is the fact that the leadership of
both anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka did not take action against identified alleged
perpetrators of rape against children when cases were reported to them.
44. The United Nations interviewed several boys following allegations of repeated
acts of sexual violence by elements of “Operation Sangaris” in and around the M’Poko
camp for displaced persons in Bangui between December 2013 and May 2014. Their
national authorities have opened an investigation that is ongoing. The victims have
been provided with necessary assistance by the United Nations and local partners. It is
of the utmost importance that the perpetrators be held responsible.
45. Both anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka looted schools and hospitals and threatened
health personnel, students and teachers. The United Nations documented nine
attacks on schools, including four attributed to anti-Balaka, four to ex-Séléka.
46. Five other schools were temporarily used by the International Support Mission
to the Central African Republic and “Operation Sangaris” and later vacated . The
United Nations also verified nine attacks against hospitals. In addition, many
schools and hospitals that were looted, destroyed or damaged in 2013 remained
closed.
47. Thirty-four abductions of children (22 boys, 12 girls), some as young as
3 years of age, were verified, marking a decrease compared with 2013, in particular
because of the decline of LRA attacks in the Central African Republic. Sixteen
abductions were attributed to anti-Balaka, eight to LRA and two to ex-Séléka. In
some cases, children were specifically targeted for ransom or as retaliation against
communities.

8/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

48. A total of 80 incidents of denial of humanitarian access were verified in
Bangui and the east of the country, including 42 attributed to anti-Balaka, 18 to
ex-Séléka, and 20 to unidentified armed men. Incidents included shooting and
stone-throwing at vehicles, carjacking, attacks on staff at their residences and
looting of offices.
49. The United Nations engaged with the anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka leadership to
identify and separate children associated with those groups. Efforts resulted in the
separation of 2,807 children (2,161 boys, 646 girls) between the ages of 8 and 17,
including 2,347 from anti-Balaka and 446 from ex-Séléka.
50. Dialogue was also initiated with the military chains of command of two
ex-Séléka factions: the Rassemblement patriotique pour le renouveau de
Centafrique (RPRC) and Union pour la paixen la Centrafrique (UPC), resulting in
the issuance of command orders by the military leadership of both factions to end
the recruitment and use of children. In follow-up to this development, UNICEF
provided training to over 400 combatants and officers from both factions. In
addition, sensitization workshops were organized for anti -Balaka in Bangui and
other south-eastern localities.
51. The collapse of the judicial system and other core functions of the State
resulted in widespread impunity allowing grave violations against children to be
committed on a large scale. To address the situation, MINUSCA was mandated
under Security Council resolution 2149 (2014) to assist the transitional authorities
to arrest and bring to justice those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The Ministry of Justice and MINUSCA signed a memorandum of
understanding establishing urgent temporary measures to restore law and order and
fight impunity. In this context, two anti-Balaka members who allegedly raped a
14-year-old girl in November in Bangui were arrested by MINUSCA police and
handed over to the national gendarmerie for investigation. As at April 2015, the two
individuals were awaiting trial.
Chad
52. The Chadian National Army was delisted from the annex of the previous
report (A/66/782-S/2012/61) following the full implementation of the action plan to
end the recruitment and use of children, signed with the United Nations in 2011.
During the reporting period, no recruitment or use of children by the national army
was reported. The United Nations continued to provide support to the Government
of Chad, with a particular focus on training, age assessment mechanisms and birth
registration.
53. As part of ongoing follow-up, the Government signed a protocol agreement in
September with the United Nations regarding the handover of children associated
with armed forces or groups. The protocol includes provisions that secure the
handover of children to child protection actors, regardless of their country of origin,
and ensures adequate protection of children held in detention. Prior to the
development of the protocol, 44 children associated with ex-Séléka in the Central
African Republic had entered Chad and been arrested. Following joint collaboration
among the United Nations, the Government of Chad and a na tional
non-governmental organization (NGO), the children were released and handed over
to child protection actors for family reunification and social reintegration. The

15-06098

9/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

protocol is also a valuable tool for the handover of children detained in the context
of operations against Boko Haram.
54. A total of 346 national army troops attended child protection sessions and
completed the training of trainers. Predeployment training of Chadian peacekeepers
continued and a total of 864 soldiers took part before their deployment to the United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Mali. An additional 1,500 troops were trained in
Lumia prior to their departure for Mali.
55. Instability in the surrounding countries of the Central African Republic, Libya
and the Sudan, as well the threat posed by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin
area, continued to have an impact on Chad. More than 150,000 people fled the
Central African Republic and thousands of Nigerians, the majority of whom were
children, arrived in Chad to escape the conflict. The children, often separated from
their families, had experienced distress and were in need of special care. This
spillover also affected border communities where child protection services are
scarce and the risk of recruitment by armed groups is high. I call upon all
stakeholders and the donor community to put in place adequate monitoring and
protection mechanisms in southern Chad and in the Lake Chad Basin region to
prevent and end violations.
56. I welcome the sustained efforts of the Government of Chad to enhance the
protection of children and prevent new violations. The adoption of a Child
Protection Code and the Criminal Code would further strengthen the legislative
framework. In the context of the Government’s participation in peacekeeping
operations and in military operations against Boko Haram, I encourage the
Government to continue to play a pivotal role in ensuring respect and compliance
with international humanitarian and human rights law. In the of the progress made
in the implementation of the action plan, the situation of Chad will be removed from
the report as of 2016.
Côte d’Ivoire
57. More than three years after the post-electoral crisis in Côte d’Ivoire, the
security situation continued to improve, although marked with sporadic inc idents of
armed attacks, banditry and other violent crimes, particularly along the border with
Liberia. The United Nations verified 18 cases of rape and other forms of sexual
violence committed by Forces républicaines de Côte d ’Ivoire elements against girls
aged 2 to 17, mostly in the western part of the country. Since 2007, when the last
parties to the conflict were delisted from the annex to my report, the protection of
children has continued to improve. In the light of that development, the situation of
Côte d’Ivoire will be removed from the report as of 2016.
Democratic Republic of the Congo
58. The situation in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo remained volatile
and witnessed major political and security developments, including a series of
military operations against armed groups. Since October, the Allied Democratic
Forces (ADF) increased their attacks against civilians in Beni Territory and
committed a series of massacres.
59. The United Nations documented 241 new cases of recruitment (223 boys,
18 girls), while a large backlog of children separated by national partners is still

10/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

under verification. Recruitment was carried out by Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) (63), Nyatura (32), Rayia Mutomboki (19), Union des
patriotes congolais pour la paix (UPCP) (17), Forces de résistance patriotiques en
Ituri (FRPI) (16), LRA (13), Nduma Defence Coalition/Cheka (NDC/Cheka) (13),
Mayi Mayi Alliance pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS) (7) and other Mayi
Mayi groups (61). Seventy-five per cent of those cases occurred in North Kivu. At
least 57 children were used as combatants. Of the 18 girls, 8 were victims of sexual
violence. One 17-year-old boy was recruited and used in combat by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) in Rutshuru Territory.
He was separated during a screening by the United Nations in a FARDC training
camp in Bas-Congo in April.
60. Despite two Government directives, children continued to be arrested and
detained for their association with armed groups. The United Nations secured the
release of 121 children (110 boys, 11 girls) from FARDC, police and military
prosecutor detention centres. Forty per cent of the children reported being subjected
to ill-treatment during detention.
61. A total of 80 children (52 boys, 28 girls) were killed and 92 maimed (48 boys,
44 girls), mostly during violent attacks by armed groups targeting civilians. Thirty eight per cent of child casualties occurred during brutal attacks by ADF in Beni
Territory, in which at least 250 persons, including 35 children, were massacred with
machetes, knives, hammers or axes. In another significant incident, inter -ethnic
violence between the Bafuliru and Barundi/Banyamulenge in June claimed the lives
of at least 12 children, including two babies, in Mutarule. Forty children (16 boys,
24 girls) were respectively killed and maimed by explosive remnants of war.
62. The United Nations documented 334 cases of rape and other forms of sexual
violence (332 girls, 2 boys), a significant increase compared with 2013. State agents
perpetrated 30 per cent of the documented violations (99). The remaining cases
were perpetrated by Mayi-Mayi Simba (50), FDLR (39), Nyatura (24), Rayia
Mutomboki (23), FRPI (22), APCLS (14), and other armed grou ps (63).
63. Twenty-two schools were attacked and twelve were used for military purposes,
affecting over 31,000 children. In Shabunda Territory, ten schools militarily used by
the FARDC (four) and Rayia Mutomboki (six) were destroyed or looted and their
materials burned during clashes in April. Other schools were attacked by ADF,
FDLR, UPCP and other armed groups. Nineteen hospitals were also attacked or
looted by the FARDC (8), Rayia Mutomboki (2), and ADF (2), NDC/Cheka (2),
APCLS (2) and unidentified armed groups (3). Following advocacy by the United
Nations, two schools used by FARDC to host FDLR surrenders were vacated in
September.
64. Armed groups abducted 108 children (65 boys, 43 girls), 55 per cent out of
whom were below the age of 15, mostly in Orientale (59) and North Kivu (30). The
main perpetrators were LRA (34), ADF (20), Mayi Mayi Simba (18), Rayia
Mutomboki (17) and other armed groups (19). At least 11 abductees were used as
combatants and 22 girls were subjected to sexual slavery.
65. Seven incidents of denial of humanitarian access were documented in North
and South Kivu, perpetrated by ADF (3), FARDC (1) and other armed groups (3).
Three NGO staff members and one United Nations staff member were killed and
two humanitarian workers abducted by ADF. Challenges to humanitarian access

15-06098

11/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

persist, owing mainly to a volatile security situation, increased criminal activities
and ongoing military operations.
66. At least 1,030 children were separated from armed groups (973 boys, 57 girls).
Most of them children had been recruited in 2013 (441) and 2012 (220), and 31 per
cent were below the age of 15 at the time of their recruitment. A total of
166 children were separated from FDLR, 140 from Nyatura, 124 from Rayia
Mutomboki, 97 from FRPI and other armed groups (503). In relation to the response
on sexual violence, UNICEF partners assisted 863 child survivors of sexual
violence, a major decrease from 2013, owing largely to lack of funding.
67. In August and September, FARDC, with support from the Unit ed Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
conducted “Opération sauvetage” to provide medical evacuation and assistance to
ADF dependants abandoned following military operations. A total of 71 persons,
including 60 children, were rescued. Forty per cent of them had been used as
combatants and are receiving reintegration support. Some had sustained bullet
wounds and all were severely malnourished.
68. Despite security challenges and instability, the Government consistently
demonstrated its commitment and ownership with regard to the implementation of
the action plan signed with the United Nations in 2012 to end the recruitment and
use of children, by funding and chairing joint coordination mechanisms and
ensuring their decentralization to conflict-affected provinces. The Vice-Prime
Minister/Minister of Defence also submitted to the United Nations two progress
reports on the implementation of the action plan. In July, the President, Joseph
Kabila appointed Jeannine Mabunda Liyoko as his Personal Adviser on sexual
violence and child recruitment. With United Nations support, the Government also
conducted awareness-raising activities. From 30 November to 4 December, the
Security Council Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict visited the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and travelled to Kinshasa and Goma. The
Working Group welcomed the progress made by the Government in implementing
the action plan and encouraged it to sustain its efforts, particularly aspects relate d to
the fight against impunity and sexual violence.
69. Progress was made in the fight against impunity with the arrest and
prosecution of 61 individuals (46 FARDC, 10 Police nationale congolais, 5 leaders
of armed groups). Thirty-five were convicted and received sentences ranging from
two years to life imprisonment, including Lieutenant Colonel Bedi Mobuli
Engangela, alias “106” and General Jerome Kakwavu, two of the five high -ranking
FARDC officers. All but one were convicted for the crime of sexual vio lence against
children. Four armed group leaders are currently awaiting trial, including on charges
of child recruitment. FARDC Brigadier General Goda Supka Emery was indicted by
the High Military Court in Kinshasa with crimes against humanity and war crim es,
including the recruitment of children. The President also promulgated an Amnesty
Law in February, excluding the crimes of recruitment of children and sexual
violence from amnesty.
70. I welcome these positive developments and encourage the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to sustain its efforts to end and prevent all
violations against children.

12/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

Iraq
71. The deadliest year in Iraq since 2007 was 2014. The United Nations received
reports of systematic and widespread violations of international law, including
executions and targeted killings, abductions, sexual violence and forced recruitment
of children in the large swaths of territory in the country controlled by ISIL and
associated armed groups. Beginning in June, an international coalition led by the
United States of America conducted airstrikes on ISIL positions in support of the
Government. Fighting between the Iraqi Security Forces, including its associated
militias and Peshmerga forces, and ISIL and its associated armed groups, included
the indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas by all parties, resulting in a sharp
increase in the killing and maiming of children. Notwithstanding significant
underreporting, 880 incidents of grave violations against children were reported, of
which 711 were verified, marking a significant increase compared to 2013.
72. The United Nations verified the recruitment of at least 67 boys by ISIL in nine
incidents. Children reportedly continued to patrol alongside adults and to man
checkpoints in Ninewa, Salah al-Din, and Diyala governorates. On 5 September, in
Salah al-Din, ISIL forcibly recruited 40 boys during Friday praye rs. An unknown
number of children were recruited by the pro-Government Popular Mobilization
Forces in all conflict areas, as well as in Baghdad and Basra. Children wearing
military uniforms and carrying weapons were spotted daily alongside those groups.
For example, the United Nations witnessed children in the Hurriya area of Baghdad
patrolling with militia convoys in July. Boys as young as 10 years old were
recruited and used by self-defence groups supporting Iraqi security forces in the
town of Amerli, Salah al-Din. Children, including girls, were reportedly associated
with Yezidi self-defence groups fighting alongside Kurdish Peshmerga and
Turkmen-based self-defence groups in Ninewa and Kirkuk, and with Sunni tribal based militias supporting ISF in Ramadi. The lack of clear recruitment procedures,
including age verification and disciplinary measures by Iraqi authorities remains a
cause of grave concern. It is of concern that the draft National Guard law that was
presented to the Council of Representatives in early March includes exceptions
related to the age of recruitment, which would allow children associated with the
pro-Government militias to join the National Guard.
73. As at December, at least 391 children, including 16 girls, held in detention
facilities, were indicted or convicted of terrorism-related charges for their alleged
association with armed groups under the Anti-Terrorism Act (2005). At least eight
children, including two girls, were detained by Kurdistan Regional Government
authorities under the Anti-Terrorism Law 3 (2006). Detention periods ranged from
two months to more than three years.
74. The United Nations recorded the killing of 679 children (121 girls, 304 boys,
254 of unknown gender) and injury to 505 others (111 girls, 282 boys, 112 of
unknown gender) in 498 incidents (of which 356 could be verified), representing the
highest number of documented child casualties since the establishment of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism in 2008. At least 87 children were killed and
211 injured in improvised explosive device and suicide attacks. On 2 September in
Salah al-Din, 16 children (5 girls, 11 boys), between 8 and 16 years of age, were
killed and 8 children (3 boys, 5 girls) were injured in an Iraqi security forces
airstrike targeting ISIL. On 17 June, in Ba’qouba district, Diyala, the Shi’ite militia
Al Asa’ib Ahl Al-Haq raided Al-Mafraq police station, killing 52 detainees,

15-06098

13/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

including 4 boys. On 22 August, in Sa’diya district, Diyala, 16 boys, as young as
8 years of age, were killed by armed elements, allegedly from the Popular
Mobilization Forces, during Friday prayers in the Musaba Bin Umeir mosque. In
June, the advance of ISIL increased constraints on the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, often with devastating effects on children. For example, sources
indicated that, in August, at least 45 Yezidi children besieged on Sinjar Mountain by
ISIL died from shortages of food and water.
75. A total of 67 attacks on schools and protected personnel and 51 attacks on
hospitals and protected personnel were reported, of which 84 were verified,
resulting in the killing of 56 children and injury of 42. Twenty -eight schools were
the targets of improvised explosive devices, including when they were being used as
polling stations during parliamentary elections in April. In addition, 10 incidents of
attacks or threats of attacks on teachers by ISIL were reported. Another 23 schools
in Anbar, Ninewa, Salah al-Din and Diyala were affected by military use by ISF and
ISIL and by the fighting between the two sides and supporting militias. Three
schools were militarily used by ISIL in the Anbarand Diyala governorates, two by
ISF in Salah al-Din and one by Peshmerga forces in Mosul. For example, on
11 November, in Beiji, Salah al-Din, the vacated Industrial High School was
demolished by improvised explosive devices allegedly planted by ISIL since it had
been previously used as a military base by the Iraqi security forces.
76. Al-Fallujah General Hospital in Anbar governorate alone was subjected to
shelling in 17 separate attacks. In four incidents, hospitals were targeted by
improvised explosive devices. In the Ninewa and Kirkuk governorates, at least two
doctors were targeted by ISIL for refusing to treat injured fighters. For example, on
3 March, in Kirkuk, an improvised explosive device targeted the home of a
physician previously threatened by ISIL, injuring his two children and 13 other
civilians. At least seven hospitals in Salah al-Din, Ninewa, and Kirkuk were used by
ISIL and pro-Government militias to treat their injured.
77. At least 1,297 children (685 girls, 612 boys) were abducted in 320 incidents,
marking the highest number since 2008 and despite significant underreporting.
Almost all incidents were perpetrated in August by ISIL against the Yezidi
community in Sinjar. Children were taken in groups with their families and detained
in schools, prisons and airports. Girls above the age of 12 were separated from their
families and either sold in ISIL-controlled areas in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic, or retained, including for sexual slavery. The men and boys were
allegedly forced to convert to Islam and join ISIL. Multiple sources in the Syrian
Arab Republic reported in December that Yezidi girls had been moved to Raqqa to
be sold as sex slaves. The number of Yezidi children abducted is indicative of
targeting by ISIL of minority communities, with Turkmen, Shabak and Christian
children also reportedly abducted in large numbers. Lack of access to conflictaffected areas or the fear of families in reporting abductions of children seriously
impeded the documentation of cases.
78. United Nations interactions with national and local authorities on child
protection continued despite the deterioration in the security situation and political
instability. However, it remains a serious source of concern that the Government of
Iraq is not responding to the disproportionate effect of armed conflict on children.
Urgent measures are required in relation to the detention of children under terrorism
charges, legislative reform, including the criminalization of the recruitment and use

14/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

of children, the association of children with the Popular Mobilization Forces, as
well as the implementation of policies and programmes for the rehabilitation of
children affected by conflict. The United Nations stands ready to support the
Government and encourages the establishment of a formal interministerial
committee to facilitate regular information-sharing on and the response to grave
violations against children.
Israel and State of Palestine
79. In 2014, the security situation significantly deteriorated in the State of
Palestine with another escalation of hostilities in Gaza and a significant increase of
tensions throughout the West Bank, with devastating impacts for children.
Palestinian and Israeli children continued to be affected by the prevailing situation
of military occupation, conflict and closure.
80. The reporting period saw a dramatic increase in the number of children killed
and injured, especially in Gaza. At least 561 children (557 Palestinian; 4 Israeli)
were killed and 4,271 injured (4,249 Palestinian; 22 Israeli).
81. In the West Bank, 13 Palestinian boys, aged 11 to 17 years, were killed.
Twelve were killed by Israeli security forces live ammunition (11) and “sponge
round” bullets (1) during demonstrations and military search and arrest operations,
and one boy was killed by settlers. On 15 May, two Palestinian boys, aged 16 and
17 years, respectively, were shot and killed with live ammunition during clashes
with Israeli soldiers near Beituniya checkpoint. Reports indicate that the children
killed by the Israeli security forces did not appear to have posed a lethal threat. On
19 March, a 14-year-old boy was fatally shot by the Israel security forces when
crossing the West Bank Barrier. In another example, a ten -year-old Palestinian boy
was fatally shot in the back with live ammunition by the Israeli security forces in
Al-Fawwar camp. The Government of Israel reports that investigations were or are
being carried out on these cases.
82. On 13 June, three Israeli youths, two of whom were 16 -year-old children, were
abducted, and on 30 June, their bodies were found near Halhul in northern Hebron.
The Government of Israel reported that three Hamas members were identified as
suspects, two of whom were killed during a fire fight with the Israeli security
forces. It was also reported that hundreds of Palestinians were arrested in the West
Bank during large search operations carried out by the Israeli security forces
between 13 and 30 June. On 2 July, a 16-year-old Palestinian boy was abducted in
Shu’fat and burned alive in apparent retaliation for the kidnapping and killing of the
Israeli youths. Three Israeli civilians, two of them under the age of 18 years, were
arrested and charged.
83. Of the 1,218 children injured in the West Bank, more than half were under the
age of 12 and 91 per cent were injured during confrontations in Hebron and East
Jerusalem, with 231 of them hit by live ammunition and 530 by rubber -coated
bullets.
84. Violence committed by Israeli settlers, and related incidents involving the
Israeli security forces, remained high, resulting in the injury of 63 Palestinian
children. For example, on 18 April, a group of settlers shielded by the Israeli
security forces reportedly attacked the Urif Secondary School for Boys near Nablus,
which resulted in the injury of 12 students from stones, bullets and a gas canister.

15-06098

15/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

The school was attacked in four instances, reportedly by Israelis living in the Yizhar
settlement.
85. Sixteen Israeli children, (14 boys and 2 girls) were injured in the West Bank as
a result of stones and Molotov cocktail thrown and shots fired at vehicles by
Palestinians.
86. In Gaza, civilians, including children, have borne the brunt of the third major
military offensive in Gaza in six years, namely, “Operation Protective Edge”. In
Gaza, in the 50-day period between 8 July and 26 August, at least 540 Palestinian
children were killed (340 boys and 200 girls between the ages of 1 week and
17 years, with almost 70 per cent of that number being younger than 12 years). The
number of child casualties exceeds the combined number of Palestinian children
killed during the two previous escalations. Hundreds of homes, some of which
belonged to alleged members of armed groups, were directly hit by Israeli airstrikes.
The Israeli bombardments resulted in the destruction of or severe damage to
residential properties, schools and hospitals, causing civilian deaths and injuries.
This is in addition to reports of Palestinian civilians and civilian objects being
directly hit in circumstances where there was allegedly no rocket fire or armed
group activity in the vicinity. This raises serious concern over the observance of the
rules of international humanitarian law concerning the conduct of hostilities,
including the principles of distinction, precaution and proportionality.
87. On average, between 8 July and 26 August, more than 10 children were killed
daily in Gaza. More than 80 per cent of them were killed between 17 July and
5 August during the ground incursion by the Israeli security forces. At least
13 children in Gaza were reportedly killed as a result of rockets fired by Palestinian
armed groups towards Israel that fell inside Gaza.
88. At least 2,955 Palestinian children were injured in Gaza. Preliminary estimates
indicate that up to 1,000 of them will be permanently disabled. Apart from the JulyAugust Israeli military operation, another 76 children were injured.
89. On 16 July, four children, 9 to 11 years of age, were killed on a beach in Gaza
City. According to eye witnesses and video footage, one child hid in an empty
building and was killed by an air strike. The other three children were hit by a shell
fired from the sea, which killed them and injured two others. No military targets
could be identified in the apparently calm area and no rockets had been fired
towards Israel from that location at that time.
90. On 20 July, an Israeli air strike hit a residential building in Bani Suhaila,
killing 25 family members, including 19 children and 3 pregnant women. Surviving
family members testified that they had received no p rior warning from the Israeli
security forces. The Military Advocate General opened a criminal investigation.
91. Palestinian children were also killed in drone strikes. On 10 July, a five -yearold boy was hit by a missile fired by a drone in Deir Al Bala h. On 23 July, a drone
killed a nine-year-old boy seeking shelter in Beit Lahiya. At the time of the attacks,
there were no reports of military activity near the homes.
92. The indiscriminate firing of rockets by Palestinian armed groups from
populated areas in Gaza towards Israeli population centres endangered both the
civilian population in Israel and the Palestinian civilians in Gaza. This raises
concern over the observance of the rules of international humanitarian law on the

16/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

conduct of hostilities, particularly the principles of distinction and precaution. On
22 August, a four-year-old Israeli boy was killed by mortar shelling in Sha ’ar
Hanegev region. At least six Israeli children between 3 months and 17 years of age
were reportedly gravely injured as a result of rocket fire from Gaza. In addition,
159 children were injured on the way to shelters, 33 were injured by building debris,
and 18 were injured in traffic incidents after the activation of warning sirens. In
addition, on 22 October, a three-month-old Israeli baby, among others, was killed
when a Palestinian man deliberately drove his car into a light rail train station in
East Jerusalem.
93. Allegations of nine instances of child recruitment and use by Palestinian
armed groups, including by the Al-Qassam Brigades, were reported. The following
five cases were verified: on 21 July, a 16-year-old Palestinian boy was injured and
captured during an ambush by the Al-Qassam Brigades on Israeli forces near
Kibbutz Nir Am/Erez. Two boys aged 17 years were killed in targeted attacks by
Israeli drone strikes in Jabaliya and Khan Younis on 12 and 14 July, both reportedly
associated with Palestinian armed groups. On 22 July, a 16 -year-old Palestinian boy,
reportedly recruited by the Al-Qassam Brigades, disappeared and his family was
informed of his death on 26 July. A video shows the boy giving his last statement,
including his full name. On 2 August, a 17-year-old boy who was reportedly used by
the Al-Qassam Brigades, was killed in the shelling of his home by Israeli security
forces. A video uploaded by Al-Qassam Brigades shows him undergoing military
training and giving his last testament.
94. On 23 July, a 17-year-old Palestinian boy was taken from his home near Khan
Younis by the Israeli security forces and forced at gunpoint to search for tunnels.
The boy reported being interrogated, abused and used to extract information about
Hamas members.
95. Palestinian children continued to be arrested and detained by the Israeli
security forces and prosecuted in juvenile military courts. According to the Israeli
Prison Service, 151 children between 14 and 17 years of age were in Israeli military
detention for alleged security violations at the end of December. A monthly average
of 188 children were in Israeli military custody.
96. The United Nations obtained the affidavits of 122 Palestinian children from the
West Bank, who had been detained by the Israeli security forces, in which they stated
that they had been subjected to ill-treatment, such as beatings, being hit with sticks,
being blindfolded, being kicked and being subjected to verbal abuse and threats of
sexual violence. At least 700 children were arrested in East Jerusalem, 70 of whom
were under the age of 13 years. The United Nations received 18 affidavits from
Palestinian children reporting ill-treatment by the Israeli police and the border police.
97. Since February, IDF Central Command for the West Bank have implemented a
pilot summons procedure to halt the practice of night arrests and tackle some of the
protection issues. There are concerns regarding the delivery of summonses at night,
arrests following appearance at police stations and reports of violations during the
interrogation process.
98. In Gaza, between 8 July and 26 August, at least 262 schools wer e damaged in
Israeli air strikes. Three public schools were completely destroyed and at least 23
were severely damaged. In addition, 274 kindergartens were damaged.

15-06098

17/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

99. Of the 83 school buildings of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) that were damaged owing to Israeli
airstrikes and shelling nearby, 7 being used as shelters were hit either directly or by
air strikes or shelling, resulting in the death of at least 42 persons, including
16 children, and in the injury of about 230 persons. In May, the United Nations
shared a list of its facilities with the Government of Israel, which was further
discussed with government entities in July. During hostilities in July and August,
UNRWA provided the Israeli authorities with real-time information identifying
installations that were being used as designated emergency shelters and places of
temporary refuge. Despite such information, on 24 July, the UNRWA Beit Hanoun
Elementary Coed A and D school, which at the time was sheltering some 450
internally displaced persons, was hit by IDF mortar fire, resulting in the death of at
least 12 persons, including 6 children, and in the injury of more than 90 others. The
location of the school had been provided to Israeli authorities by United Nations
staff on 12 separate occasions over the seven days leading up to the incident,
including the day of the incident itself. Intense military activity was reported in the
vicinity of the school prior to, but not at the time of, the i ncident. IDF launched a
criminal investigation.
100. On 30 July, artillery projectiles struck the UNRWA Jabalia Elementary Girls A
and B School, killing at least 17 persons, including one United Nations staff
member, and injuring 99 persons sheltering inside. The school’s coordinates had
been formally conveyed to the Israeli authorities on at least 28 occasions over a
14-day span, including the night before the incident.
101. On 25 August, two Government schools were attacked and destroyed by air
strikes. In addition to the July and August incidents, seven instances of attacks on
schools were reported throughout the rest of the year.
102. During its routine inspections, UNRWA discovered that weapons or weapons
components had been placed by Palestinian armed elements in three vacant UNRWA
schools in Gaza.
103. In the West Bank, in 21 cases, the Israeli security force entered and used
schools. On five occasions in the West Bank, UNRWA school premises were entered
without the permission of the United Nations.
104. On 10 November, the Secretary-General decided to establish a United Nations
Headquarters Board of Inquiry into ten incidents in which death or injury occurred
and damage was done to, or weaponry was found at, United Nations facilities during
the conflict.
105. Between 8 July and 26 August, 17 of the 32 hospitals in Gaza were damaged
by Israeli air strikes or shelling. One hospital and 58 primary health clinics were
destroyed. For instance, on 21 July, Al-Aqsa Martyrs Hospital was directly hit
numerous times, killing three persons and injuring 40. Reportedly, no warning of the
attack was given. The Israeli security forces claimed that the target was a cache of
missiles in the hospital’s immediate vicinity. That attack raises concerns about
observance of the special protection accorded to hospitals under international law.
106. Three hits on schools were recorded in Israel by rockets fired from Gaza by
Palestinian armed groups, resulting in damage to the school facilities, with no
fatalities.

18/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

107. The blockade of Gaza since June 2007 continued to take a heavy toll on
humanitarian assistance for more than 80 per cent of the families in Gaza. It has
impacted the provision of health services, which suffered from a lack of adequate
equipment, instruments and essential medicine. The Erez checkpoint with Israel and
the Rafah crossing with Egypt, serving 1.7 million people, remain the only two
humanitarian access points.
108. The Military Advocate General requested the IDF fact-finding and assessment
mechanism to examine a number of “exceptional incidents” that occurred during the
Gaza crisis. As at April 2015, the Military Advocate General had conducted an
initial examination of more than 100 incidents and opened criminal investigations
for 13. Since the focus of the Mechanism is on “exceptional incidents”, concerns
remain over its not addressing failures to ensure respect for international law at the
policy level and the State’s duty to investigate all incidents, policies or tactics that
may violate international law.
109. The Israeli and the Palestinian authorities have an obligation to ensure that
allegations of violations of international humanitarian and human rights law are
promptly, effectively, independently, and impartially investigated, and that those
responsible are brought to justice.
110. Israel has repeatedly claimed that its military operation in Gaza was in response
to rocket fire into Israel and that it was conducted in full compliance with its
international obligations. However, I am deeply alarmed at the extent of grave
violations suffered by children as a result of Israeli military operations in 2014. The
unprecedented and unacceptable scale of the impact on children in 2014 raises grave
concerns about Israel’s compliance with international humanitarian law, notably the
principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution in attack, and respect for
international human rights law, particularly in relation to excessive use of force. It is
of particular concern that “Operation Protective Edge” was the third major Israeli
military operation in Gaza within six years. The cumulative impact on children and
the civilian population in general of these military operations, and the ongoing
military occupation in the State of Palestine, is devastating. As indicated earlier in the
present report, the number of Palestinian children killed (557) is the third highest in
2014, after the number of children killed in (a) Afghanistan (710) and (b) Iraq (679),
and before the number of children killed in (c) Syrian Arab Republic (368) and
(d) Darfur (197). The number of schools damaged or destroyed in the State of
Palestine (at least 543) was the highest recorded number of all situations in 2014.
111. I urge Israel to take concrete and immediate steps, includi ng by reviewing
existing policies and practices, to protect children, to prevent the killing and
maiming of children, and to respect the special protections afforded to schools and
hospitals. An essential measure in that regard is ensuring accountability f or
perpetrators of alleged violations. I further urge Israel to engage in a dialogue with
my Special Representative and the United Nations to ensure that there is no
recurrence in grave violations against children.
Lebanon
112. Lebanon was heavily affected by insecurity and the existing trends of
improvised explosive device attacks, urban clashes and cross-border shelling from
the Syrian Arab Republic continued. Direct attacks by armed groups on the
Lebanese Armed Forces resulted in violent clashes, particularly in the Arsal, Bekaa

15-06098

19/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

governorate and in the Tripoli, North governorate. The United Nations collected
credible information on children as young as 14 years of age who had joined armed
factions in Palestinian camps and armed parties operating in the Syrian Arab
Republic, particularly in border areas. The United Nations also received verified
reports of at least 25 boys arrested by the Lebanese armed forces during
anti-terrorism raids, mostly conducted in Arsal and Tripoli bet ween August and
December, and kept in pretrial detention together with adults under military
jurisdiction for national security offences. In mid -January 2015, the children were
transferred to the area of the prison hosting children.
113. According to consistent reports from different sources, at least 17 boys and
three girls were killed and four boys injured, mostly by gunshots or stray bullets,
during armed clashes in urban areas. Six of them, three Lebanese and three Syrian,
were reportedly killed during shelling by the Syrian Air Force on Arsal on
17 January. A 15-year-old Syrian refugee boy was summarily executed by al-Nusra
elements in Arsal in June.
114. School facilities and learning activities were affected by armed violence,
particularly in Tripoli surrounding areas, where 97 schools were used as shelters,
depriving at least 20,000 students of education. Sporadic incidents of armed
violence also affected the provision of humanitarian assistance.
115. As a result of an increase in the identification of children associated with
armed groups, relevant authorities, civil society and the United Nations carried out
advocacy to ensure that the children received support, including access to protection
and reintegration programmes. In that context, I welcome the signing by the
Government of a workplan to prevent and respond to the association of children
with armed violence and encourage that the provisions be fully implemented.
Finally, I urge Lebanon to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict which it signed
in 2002.
Libya
116. The security situation in Libya deteriorated sharply in 2014, particularly in the
fourth quarter of the year. Internal armed conflicts erupted in various parts of the
country, including in its two largest cities, Tripoli and Benghazi. Humanitarian and
monitoring access remained severely limited owing to security reasons and relief
operations were suspended almost entirely following the relocation o f United
Nations international staff out of the country.
117. Although no verified information on the recruitment and use of children was
available, concerns persisted over the association of children with armed militias.
Furthermore, in May, during “Operation Dignity” in eastern Libya, forces loyal to
General Khalifa Haftar allegedly detained dozens of males, possibly also children,
based on their nationality, political or religious affiliation. This reportedly included
a 17-year-old boy, who had allegedly been detained with three other youths, and
who was tortured and died in custody in Benghazi.
118. The United Nations received numerous reports of indiscriminate shelling by
all parties to the conflict, as well as of the deliberate destruction of homes i n
Warshafana and Benghazi. Following the escalation of the conflict in May, the

20/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

United Nations received reports of about 30 children killed across the country, but
the actual number is likely to be underreported.
119. The shelling of hospitals in Tripoli and Benghazi severely affected children’s
access to health care. Both the Al-Afya Hospital and the Tripoli Medical Centre
were hit by shells in July and August, respectively. In November, four medical staff
were reportedly abducted from the Hawari General Hospital but managed to escape,
while another was shot dead, resulting in the resignation of many staff.
120. Reports of the use of schools and hospitals by armed groups were also a cause
for concern. For instance, in Benghazi, Ansar al-Shari’a reportedly took control of
the General Hospital and placed snipers on the roof. Many schools in eastern Libya
had been closed since May due to the security situation, including those hosting
internally displaced persons.
121. In the West, armed groups, either affiliated with the Libya Dawn coalition or
rival armed groups from Warshafana or Zintan, abducted children in the aftermath
of the fighting in Tripoli, as well as during the fighting in Warshafana. In addition,
human rights defenders reportedly received threats from armed groups that their
children would be abducted and killed if they did not stop their work.
Lord’s Resistance Army (Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the
Congo and South Sudan)
122. During the reporting period, LRA was in survival mode but continued to
engage in attacks on civilians, looting and kidnapping. A total of 13 children were
recruited, mostly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Abduction of children in
LRA-affected countries remained the most significant violation. A total of 42 cases
were reported in the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, many of those children were released immediately after being
used to carry looted items. Others were held in captivity by LRA for three to four
days before either being released or escaping. The United Nations continued to
provide psychosocial assistance and support to family reunification in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan and
Uganda for the 180 children and young mothers who escaped or were released by
LRA. The absence of long-term reintegration programmes for child returnees
remained a challenge to the sustainability of those efforts. Owing to the dec rease in
LRA activity, the present section will be removed from the 2016 report if the current
trends continue, and the violations will be reported in the relevant country sections.
Mali
123. Owing to repeated violations of the ceasefire agreement signed by the
Government of Mali and the two coalitions of armed groups — the Coordination
and the Platform — the security situation deteriorated considerably in northern
Mali, especially after the resumption of hostilities in Kidal in May. In that context,
the monitoring and verification of violations against children remained difficult and,
therefore, violations are estimated to be underreported.
124. The United Nations verified the recruitment and use of 84 children within the
ranks of Mouvement national de libération de l’Azawad (MNLA), Haut Conseil
pour l’unité de l’Azawad (HCUA), Mouvement arabe de l’Azawad (MAA)-Sidati,
MAA-Ould Sidi Mohamed and Groupe d’autodéfense Touaregs Imghad et alliés

15-06098

21/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

(GATIA) in the regions of Kidal, Timbuktu, Gao and Mopti. In addition, allegations
were received indicating that hundreds of children are currently associated with
armed groups and engaged in hostilities, but the information could not be verified.
125. In accordance with the protocol on the release and reintegration of children
associated with the armed forces and armed groups of 1 July 2013, four children
detained under security charges were released. However, nine children remained in
detention in Bamako for alleged association with armed groups, some for as long a s
two years. In June, the Ministry of Justice appointed a focal point to work with the
United Nations on this issue.
126. The killing of nine children and the injuring of 23 were verified. Explosive
remnants of war claimed all but one life and injured 21 c hildren in the Mopti, Gao
and Kidal regions. The widespread use of explosive remnants of war is of great
concern since armed groups have left behind many remnants that have contaminated
areas, mostly around Gao.
127. Thirty-eight incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence against girls
were perpetrated by MNLA (6), Malian Defence and Security Forces (4) and
unidentified armed elements (28) in Gao and Timbuktu regions. Reporting on sexual
violence remained challenging, owing to fear of reprisals, lack of medical and
judicial capacity and services in certain areas and preference for settlements outside
judicial proceedings.
128. The United Nations verified one attack against a school in the Gao region in
May. There were 20 cases of military use of schools, mainly attributed to MNLA
and to joint troops of MNLA, HCUA, MAA-Coordination, and Coalition du peuple
de l’Azawad. Nearly 60 per cent of the schools militarily used are located in Gao,
while the others are in Kidal, Timbuktu, and Mopti. In the region of Kidal, almost
all schools remained closed. Peacekeepers of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali used three schools in Gao city, Ansongo
Cercle and Tabankort. In December, the Gao vocational school was vacated and the
United Nations is currently refurbishing it. The use of one health centre by MNLA
since March was documented in Ménaka, in the Gao region.
129. Reports of abduction of girls aged 12 to 16 years by unidentifie d individuals
were also received, mostly in the context of clashes between the Peulh and Dogon
communities.
130. Twenty-four incidents of denial of humanitarian access severely affecting the
delivery of humanitarian assistance were verified but the perpetr ators could not be
identified.
131. Despite some initial progress made to address impunity for violations against
children, slow restoration of state authority, including the reestablishment of a
functioning judiciary in northern Mali, remained of great c oncern. Moreover, at
least two suspected perpetrators of sexual violence were released from detention
without being charged, as part of confidence-building measures within the
framework of the peace negotiations.
132. The United Nations engaged with armed groups, such as MAA-Ould Sidi
Mohamed and GATIA in Tabankort, MNLA and HCUA in Kidal, the leadership of
the Coordination des mouvements et forces patriotiques de résistance II (CMFPR -II)
in Timbuktu, and the joint troops of MNLA and MAA -Sidati in Ber. The latter

22/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

engagement resulted in the signing of local command orders that prohibit all six
grave violations against children. In September, the United Nations also conducted a
screening of the MAA-Sidati and MNLA joint troops stationed in Ber, and identified
five children aged between 15 and 17 years and two young adults who had been
recruited as children. In line with advocacy efforts by my Special Representative on
Children and Armed Conflict, I call upon all parties involved in the inter -Malian
peace process to take into consideration specific provisions to end and prevent
violations against children in the peace agreement and its implementation.
Myanmar
133. Armed clashes between Government armed forces (Tatmadaw) and ethnic
armed groups continued in Kachin, Northern Shan and, to a lesser extent, in Kayin
State. By December, growing tensions between the Government and armed groups
were negatively affecting progress towards a national ceasefire agreement. In
October, four Karen armed groups, including the Karen National Liberation Army
and the Democratic Karen Benevolent Army formed the Kawthoolei Armed Forces
Alliance, allegedly in response to increased Tatmadaw operations.
134. A total of 357 cases of child recruitment and use by the Tatmadaw were
reported through the Country Task Force-operated phone line, the forced labour
complaint mechanism of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and
community monitoring. At least 27 of the children, as young as 14 years of age,
were newly recruited in 2014. Children were either enlisted owing to economic
circumstances and family problems, or were deliberately tricked or forced into
joining. The Government-led awareness campaign launched in November 2013
resulted in an increase in reports to the United Nations of child recruitment.
135. The United Nations received reports that children were deployed to the front
line as combatants and in support roles and reported 15 such cases to the Tatmadaw,
after which nine children were discharged and the others removed from the front
line. A total of 389 boys and young males recruited as children were released from
the Tatmadaw. Those released received reintegration assistance from the United
Nations and its partners in collaboration with the Department of Social Welfare.
136. Detention of children as “deserters” remained a concern. Of the 53 documented
cases of children escaping from the Tatmadaw, 13 were arrested on charges of
desertion, with cases increasing towards the end of the year. The United Nations
also received a worrisome report of a 16-year-old boy who had allegedly committed
suicide while associated with the Tatmadaw in a battalion in Kayah State.
137. In addition to children recruited into the formal ranks of the Tatmadaw, several
incidences of informal association of children were recorded, including as porters
and scouts. For example, a 12-year-old boy from Chin State was approached by a
soldier and taken to eastern Shan State where he was forced to carry out camp
management tasks for five months. In Rakhine State, two battalions have been using
a 16-year-old boy for support duties one day per week under abusive work
conditions since he was 11. Up to 50 children were used by the same battalions.
138. Children also continued to be recruited by armed groups, including through
abductions. For example, the United Nations verified five reports of children
associated with the Kachin Independence Army (KIA). On 12 March, two girls,
aged 15 and 16 years, were abducted by two KIA elements in Mansi Township.

15-06098

23/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

After four days in captivity, they were asked to join KIA in support roles. In another
incident, a 12-year-old boy was allegedly used as a combatant by KIA and was
injured during a firefight with the Tatmadaw in Namkhan. Owing to access issues
and limited capacity, the United Nations was largely unable to monitor the presence
of children in armed groups.
139. Three children were injured in Kachin and northern Shan States and one child
was reportedly killed in crossfire. For example, on 29 July, two boys, aged 16 and
17 years, were injured in shelling during clashes between the Ta ’ang National
Liberation Army and the Tatmadaw. According to a credible report, on 28 July, a
16-year-old boy was allegedly killed by the Tatmadaw because of his perceived
association with the KIA in northern Shan State.
140. In the absence of a peace agreement, demining and marking explosive
remnants of war remained impossible and children continued to be maimed and
killed. For example, a 17-year-old boy stepped on a landmine in Kayin State and
lost his right leg and injured his left leg seriously. In Mansi township, the KIA
allegedly used civilians and internally displaced persons to clear areas of landmines.
Of particular concern are landmines laid by the Tatmadaw and KIA in close
proximity to schools in Kachin and northern Shan States.
141. The United Nations verified the rape of a 14-year-old mentally challenged girl
in northern Shan State by a Tatmadaw private who was initially convicted by a
military tribunal for neglecting his duty. Following pressure from civil society, the
case was transferred to a civilian court, which sentenced the soldier to 13 years in
prison for raping a minor.
142. The Tatmadaw continued to use a vacated school building in Bhamo, Kachin
State. Also in Kachin, the Alen Bum boys’ dormitory in Laiza was used by
KIA-affiliated militia elements as a training facility during summer. After advocacy
by the United Nations, KIA instructed the militia to vacate the school and
committed itself in writing to prohibit its military use.
143. Humanitarian access to areas outside of Government control in Kachin and
northern Shan States improved compared to the previous reporting period, but
remained severely restricted, owing also to administrative delays. Twenty -eight
cross-line missions provided assistance to approximately 30,000 persons.
144. Positive steps have been taken by the Government to advance the
implementation of the action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children. This included the regular discharge of children from the Tatmadaw, regular
review meetings with the United Nations to expedite discharges, strengthened
training efforts to sensitize Tatmadaw troops and, in September, the endorsement of
a workplan for full implementation of the action plan. In January, the United
Nations was granted monitoring access with 72-hour notice to the Border Guard
Forces and experienced increased access to Tatmadaw facilities in 11 monitoring
visits. The Government and ILO have also been actively cooperating to eli minate
forced labour, including recruitment and use, by 2015. Despite progress made,
children continue to be present in the Tatmadaw ranks. I urge the Government to
take action to prevent recruitment and to exercise due diligence to ensure that
children escaping from the Tatmadaw are not arrested as “deserters”. Prevention of
child recruitment, as well as oversight mechanisms at all stages of the recruitment
process, need to be strengthened urgently.

24/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

Somalia
145. The security situation remained extremely volatile, particularly in southcentral Somalia, leading to displacement of more than 80,000 persons. The reporting
period witnessed a gradual build-up of joint operations by the Somalia National
Army and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), driving Al-Shabaab
out of key towns in southern and central regions.
146. A total of 1,870 violations against children were documented, affecting
1,482 boys and 250 girls, with 806 out of 893 incidents verified. While the numbers
represent a substantial reduction compared with 2013, the decline is largely
attributable to the reduced capacity and access to verify incidents.
147. The recruitment and use of 819 children (779 boys, 40 girls) by Al -Shabaab
(437), national army and allied militia (197), Ahl Al-Sunna wal-Jama’a (109) and
other armed elements (76) was documented. Of particular concern was the ongoing
recruitment and use of children by clan militias. Al -Shabaab sustained a campaign
of recruitment targeting children and youth in mosques and schools, for example,
recruiting 82 children in mosques or during religious events. Reports were also
received of five boys used by AMISOM in support functions.
148. The detention of children in Somalia remained a concern, with 286 children
(277 boys, nine girls) detained by the national army and other security forces (229),
Al-Shabaab (44) and other armed groups (4). Seven of the nine girls were kept in
Al-Shabaab custody. Of the children detained by government security forces, many
were arrested following house searches and security operations and most were
released a few days after the arrest. Of concern is the situation of children held at
the Serendi rehabilitation centre in Mogadishu, whom my Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict met during her visit in August. The children have
been deprived of their liberty, as they are not free to leave the centre. The
Government must ensure that any child deprived of his or her liberty for alleged
association with armed groups is treated primarily as a victim and handed over to
child protection actors.
149. Some 340 incidents of killing and maiming were documented affecting
520 children (393 boys, 127 girls) perpetrated by the national army and allied
militia (193), Al-Shabaab (96), and other armed elements (231). Children have been
killed in crossfire, sometimes during joint national army/AMISOM operations and
in suicide attacks. Targeted attacks against the national army, AMISOM and
prominent Federal Government of Somalia officials also led to large numbers of
civilian casualties, including children. Al-Shabaab carried out public executions,
including of children, as punitive measures and to instil fear. One boy and one girl
were executed on suspicion of being spies for the Federal Government or AMISOM.
Seventeen children were reported killed and maimed during military operations by
AMISOM.
150. The monitoring and reporting of rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children remained a challenge, among other things, because of the victims ’
fear of stigmatization. A total of 70 incidents affecting 76 girls were reportedly
committed by the national army and allied militia (24), Al -Shabaab (19) and other
armed groups (33). Girls in internally displaced persons camps were particularly
vulnerable to sexual violence and forced marriage. At least 13 documented incidents
of abduction resulted in rape and forced marriage. In one particularly tragic incident

15-06098

25/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

in April, a 14-year-old female internally displaced person was abducted, raped and
then killed by unknown armed men.
151. Seventeen schools were subjected to attacks by Al-Shabaab (eight), the
national army and allied militia (six), and unknown armed elements (three). One
school was also severely damaged in shelling by AMISOM. Al -Shabaab continued
to use schools for recruitment and disrupted learning for hundreds of children
including by distributing jihadist booklets for teachers and conducting
indoctrination lectures. Incidents targeting protected personnel were also
documented such as the detention of two teachers by Al-Shabaab for declining to
refer their students to religious classes. Four schools were used for military
purposes by the national army (three), later vacated, and Al -Shabaab (one). It was
also reported that AMISOM used a school for military purposes during a few days
in December.
152. Four hospitals were attacked by unknown armed groups (3) and Al-Shabaab
(1) and incidents affecting related-personnel were documented. In one incident,
Al-Shabaab abducted a health worker to provide medical care to its wounded
fighters. Other incidents included improvised explosive device attacks against two
hospitals resulting in the deaths of two doctors and two boys.
153. A total of 133 children were abducted, by Al -Shabaab (97), the national army
and allied militia (25), and unknown armed groups (11). More than half of the
children abducted by Al-Shabaab were used to increase its numbers ahead of joint
national army/AMISOM operations.
154. Fifteen incidents of denial of humanitarian access were reported, the majo rity
by unknown armed groups, and 3 each by Al-Shabaab and the national army.
155. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict visited Somalia in
August to assess the situation of children affected by conflict, engage with the
Federal Government of Somalia on the implementation of the two action plans
signed in 2012 to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children and advocate
for the strengthening of the legal framework for the protection of children.
156. Coordination mechanisms between the United Nations, the Federal
Government of Somalia, AMISOM and other partners were established to facilitate
the implementation of the action plans. Significant steps were also taken with the
signature of standard operating procedures for the handover of children separated
from armed groups in February and the establishment of a child protection unit at
the national army headquarters. Moreover, a mobile national army/United Nations
team screened over 1,000 soldiers and the Barre Aden Shire “Hirale” militia that
surrendered in anticipation of integration into the national army. No children were
found during the screening exercises. The United Nations provided training on child
protection to more than 8,000 national army soldiers, in collaboration with the
European Union Training Mission in Somalia and AMISOM. In addition, following
United Nations advocacy, the AMISOM Force Commander issued a directive to
reinforce accountability and compliance with children’s rights during operations.
157. Following the listing of Ahl Al-Sunna wal-Jama’a for the recruitment and use
of children, the United Nations initiated dialogue with the group and discussed steps
towards the formulation of a commitment to halt and prevent continuation of the
practice.

26/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

158. The United Nations also supported the reintegration of 500 children (375 boys,
125 girls) through community-based programmes. Reintegration activities included
provision of psychosocial assistance, “back-to-school” support programmes and
vocational training.
159. In December, in a positive legislative development, the Federal Parliament
adopted a law ratifying the Convention of the Rights of the Child. The law was
signed by President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud on 20 January 2015. I welcome the
progress made by the Federal Government of Somalia and I encourage it to sustain
all its efforts to better protect children in Somalia, including by finalizing the
ratification process of the Convention and to take steps to ratify its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
South Sudan
160. The political landscape in South Sudan changed dramatically in the wake of
heavy fighting that broke out in Juba on 15 December 2013. Although the onset of
the conflict was sparked by political issues, an ethnic dimension quickly evolved
and had devastating effects for children. There was a large increase in the number of
violations in 2014, with a total of 514 verified incidents affecting 16,307 children. A
detailed account of the effects of the armed conflict on children in South Sudan is
available in my recent report to the Security Council, covering the period from
1 March 2011 to 30 September 2014 (S/2014/884).
161. Eighty-one incidents of recruitment and use of children were verified,
affecting 617 children (612 boys, 5 girls). The majority were associated with the
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) (310) and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army in Opposition (SPLA-IO) (108), but also with the South Sudan National
Police Service, the South Sudan Wildlife Service, the South Sudan Liberation Army
(SSLA), the South Sudan Democratic Movement/Army-Cobra Faction (SSDM/A-CF),
the White Army and armed groups allied to Gabriel Tanginye. Unverified large
numbers of children have also been observed with the Johnson Olonyi armed group,
whose troop integration into SPLA was pending completion as at April 2015, and
with other unidentified armed actors. Children were at risk of recruitment in refugee
and internally displaced persons camps, protection of civilian sites and in their own
communities. Given the challenging security situation and safety concerns for
children, it has not always been possible to verify information. Last, as reported in
the section of the present on the Sudan, in January and February, 64 boys, aged
14 to 17 years, were reportedly recruited by the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) in Unity State, South Sudan. Fifty-five of those cases were verified.
162. Ninety children were verified killed and 220 injured. There was also a
disturbing increase in the incidents of killing and maiming of children reported to
the United Nations that could not be verified. One report identified up to 490 bodies
of children in mass graves found around Bor following heavy fightin g at the start of
the conflict. Some of the reported incidents suggest that children were summarily
executed. For instance, following the fighting in Rubkona and Bentiu towns in
April, two boys were found dead with their hands tied behind their back outsid e a
mosque that was used by civilians seeking protection. The affiliation of the
perpetrators is unknown but the incident occurred during an exchange of fire
between SPLA and SPLA-IO.

15-06098

27/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

163. In another incident, the United Nations received testimonies from boys aged
14 to 17 years in Juba who had been detained by security forces and subjected to
inhumane and degrading treatment, such as beatings and being urinated upon,
during interrogations about ethnic affiliation and involvement in the conflict.
164. Rape and other forms of sexual violence were reported, with a total of
22 incidents verified affecting 36 children (4 boys and 32 girls) by SPLA (24), JEM
(4), SPLA-IO (1) and unknown perpetrators (7). In April, when SPLA -IO took
control of Bentiu, hate speech calling upon persons to kill and commit sexual
violence against non-Nuers and foreigners was broadcast on local radio.
165. There were seven incidents of attacks on schools, including looting, and
60 involving military use. Thirty-four schools in use, some before the reporting
period, were vacated following United Nations advocacy; as at December,
33 reportedly remained in use by numerous armed actors, affecting access to
education for approximately 11,000 children. A total of 22 incidents of attacks on
medical clinics and health centres were also verified. In one incident in April,
Bentiu Hospital was attacked by SPLA-IO, and medical staff, patients and civilians
seeking protection inside the hospital, were killed.
166. Thirty-four incidents of abduction were verified affecting 147 children
(52 boys, 95 girls). The United Nations received worrisome reports of large -scale
abductions, including up to 105 children (29 boys, 76 girls) by SPLA -IO in Malakal
in February. As at April 2015, abductions continued in large numbers.
167. One hundred and ninety-nine incidents of denial of humanitarian access were
verified, representing a large increase from 2013. Incidents included forceful entry
into compounds, looting, seizure of assets and harassment of humanitarian workers.
168. No incidents of LRA attacks involving children were reported in South Sudan.
However, a total of 43 children either escaped or were rescued from the group.
Twenty-eight of them have since been reunified with their families, while the rest
remain in the interim care centre in Yambio, Western Equatoria State, pending
family tracing and reunification.
169. Family tracing and reunification remained a challenge, owing partly to limited
access or no access for child protection actors to some area s. Rapid response
missions were occasionally conducted to provide basic, life -saving assistance to
children in hard-to-reach areas. During a meeting with my Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict, the leader of the South Sudan Democratic
Army — Cobra Faction (SSDM/A-CF), David Yau Yau, acknowledged that he had
recruited children and declared himself ready to release them. As at April 2015, over
750 children had been released to the United Nations and were receiving interim
care, psychosocial support and education service.
170. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict visited South
Sudan in June to assess the impact of the conflict on children and engage with
national authorities. During her visit, the President committed to i ssuing a decree
criminalizing the recruitment and use of children and to issuing command orders to
stop the military use of schools. My Special Representative also witnessed the
signature of the recommitment by the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs t o the
action plan to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children. The
recommitment also included stopping and preventing sexual violence, the killing
and maiming of children and attacks on schools and hospitals. In August, a

28/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

workplan to implement the agreement was endorsed. In October, the Government
and the United Nations launched the campaign entitled “Children, Not Soldiers” at
the national level. Following extensive advocacy, the Government and the United
Nations also established a joint high-level committee on children affected by armed
conflict. In May, the leader of SPLA-IO also signed a commitment agreement with
my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict to end violations
against children.
171. As at the end of 2014, neither the Government nor SPLA-IO had made any
progress in implementing their commitments. On the contrary, reports of violations,
particularly recruitment and use and abduction of children, continue unabated. I call
upon all parties to the conflict in South Sudan to stop all violations against children
and to take all necessary measures, including through prompt and thorough
investigations and prosecution, to hold perpetrators to account. I urge the
Government of South Sudan to take concrete measures and fully implement the
action plan and the recommitment agreement signed in June. I also urge SPLA -IO to
implement the commitment that its Chair signed with my Special Representative in
May.
Sudan
Three areas
172. Conflict continued in South Kordofan and Blue Nile, where large areas
remained inaccessible, especially those under the control of armed groups. After
several months of political deadlock, fighting intensified during the first quarter of
2014. The Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People ’s Liberation MovementNorth (SPLM-N) resumed talks in November in Addis Ababa under the auspices of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel, but negotiations were
suspended indefinitely by early December.
173. In April and December, the Government launched two phases of its “Decisive
Summer” campaign to regain control of areas controlled by SPLM -N. This resulted
in new waves of mass displacement. Tribal fighting was also observed, particularly
in West Kordofan, with one verified incident in November of clashes breaking out
among members of two Misseryia sub-clans in which at least 40 children were
reportedly killed or injured. The disputed area of Abyei also witnessed continuing
tensions.
174. The United Nations verified the recruitment of 60 boys aged 14 to 17 years by
the JEM (55) and SPLM-N (5). All but 3 of them occurred during a forced
recruitment campaign in refugee settlements in Unity State in South Sudan.
Unverified information was received about an additional 9 boys recruited by JEM in
that same period. Although no new recruitment cases by Sudanese Armed Forces
were verified, the United Nations received credible information of recruitment and
use of children by the Popular Defence Forces. Large areas of those states were
inaccessible, which limited United Nations ability to monitor allegations in order to
reflect the full extent of violations.
175. At least 12 incidents (2 verified) were reported, in which 62 children, aged 5
to 17 years, were killed or maimed. A boy was killed in the SPLM -N shelling of
Kadugli in May and another boy died in an explosive remnants of war incident.
Twenty-eight children (9 girls, 19 boys) were reportedly killed and 32 injured

15-06098

29/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

(7 girls, 25 boys) in the shelling by the armed forces of SPLM -N-controlled areas.
A further 42 children were reportedly killed or maimed as a result of tribal clashes.
176. Four boys, all South Sudanese refugees, were abducted by Arab men in
El Muglad locality, West Kordofan, and kept in captivity for approximately six
months. They were released and reunified with their families in August following
negotiations by the Sudan Police Family and Child Protection Unit.
177. One school and two hospitals run by NGOs were severely damaged in aerial
bombardments by the armed forces on SPLM-N-held territories, affecting access to
education and medical care for over 75,000 children. In one instance, six persons
were injured and the hospital’s emergency room and pharmacy were destroyed. The
United Nations also received credible information regarding the military use of
three schools by the armed forces in South Kordofan.
178. Access to Government and SPLM-N-controlled areas remained very
challenging, even though there was a slight improvement compared with 2013. For
the first time, the United Nations was granted limited access to Kurmuk and Bau
localities in Blue Nile. Access to Abyei through Kadugli continued to be difficult.
Darfur
179. Darfur continued to experience intermittent fighting between Government
forces and non-signatory armed groups, with a spike from January to May and in
December, following the launch of the Government ’s “Decisive Summer” military
offensive using the rapid support forces. Intertribal and intratribal clashes in which
children were involved intensified. In that context, the verification of violations
against children remained difficult.
180. The country task force on monitoring and reporting verified three boys
recruited and used by the armed forces and three by unidentified militias, a marked
decrease compared with 2013. However, allegations of the recruitment of children
continued to be received. In March, eyewitnesses reported the presence of boys
between 15 and 17 years of age during a rapid support forces parade in Nyala, South
Darfur. Another report mentioned that an estimated 37 children were seen carrying
machine guns in El Daein, East Darfur.
181. Moreover, 197 children (135 boys, 62 girls) were killed (65) and maimed
(132), by cross-fire during fighting between government forces and armed groups
and in aerial bombardments by the armed forces. In addition, 15 children were
killed and 29 injured by explosive remnants of war.
182. Forty-eight incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence affecting
60 girls were verified and attributed to the armed force s (15), the rapid support
forces (10) and unidentified armed men (35). In most cases, girls were raped during
attacks on their villages or when performing daily activities. Verifying cases of
sexual violence remains a challenge due to fear of reprisals, mi strust in law
enforcement and judicial authorities, and social stigma. In addition, the requirement
by law to prove rape as a crime before the provision of medical care deters
survivors and families from seeking help. When they do so, criminal law provisio ns
may be interpreted in such a way that the survivor is accused of adultery. In cases
where perpetrators are identified, families of victims often settle cases outside
judicial proceedings.

30/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

183. Furthermore, the United Nations received allegations of the rape of
200 women, including children, by the armed forces in Thabit, North Darfur, in
October. On 9 November, UNAMID conducted a mission to investigate the
allegations, which could not be verified, as security personnel were present during
UNAMID interactions with the community. UNAMID has since continued to face
restrictions in its effort to access Thabit.
184. Ten schools were severely damaged, destroyed or looted during fighting
between Government security forces and armed groups and in aerial bombardm ents
by the armed forces. Eight incidents of attacks, looting and destruction of hospitals
were reported. One school used militarily by the armed forces in South Darfur was
also verified.
185. Eight incidents of abduction of 13 children (10 boys, 3) were r eported and
attributed to the rapid support forces (4), border guards (3), armed forces (1) and
unidentified militias (5). Children were used in support functions or labour and
sometimes were sexually abused.
186. Denial of humanitarian access and the imposition of restrictions on movements
continued to impede efforts to reach affected communities, including children.
187. On 6 August, the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi established an
operational mechanism to end recruitment and use of children, following a
command order issued in December 2013. UNAMID engaged in dialogue with tribal
leaders and communities, which resulted in the adoption of a community -based
strategic plan to end use of children in intercommunal violence in October. It
followed the issuance of a command order by the leader of the Mahameed clan of
the Northern Rezeigat. On 26 November, UNAMID, UNICEF and the Sudan
commission on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration launched the Darfur wide campaign entitled “No Child Soldiers — Protect Darfur” in Masseriah, North
Darfur. Training and awareness-raising activities on child protection were also
conducted with civil society, religious and tribal leaders, state -level government
personnel and the armed forces.
188. Limited progress was observed in holding the perpetrators of violations
against children accountable. Twelve cases of arrest were documented by the
country task force on monitoring and reporting, of which 4 resulted in prosecution
and 1 in a sentence of 20 years’ imprisonment for rape.
189. I urge the Government of the Sudan to finalize and sign the action plan to
address recruitment and use of children by its security forces.
Syrian Arab Republic
190. Conflict continued at unprecedented levels across the Syrian Arab Repu blic,
resulting in massive violations against children. The United Nations verified
2,107 grave violations by all parties to the conflict in major urban and rural areas.
ISIL has taken over large parts of the country and used public brutality and
indoctrination to ensure the submission of communities; children were specifically
targeted. The United Nations had limited capacity to verify information in the areas
under the control of ISIL. Sieges and bombardments of civilian areas continued,
particularly by Syrian Government Forces, which also hampered the verification of
incidents.

15-06098

31/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

191. The recruitment and use of children in combat has become commonplace in
the Syrian Arab Republic. While actual numbers are expected to be higher, the
United Nations verified that 271 boys and 7 girls had been recruited and used by
groups affiliated with the Free Syrian Army (FSA) (142), Kurdish People ’s
Protection Units (YPG/YPJ) (24), ISIL (69) and al-Nusra Front (ANF) (25). In
77 per cent of the cases, children were armed or used in combat and almost one fifth
were under 15 years of age. Boys associated with armed groups were commonly
between 14 and 17 years of age, with 17 verified cases under the age of 15. In many
cases, children were paid to fight for salaries of up to $4 00 per month. The payment
of relatively large salaries by ANF, FSA, and in particular ISIL, created an incentive
for children and their parents under difficult economic circumstances.
192. Fragmentation of FSA resulted in localized and variable recruitment , training
and salary practices. During armed battles, children were used for fighting,
attending to the wounded or for recording events for propaganda purposes.
193. YPG/YPJ continued to recruit and use boys and girls, including children
younger than 15 years, reportedly taking them to indoctrination and training camps.
For example, in March, a 13-year-old girl was taken to Ras al-Ayn for military
training and the requests by her parents to see her were refused. In most cases,
children were used in combat roles, and repeated allegations of “conscription”
policies targeting children were levelled against YPG/YPJ.
194. Reports of the recruitment and use of boys by ISIL and ANF increased
significantly. In 25 per cent of verified cases, boys were under the ag e of 15,
including some as young as 8 years of age. ISIL reportedly established at least three
child training camps in Raqqa, and hundreds of boys as young as 10 years of age
were imprisoned in Aleppo, forced to attend indoctrination seminars and promised
salaries, mobile phones, weapons, a martyr ’s place in paradise and the “gift” of a
wife upon joining ISIL. In training and using children for combat roles, ISIL has
violated international humanitarian law and perpetrated war crimes on a mass scale.
Children were also recruited as suicide bombers and used to perpetrate extreme
violence. For example, in July, four boys fighting with ANF in Dar ’a participated in
the beheading of four Syrian Government Forces soldiers.
195. A number of pro-Government groups, including Hizbullah, also reportedly
recruited children in small numbers. Five boys joined the Popular Committee to
support Syrian Government forces in al-Midan, Damascus. Children were also used
as human shields and for forced labour. In November, children were among the
civilians reportedly forced at gunpoint to be in front of the Syrian Government
forces tanks entering the town of al-Sheikh Meskin to secure the Dar ’a-Damascus
highway.
196. Detention of children by Syrian authorities continued, with 38 veri fied cases
(31 boys, 7 girls), including 15 who were subjected to torture. Children were
arrested at checkpoints and schools. For example, in a verified incident in July, a
14-year-old boy from Homs, who had been detained in the State Security Centre,
confessed under torture to carrying weapons and attacking checkpoints.
197. Indiscriminate attacks launched in civilian populated areas continued to cause
widespread killing and maiming. The United Nations verified the killing of
368 children (184 boys, 66 girls, 118 gender unknown) by Syrian Government
forces (221), ISIL/ANF (44), FSA-affiliated groups (24), international coalition

32/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

airstrikes (4) and unknown parties (75). There were 771 cases of children maimed
(420 boys, 142 girls, 209 gender unknown) by Syrian Government forces and
pro-Government groups (336), FSA-affiliated groups (296), ISIL and ANF (19),
YPG/YPJ (1) and unknown parties (119) across the country. Actual numbers are
believed to be much higher.
198. Armed groups killed and maimed children by firing mortars mainly in
Government-controlled areas. For example, a 7-year-old boy and a teacher were
killed and 56 children injured in a mortar attack on the Al -Manar Armenian Catholic
School in Damascus in April. Vehicle-borne improvised explosive device and
suicide attacks by armed groups accounted for almost one fifth of child casualties.
In April, 69 children were killed and injured in a double vehicle -borne improvised
explosive device attack in a Government-controlled neighbourhood of Homs.
199. The public brutality and extreme violence perpetrated by ISIL also targeted
children. For example, in July, a 15-year-old boy accused of adultery was publicly
executed in Manbij, with his parents forced to watch and his corpse left on display
for three days. In November, civilians were forced to participate in the stoning of a
14-year-old girl in Dei-ez-Zor. ISIL reportedly encouraged children to participate in
public brutality, including holding decapitated heads for public display or playing
“football” with them.
200. Aerial bombardment of civilian areas accounted for over 90 per cent of
children documented killed and maimed by Syrian Government forces. In an attack
in April by Syrian Government forces on the Ein Jalout primary school in Aleppo,
33 children were killed and 40 injured. Barrel bombs accounted for almost one third
of child casualties inflicted by Syrian Government forces, including 6 children
killed in June in al-Shajara internally displaced persons camp, Dar ’a. Children
continued to be killed during ground operations by pro-Government groups. For
instance, in July, three children, aged 10 to 14 years, fleeing Suweida were killed by
Popular Committee fighters. Children also continued to fall victim to explosive
remnants of war.
201. The United Nations received 18 reports of sexual violence against children by
ISIL (9), Syrian Government forces (5), Popular Committees (2), FSA (1) and the
Kurdish police (1), of which 11 were verified. Forced marriage of girls to foreign
fighters became common in ISIL-controlled territory. In July, the father of a
14-year-old girl in Aleppo was tortured for three days until he agreed to have his
daughter marry an Egyptian ISIL “Emir”. ISIL issued guidance on the treatment of
sex slaves, including children, and Yazidi girls abducted in Iraq were moved to and
sold in Raqqa. Allegations of sexual violence against children by Syrian
Government forces and pro-Government groups continued, with doctors reporting
treating raped girls requesting abortions. In January, a 13 -year-old boy was
“arrested” at a checkpoint by the Popular Committee in Suweida and repeatedly
raped over the course of three days.
202. According to the Ministry of Education, 889 schools had been fully (379) or
partially (510) damaged by end-2014. The United Nations verified 60 attacks on
education facilities by Syrian Government forces (39), ISIL (9), FSA (1), and
unidentified parties (11). For example, in October two explosions near the
Al Makhzomi and Al Mouhdetheh primary schools in Akrama, Homs City, killed
29 children and maimed 27. Families repeatedly reported being too scared to send
their children to school. The military use of schools also continued, with nine

15-06098

33/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

verified cases: YPG/YPJ (4), FSA (3) and ISIL (2). ISIL appropriated schools for
child indoctrination, and in late 2014 all schools in ISIL -controlled Aleppo, Dei-ezZor and Raqqa were closed pending adoption of a “modified” curriculum.
203. By December, 413 medical facilities tracked by the United Nations were
partially or fully damaged, while 823 were only partially functioning or not
functioning due to shortage of staffing, equipment or use for other purposes. Eighty six attacks on health facilities and 178 medical personnel killed were reported. The
United Nations verified 28 attacks on health facilities and personnel by: Syrian
Government forces (17), ISIL (9) and unidentified parties (2). For example, in May,
a rocket attack on an FSA field hospital in an abandoned school in Jasem, Dar ’a
resulted in the death of two children and four medical personnel.
204. Abductions became a prominent tool used by ISIL. The United Nations
verified that ISIL abducted and/or imprisoned 463 children, including for use in
prisoner exchanges and for recruitment purposes, a number of whom were tortured.
In May, 153 Kurdish boys aged 13 to 17 years were abducted in Manbij, Aleppo,
while returning home from their school exams. Armed groups also arbitrarily
detained children for alleged “criminal” offenses.
205. By January 2015, 212,000 persons remained under siege, 163,500 of them by
Syrian Government forces and 26,500 by armed groups, and subjected to starvation.
Children attempting to escape besieged areas were killed by snipers or in
minefields. In January, an 11-year-old boy was killed by a sniper while attempting
to leave al-Nashabiya, Rural Damascus. Attacks by armed groups on civilian
infrastructure left millions of persons, including children, without access to water
and electricity. Administrative blockages and refusals to allow certain items on
inter-agency convoys, including surgical supplies, were common and threats and
attacks on humanitarian personnel and facilities continued.
206. There were several meetings between the United Nations and the
Government’s Interministerial Committee on Child Protection, and an expert level
group of government and United Nations officials was established to strengthen
engagement. In May, the United Nations provided training materials to support the
Commission for Family Affairs in conducting child rights orientation for Syrian
Government forces; however, this has yet to be implemented. Legislative Decree 22,
adopted in June, granted an amnesty for children associated with armed groups, and
the Government committed to diverting those children to rehabilitation programmes.
However, cases of children detained by Syrian Government forces were verified by
the United Nations throughout the year. In all circu mstances, children are entitled to
benefit from the special status of juveniles in conflict with the law, in conformity
with international humanitarian and human rights law.
207. The political and military leadership of both YPG/YPJ and the FSA Supreme
Military Council publicly committed to ending child recruitment and use, enforcing
disciplinary measures and issuing command orders to that effect. However, the
recruitment and use of children by both groups following these commitments
continued and was verified by the United Nations.
Yemen
208. During the reporting period, the security situation deteriorated significantly in
the northern governorates where Al Houthi/Ansar Allah (hereinafter Ansar Allah)

34/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

expanded its presence. Armed clashes took place between the Yemeni Armed Forces
and Islah-backed pro-Government tribal militias and tribal armed groups, against
Ansar Allah and Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP). The situation in the
southern governorates also remained tense and armed clashes took place in
Al Dhale’e. A mass offensive was conducted by YAF against AQAP and Ansar
Al Sharia’, and clashes continued in Aden between Al Hirak (a southern cessation
movement) supporters and the security forces. As at April 2015, an international
coalition had launched airstrikes against Ansar Allah, which reportedly resulted in a
significant number of child casualties.
209. The United Nations verified a significant increase from 2013 of recruitment
and use of children, with a total of 156 boys recruited and used between the ages of
9 and 17. The majority (140) of cases were perpetrated by Ansar Allah with a highly
visible presence. The United Nations observed and documented armed children
manning checkpoints, being present on armed vehicles and guarding buil dings.
Following Ansar Allah’s expansion into the capital in September, distinguishing
between members of YAF and Ansar Allah became increasingly challenging,
particularly at checkpoints. Eleven boys between the ages of 16 and 17 were
recruited and used by Islah-backed tribal militias aligned with the Government or
Salafists, all except two of them in the frontlines. An additional four boys were
verified as joining tribal armed groups in Al Bayda governorate.
210. The numbers of child casualties increased significantly from the previous
reporting period, with 74 children (56 boys, 18 girls) killed and 244 (176 boys,
68 girls) maimed. Child casualties due to mines and other explosive devices more
than doubled, with 10 children killed and 54 maimed. Ansar Alla h was targeted and
attacked, including by two suicide bombings that killed 14 and injured 25 boys. A
total of 14 children were killed and 30 maimed by six improvised explosive devices,
including an attack on an Ansar Allah checkpoint. Another 10 children w ere killed
and 37 injured due to shelling, and 2 boys and 3 girls were maimed as a result of
aerial bombings, including one drone strike on 29 September in Al Jawf, which
maimed 1 boy and 2 girls.
211. Nine boys were detained by Ansar Allah as they reportedly conducted “law
enforcement operations”. Six other incidents of detention by Ansar Allah were also
verified involving six boys. four of whom were detained for their alleged
association with Islah, and one because of his father ’s association with Islah.
212. The United Nations verified 35 attacks against schools. For example, all
10 schools attacked in Amanah Al Asimah governorate were destroyed during
clashes that took place in September between Ansar Allah and YAF and
pro-Government tribal militias. Nine attacks were attributed to YAF and eight to
Ansar Allah. In many cases schools were forced to close completely.
213. The United Nations verified 13 attacks against hospitals by Ansar Allah and
YAF, which severely hampered the provision of medical servic es. For example, on
21 January, a hospital in Al Dhale’e district was shelled by YAF, resulting in the
death of a 45-day-old boy and injury to his 2-year-old sister while they were trying
to escape the shelling with their father.
214. Ninety-two schools were verified as being used for military purposes by armed
forces and groups with the majority of schools being used by Ansar Allah for
providing accommodation or as weapons’ storage. In response to that trend, the

15-06098

35/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

Ministry of Education and Governorate Education Offices, supported by the United
Nations, established task forces on education in emergency, which vacated at least
25 schools used by Ansar Allah.
215. In total, 43 denials of humanitarian access were verified. In a positive
development, a United Nations staff member kidnapped by an unknown armed
group was released in November after 13 months in captivity.
216. On 14 May, in a ceremony attended by my Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, the Government of Yemen signed an action pla n with the
United Nations to end and further prevent the recruitment and use of children by
YAF. Within a month after the signing ceremony, follow-up mechanisms were
established in accordance with the action plan. In a welcome development,
following engagement by the United Nations with the Constitutional Drafting
Committee, the draft constitution issued in January 2015 includes the prohibition of
voluntary recruitment of all persons under the age of 18. The final version of a draft
action plan to end the recruitment and use of children by Ansar Allah was endorsed
by their Human Rights and Civil Society Office, which was reportedly shared with
the office of Abdul Malik Badrealdeen Al Houthi. Since the eruption of violence in
early 2015 all progress on actions plans and on ending violations has been put on
hold.

B.

Situations not on the agenda of the Security Council or
other situations
Colombia
217. In 2014, peace talks between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP)
continued in Havana. The conclusions on the three first items of the agenda, “Rural
development”, “Political participation” and “Illicit drugs”, were shared publicly and
discussions began on item five, “Victims”. The latter opened up the opportunity to
raise specific concerns on child protection, in particular with regard to the
recognition of the rights of child victims. At the request of the negotiating parties,
the United Nations and the National University of Colo mbia organized regional and
national forums to collect the views of victims and proposals. On those occasions,
many national and international actors advocated for child protection concerns to be
raised at the negotiating table. In December, the FARC -EP and the Government
started talks about de-escalating the conflict, including issues related to child
recruitment and a ceasefire. I commend the sustained efforts to put an end to the
conflict and encourage all parties to take further concrete steps to protec t children
and guarantee lasting improvements for children’s rights, including under item
three, “End of conflict”.
218. Despite the ongoing peace process, hostilities between FARC -EP, the Ejército
de Liberación Nacional (ELN) and the Colombian Armed Force s continued and
intensified in some parts of the country, causing displacement and often putting
children at risk of recruitment and sexual violence. As at December 2014, there
were some six million persons registered as internally displaced persons,
approximately 35 per cent of whom were children. Afro -Colombian and indigenous
communities were particularly affected. Violence committed by post -demobilization
groups and other local armed groups was an important trigger of displacement, both

36/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

in urban and rural areas. In addition, about 500,000 persons suffered from severe
mobility restrictions to access basic services and assistance, as a result of the sharp
increase in attacks against civilian infrastructure committed throughout 2014,
mostly by ELN (52 per cent) and FARC-EP (22 per cent).
219. The United Nations verified 343 cases of recruitment and use of children by
armed groups in 22 departments and in Bogotá. The Colombian Family Welfare
Institute documented the separation of 277 children, the majority of whom had
escaped from armed groups. A total of 198 children had been recruited by FARC -EP,
52 by ELN, and the remaining by post-demobilization groups and other armed
groups. In addition, the Ombudsman Office issued at least 36 risk reports on
recruitment in 20 departments.
220. On 12 February 2015, FARC-EP announced that it had raised the recruitment
age to 17 years. While I take note of that positive development, I wish to recall that
the Convention on the Rights of the Child ratified by Colombia in 1991 stipulates
that a child means every human being below the age of 18, and that its Optional
Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict, ratified in 2005, prohibits
armed groups from recruiting children under the age of 18 and provides that th e
State party should prevent such recruitment and use.
221. At least nine children were killed and 60 were maimed, mostly in landmine
incidents. Children, predominantly girls, were also victims of sexual violence
attributed to armed groups, including post-demobilization groups, and in some cases
to members of national armed forces. Furthermore, sexual exploitation and abuse of
girls by members of armed groups in mining zones continued. The United Nations
received reports of the detention in Bolivar of three persons charged with selling
girls for sexual purposes to armed groups and to mine workers.
222. There were 12 reported cases of schools damaged in crossfire, anti -personnel
mines and explosive remnants of war, as well as 11 cases of military use by part ies
to the conflict. In May, the armed forces found 76 gas cylinders stored by FARC -EP
in a school in Cauca, ready to be used in combat, thereby putting schoolchildren at
risk. In addition, the presence of units of the armed forces near or in front of scho ols
during class hours put school premises and children at risk. Within the reporting
period, teachers were also subject to threats by FARC -EP, ELN, Autodefensas
Gaitanistas de Colombia/Los Urabeños and Los Rastrojos and three teachers were
killed by unidentified armed groups.
223. Despite its prohibition by the National Child Protection Code (Art. 41,
para. 29, of Law 1098 of 2006), the involvement of children in civic -military
activities organized by the armed forces continued in several parts of the cou ntry.
For example, in July, in Cauca, the armed forces carried out a civic -military activity,
inviting more than 500 persons; the recreational activity for children was carried out
by the armed forces psychological operations team. The Committee on the Rig hts of
the Child has previously shared its concerns with regard to civic -military activities
organized by the armed forces inside schools and in the community. In its recent
report on prevention of the recruitment of children and adolescents, issued in
December 2014, the Ombudsman Office also requested the Ministry of Defence, the
armed forces and the police to refrain from carrying out the campaigns with
children. I echo those concerns and call upon the armed forces to refrain from
involving children in any military activities that may place them at risk of being
targeted by armed groups.

15-06098

37/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

224. Since 1999, at least 5,694 children have been separated from armed groups
and benefitted from the Colombian Family Welfare Institute programme. With
regard to protection and assistance provided to children separated from armed
groups as stipulated in the National Child Protection Code and the Victims Law, all
children, as victims, should be accorded equal protection, regardless of the group
that recruited or used them. In some cases, however, children who had been
separated from armed groups, mostly those associated with post -demobilization
groups, were referred to the Office of the Attorney General for prosecution without
benefitting from the Institute’s programmes for protection and assistance.
225. Since 1999, there have been 193 convictions for child recruitment, including
under the Justice and Peace Law of 2005 and by the Human Rights Unit of the
Office of the Attorney General, as well as by regional and local cour ts. In June, a
new bill for the protection of victims of sexual and gender -based violence in
conflict was approved. I welcome that major step, which was taken to harmonize the
national legislation with international standards.
India
226. The recruitment and use of children as young as six years of age by armed
groups, including the Naxalites, continued. According to the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Naxalites in Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Odisha States recruited
boys and girls between 6 and 12 years of age into specific children’s units. They
were used as informers and taught to fight with crude weapons, such as sticks. At
the age of 12, children associated with Naxalites are reportedly transferred to
specific units, where they receive training in weapon handling and the use of
improvised explosive devices.
227. In Naxalite recruitment campaigns targeting poor communities, parents are
forced to offer children under the threat of violence. Similarly, children are
reportedly threatened with the killing of family members should they escape or
surrender to security forces. In August, in Lakhisarai district, Naxalites reportedly
made demands of children from families, resulting in up to 100 girls and boys,
between 10 and 15 years of age, joining the group. In West Singhbhum, government
security forces reportedly arrested an armed group element for the recruitment of
11 children aged 9 to 13 years, including 5 girls, on their way to a training camp.
The recruiter allegedly stated that his commander had specifically asked for girls.
According to the Government, based on the statements of several women formerly
associated with Naxalite groups, sexual violence is common in the camps. Violence
and the use of schools as recruitment grounds affected access to education for
children in Naxalite areas.
228. The United Nations also received reports of the recruitment and use of
children in Assam and Manipur States. Children were reportedly lured into joining
armed groups in the face of the lack of livelihood alternatives, but were also
abducted and forcibly recruited, including through coercion of family members and
the threat of violence. Concerns persist over allegations of detention of children in
violence-affected states, including for alleged association with armed groups.
229. I am concerned by the Government reports of the use of children as human
shields and in combat roles by the Naxalites. The period under review reportedly
saw an increase in Naxalite violence, resulting in the killing of 89 civilian s and
48 security personnel in 429 incidents in the first quarter alone. Concerns also

38/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

persisted over the killing and maiming of children in north -eastern states. For
example, in Assam, on 23 December, in four seemingly coordinated attacks, the
National Democratic Front of Bodoland allegedly killed around 75 civilians,
including at least 18 children.
Nigeria
230. Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati wal-Jihad (JAS), commonly known as Boko
Haram, continued and intensified its attacks on the civilian population in the three
north-eastern states of Nigeria (Borno, Adamawa and Yobe). High -profile attacks
were also conducted in other parts of the country: Kano, Gombe and Bauchi States,
and the Federal Capital Territory. The group’s tactics began with hit-and-run attacks
targeting government officials, security forces, detention centres, religious figures
and, increasingly, schools and children, and have evolved into take -and-hold
attacks, controlling large swaths of territory. The pace and intensity of att acks
resulted in the displacement of over 1 million persons, the majority being women
and children. Since June, Nigerian security forces increased their operations against
Boko Haram, in conjunction with the Civilian Joint Task Force and other
pro-Government vigilante groups. Boko Haram activities have progressively
expanded beyond Nigeria’s borders into Cameroon, Chad and the Niger and have
prompted a regional response to address the threat posed by the group.
231. In December, the United Nations in Nigeria formally established a country
task force on children affected by armed conflict to monitor and report on violations
against children following the listing of Boko Haram in my previous annual report
(A/68/878-S/2014/339). The verification of incidents remained challenging, due to a
severe lack of access to affected areas.
232. Increased reports were received on the recruitment and use of boys and girls
by Boko Haram in support roles and in combat. Children were also used as human
shields to protect Boko Haram elements. Another alarming trend observed since
July was the growing number of girls used as suicide bombers in populated urban
centres. For example, in July, four teenage girls were reported to have carried out a
series of suicide attacks attributed to Boko Haram in Kano. A 13 -year-old girl from
Adamawa State was reportedly rescued at a checkpoint in Katsina State while
carrying a belt with explosives. The United Nations also received reports of children
joining CJTF and other vigilante groups, voluntarily or forcibly, and being used to
man checkpoints, gather intelligence and participate in armed patrols. It was
reported that some of the civilians, including children, who had voluntarily joined a
particular side sometimes had done so in order to avoid the suspicion that they were
associated with, or sympathetic to, the other side.
233. The killing of civilians, including children, by Boko Haram continued and
sharply increased during the period under review. It is estimated that at least
7,380 persons were killed in 255 incidents (5,083 in Borno, 893 in Adamawa, 517 in
Yobe and 887 in other states). Data on the age and status of the victims is not
available and therefore, the exact number of children killed an d injured remains
unknown. Children were killed and maimed during Boko Haram raids on villages,
in targeted attacks in public places, in clashes between Boko Haram and the
Nigerian security forces and as a result of suicide bombings. Children were also
killed by Boko Haram in their schools. Education authorities in the north -east
recorded the killing of 314 school children between January 2012 and December

15-06098

39/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

2014. In February, 59 secondary schoolboys were shot or burned to death in their
dormitory during a night-time attack in Buni Yadi, Yobe. In November, a suicide
bomber disguised in a school uniform killed at least 47 school children and injured
117 others in Potiskum, Yobe. In addition, 26 incidents of suicide attacks were
reported, in the states of Borno (nine), Kano (eight), Yobe (five), Gombe (two),
Bauchi (one), and in the Federal Capital Territory (one). The suicide attacks
reportedly involved 45 suicide bombers and claimed the lives of at least
688 persons, including over 200 persons at the Grand Mosq ue in Kano.
234. Worrisome allegations were received of other violations against civilians,
including children, by Government armed forces, CJTF and vigilante groups,
including extra-judicial killings, arbitrary detention and torture.
235. Boko Haram targeted schools and teachers perceived to provide a “Western”
curriculum. School facilities were attacked, looted and destroyed, teachers and
students were killed, threatened and abducted. According to education authorities, a
total of 338 schools were destroyed and damaged, and at least 196 teachers killed
between 2012 and 2014. A number of specific incidents where children were
targeted and killed are outlined in paragraph 230 above. Continuing threats in all
three north-eastern states led to reduced access to education, closure of schools,
teachers leaving and the withdrawal of children from schools. The United Nations
received reports of health centres also looted and destroyed. Access for polio health
workers was increasingly reduced, due to growing insec urity.
236. Since 2009, Boko Haram has reportedly been responsible for the abduction of
at least 500 young women and girls from their homes or schools and while
travelling on roads in the affected States. The abduction of 276 girls from their
school in Chibok, Borno, in April 2014, represented the largest single incident of
abduction attributed to the group. Of the 276 abductees, 57 managed to escape.
Incidents continued to be reported and, in September, over 100 young women and
girls were abducted from villages during attacks in Adamawa State. The
whereabouts of the Chibok girls and the other abductees remain unknown.
According to accounts from escapees, they were subjected to forcible religious
conversion, physical and psychological abuse, forced labour a nd forced marriage to
Boko Haram fighters. The group’s stated motives for abductions include retaliation
against the Government for detention of relatives and punishment of schoolchildren
for attending Western-style schools.
237. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict visited Nigeria in
January 2015 to assess the impact of the conflict on children, support the roll -out of
the monitoring and reporting mechanism and engage with the Government,
including sharing her concerns regarding the allegations on violations committed by
government forces, CJTF and vigilante groups. During the visit, the Special
Representative met with civilian and military authorities at the highest level, who
expressed readiness to cooperate with the monitoring and reporting mechanism
through the establishment of a Federal-level interministerial committee and statelevel committees on children in the three affected states. In January 2015, the
Minister of Justice issued an advisory reiterating the prohibition of recru itment and
use of children. In response to the number of schools affected by the conflict and
following the abduction of the Chibok girls, the Government also launched the
“Safe Schools Initiative” aimed at providing remedial education and piloting 10 safe
education facilities in the three affected states.

40/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

238. The threat of Boko Haram to regional stability prompted neighbouring
countries to react by conducting joint operations and coordinating efforts through a
Multinational Joint Task Force composed of troops from Lake Chad Basin countries
and Benin, and whose deployment was authorized by the African Union Peace and
Security Council on 3 March 2015. Given the high numbers of children recruited or
abducted by Boko Haram, it is of great concern that abductee s or children
associated with the group will be heavily affected in the course of military
operations. In December, Cameroonian security forces reported the dismantling of
an almajiri school near the border with Nigeria, where 84 boys aged between 4 and
17 years were found in the presence of instructors allegedly affiliated with Boko
Haram. In April 2015, the boys were reportedly placed in a facility run by the
Ministry of Social Welfare in northern Cameroon.
239. I urge the Government of Nigeria to take all necessary measures to protect
children affected by the security situation and investigate the allegations of
violations by its security forces as part of the military operations against Boko
Haram and bring the perpetrators to justice. I also call upon regional countries
participating in military operations against Boko Haram to carry out their operations
against the group in compliance with international humanitarian, refugee and human
rights law and to take all necessary measures to ensure the protecti on of children
and minimize the impact of the conflict on them. I welcome the fact that child
protection provisions have been included in the Multinational Joint Task Force
concept of operations. I reiterate that depriving children of their liberty should only
be a measure of last resort and that children who are detained should be treated
primarily as victims and handed over to child protection actors as soon as possible.
Pakistan
240. Pakistan continued to face significant security challenges, posed in particular
by armed groups and extremist groups, with schools being particularly targeted.
Hundreds of civilians were killed or injured in dozens of attacks. In response, the
Government launched a major offensive in North Waziristan in June to reduce t he
capacity of armed groups to strike within the country. In one of the most alarming
incidents of the reporting period, on 16 December, nine gunmen stormed the Army
Public School in Peshawar, firing on pupils and staff indiscriminately, and utilizing
improvised explosive devices and hand grenades to maximize casualties. At least
132 boys, as young as 8 years of age, and several teachers and other staff members
were killed. At least 133 persons were injured, the vast majority of them children.
The Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) claimed responsibility for the assault, stating
that it was an act of revenge for the ongoing offensive in North Waziristan.
241. Although exact figures of child casualties were not always available, sectarian
violence and hundreds of indiscriminate attacks, including by improvised explosive
devices and suicide bombers, continued to affect children in several areas, with
Baluchistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Provinces most affected. In February, for
example, in Peshawar, a suicide bomb in the crowded Koocha Risaldar area near
Qissa Khawani bazaar reportedly killed 10 persons, the majority of whom were
women and children, and injured 48 others.
242. Armed groups continued to regularly attack educational institutions. At least
40 secular schools were reportedly attacked, mainly in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
province, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and in Balochistan Province. In

15-06098

41/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

January, for example, a suicide bomber reportedly blew himself up outside the gates
of a school in Hangu, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, killing a 14-year-old boy who
was trying to prevent the attacker from entering the school. In February, an
improvised explosive device exploded outside school gates in Karak, Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Province, reportedly injuring 13 children and the school principal. In
the wake of the December 16 attack on the Army Public School in Peshawar, all
educational institutions across Pakistan were closed for a period of three to four
weeks, thereby disrupting education.
243. Attacks on polio workers by TTP-affiliated and other armed elements
continued unabated in 2014, resulting in the killing of at least nine such workers and
several police and security personnel providing escorts for the conduct of polio
campaigns. For example, in January, three persons were reportedly killed and two
others injured by four armed elements in Karachi. In Balochistan, on 26 November,
four polio workers, including three women, were reportedly shot dead and three
other members of the polio vaccination team were wounded by two gunmen on a
motorcycle. On 9 December, in Faisalabad, Punjab, a schoolteacher volunteering in
a polio vaccination campaign was reportedly shot by armed elements on a
motorcycle. The Taliban splinter faction Jundullah claimed r esponsibility for the
attack.
244. Interaction on child protection between the United Nations and the Pakistani
authorities continued throughout 2014. For example, with United Nations support,
the Government of Gilgit-Baltistan approved a comparatively substantial budgetary
allocation for the establishment of child protection services. One area of concern is
the reports of detention of children for alleged association with armed groups and
on national security charges. In January 2015, the Parliament of Pa kistan passed a
constitutional amendment on the establishment of military courts for a duration of
24 months, wherein civilian suspects accused of acts of terrorism will be tried.
Military courts are inappropriate forums for hearing cases involving childre n since
they do not fully recognize the special status of juveniles in conflict with the law. I
urge the Government to ensure that any children arrested for their alleged associated
with armed groups or under security charges are treated primarily as victi ms. In all
circumstances children are entitled to benefit from the special status of juvenile in
conflict with the law in conformity with international human rights law.
Philippines
245. In March, the Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front ( MILF)
signed a comprehensive agreement on the Bangasamoro that includes a transition
plan on normalization towards the eventual decommissioning of the MILF
Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces (BIAF). The Government also continued to
enhance the monitoring, reporting and response system to institutionalize the
response to child rights violations. Meanwhile, the emergence of breakaway armed
factions and localized community feuds involving armed elements continued to
affect children. As at March 2015, intensive fighting was continuing between the
Government and the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF) and Abu Sayyaf
Group (ASG).
246. Noting that child recruitment is mostly likely underreported since communities
are apprehensive about sharing information for fear of reprisals, the United Nations
verified the recruitment and use of seven boys, as young as 9 years of age, by the

42/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

New People’s Army (NPA) and ASG, marking a decrease from the 20 verified cases
in 2013. For example, among the five boys recruited and used by ASG was a 9-yearold boy who was used as a weapons porter for approximately 18 months. After
escaping, he was shot dead. ASG had previously told his family that the boy would
be killed if he left. The recruitment of two boys by NPA, aged 15 and 16 y ears, was
reported by their parents. The municipal police launched an investigation but the
recruiter remained at large and an arrest warrant was issued.
247. Local communities continued to note that armed groups, including NPA and
reportedly ASG, approached civilians including children, for recruitment purposes,
offering them shelter, food, access to education or offering to support communities.
In response, parents reportedly sent their children to urban centres for their
protection.
248. On 3 July, a 14-year-old boy and his father were arrested by members of the
Armed Forces of the Philippines in Maguindanao, allegedly on suspicion of the
father being affiliated with BIFF. The whereabouts of the father and the boy were
unknown at the end of 2014, although an investigation was launched by the
Regional Human Rights Commission of the Autonomous Region of Muslim
Mindanao.
249. The United Nations verified the killing of 13 children and the injury of
26 others in 22 separate incidents. In one incident, on 28 July, seven children were
killed and six others, as young as 3 years of age, were wounded by ASG when their
vehicle was ambushed. Ten incidents resulted from armed forces operations against
BIFF and retaliatory attacks. One boy was killed and four children (two girls, two
boys) were injured in armed clashes in the Autonomous Region of Muslim
Mindanao resulting from conflicts involving MILF or Moro National Liberation
Front commanders.
250. In five separate incidents, clashes between the armed forces and BIF F and
between national police and NPA resulted in damage to schools, followed by
suspension of classes. On 2 January, BIFF used a primary school in North Cotabato
in operations against the armed forces and set the school on fire upon withdrawal.
Concerns also persisted over threats made against teachers by ASG. In addition, the
United Nations verified the military use of six schools and one hospital by the
armed forces, mainly during operations against BIFF.
251. In June, the MILF leadership reappointed a panel to engage with the United
Nations on a roadmap to expedite implementation of the action plan to end and
prevent the recruitment and use of children and took a number of important steps,
notably that of appointing focal points in all of its base and front commands,
displaying command orders prohibiting the recruitment and use of children,
including sanctions against perpetrators, facilitating orientations on the roles and
responsibilities of BIAF members vis-à-vis the action plan, and submitting progress
reports to the United Nations every two months. MILF has also guaranteed
unhindered access for action plan-related activities, including verification exercises.
252. In partnership with the Bangsamoro Development Agency, the United Nations
has established 16 community-based child protection networks in conflict-affected
communities in Mindanao to strengthen their capacity to prevent and respond to all
forms of child rights violations.

15-06098

43/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

253. The armed forces, through their Human Rights Office, and in lin e with my
recommendations to better protect children affected by the armed conflict in the
Philippines (S/2013/419), continued to finalize a strategic framework to protect
children during military operations. So me of these have already been implemented,
including the guidelines on the conduct of activities in schools and hospitals.
254. I commend the progress made by MILF and urge it to identify all children
associated with BIAF to ensure their separation in line with the action plan. I
encourage both the Government of the Philippines and MILF to continue their
sustained engagement to ensure the success of the peace process, which the United
Nations stands ready to support.
Thailand
255. Armed violence in southern Thailand continued, with armed groups launching
attacks against civilian targets and engaging in sporadic fighting with Government
security forces. Peace talks between the Government and armed groups, facilitated
by Malaysia, began in 2014.
256. The United Nations continued to receive reports on the recruitment and use of
children by armed groups. Children reportedly received military training and were
used as lookouts, informers and combatants. For instance, a 14 -year-old boy
allegedly associated with an armed group was reportedly killed in a gunfight with
civil defence forces in Narathiwat Province in August. Concerns persist over the
informal association of children with civil defence groups providing security for
transportation routes, teachers and schools. Reports also continue regarding the
administrative detention of children for alleged association with armed groups.
257. The United Nations received reports of 57 incidents in Pattani, Yala and
Narathiwat that resulted in the killing of 23 children and maiming of 65. The
incidents included shootings and improvised explosive device attacks. For example,
on 3 February, three boys, between 6 and 11 years of age, were reportedly killed by
gunshots during a targeted attack on their family by armed ele ments.
258. Armed groups continued to target teachers and education personnel, often
using brutal threats and acts. According to the Ministry of Education, six teachers,
one education personnel and 10 students were killed in 2014, while three teachers,
one education personnel and 15 students were injured. In a worrisome example, in
March, insurgents shot a teacher while she was riding a motorcycle to work at
Tabing Tingi Community School. The assailants reportedly then poured gasoline on
her body and set it on fire. A leaflet, with the words “This attack is in revenge for
the killing of innocent people,” was found nearby.
259. In line with that trend, in November, banners threatening teachers were found
in several parts of Yala. Soldiers and police who have been providing security
escorts for teachers in the affected region have also come under fire. In November,
18 members of an armed group launched an attack on a security escort, killing four
soldiers and injuring two others. In October, eight schools in t he provinces of
Pattani and Narathiwat were burned at night. No group claimed responsibility for
the attacks. However, according to some reports, it was retaliation by a National
Revolutionary Front-led armed group for attacks by the Royal Thai Army. The
Government arrested eight persons in October, who reportedly confessed to carrying
out the attack.

44/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

260. In May and August, for the first time since the escalation of violence in 2014,
three hospitals were attacked in Pattani and Songkhla. In one attack, a parked
motorcycle exploded and set fire to adjacent areas in the bombing at the Khok Pho
hospital, resulting in serious injury to a 3-year-old girl.
261. In my previous two annual reports, I welcomed the fact that the Government
and the United Nations country team were engaging in dialogue on access to the
southern border provinces to conduct independent verification and report on alleged
violations against children. I am concerned that progress has still not been achieved
on the issue of access for monitoring and verification, and again strongly urge the
Government to facilitate independent access.

IV. Recommendations
262. I am deeply concerned at the increase of grave violations outlined in the
present report and call upon all parties to immediately end, and take all
measures to prevent, grave violations against children.
263. Accountability is crucial to preventing grave violations, and I urge
Member States to place it at the core of national and international responses to
violations.
264. I call upon Member States to ensure that their response to threats to peace
and security are conducted in full compliance with international humanitarian
law, refugee law and human rights law. Member States should ensure that
responses include specific mitigating measures for the protection of children.
265. I strongly urge all parties listed in the annexes to the present report who
have not yet done so to enter into dialogue with the United Nations to agree on
and implement measures to end grave violations and assist victims.
266. I call upon Member States to allow independent access to the United
Nations for the purposes of monitoring and reporting on grave violations
against children.
267. I also call upon Member States to facilitate contact between the United
Nations and non-State armed groups for dialogue and follow-up on action plans
in order to bring an end to violations. Such dialogue does not prejudge the
political or legal status of those non-State armed groups.
268. I urge Member States to consider alternatives to the deprivation of liberty
or prosecution of children for their alleged or actual association with armed
groups or as part of counter-terrorism measures. At a minimum, Member
States should ensure that procedures or trials are consistent with international
juvenile justice standards and the principle of the best interests of the child.
269. The recruitment and use of children by extremist groups pose new
challenges with regard to their protection, rehabilitation and reintegration. I
encourage Member States to highlight and address the need for prevention and
appropriate measures to rehabilitate those children recruited and used,
including education programmes and vocational training, in compliance with
the principle of the best interest of the child and respecting the child’s primary
status as a victim.

15-06098

45/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

270. I encourage Member States, regional organizations, international
mediators and special envoys to continue including child protection provisions
in peace negotiations and agreements.
271. I welcome the leadership and contribution of regional and subregional
organizations in the protection of children. I call upon regional and subregional
organizations to continue integrating child protection considerations in their
policies, planning of peace support operations, training of personnel and
conduct of operations.
272. I call upon all parties to respect the civilian character of schools and cease
attacks against them and attacks and threats of attacks against students and
teachers.
273. I call upon the Council to expand the tools available to child protection
actors to gather information and report on the abduction of children, including
through adding abductions as a trigger violation for listing in the annexes of
the present report.
274. I also call upon the Council to continue to support the children and armed
conflict agenda by strengthening provisions for the protection of children in all
relevant mandates of United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions. I also welcome and encourage the inclusion of grave
violations against children as criteria for sanctions in Security Council
committees.
275. I welcome the engagement and progress made so far regarding the
“Children, Not Soldiers” campaign. I call upon all Member States to continue
to mobilize political and financial support to ensure that progress achieved is
institutionalized and durable.
276. I again urge all Member States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its three Optional Protocols.

V. Observations
277. The present report clearly lays out the egregious violations to which children
were subject during the reporting period in countries affected by conflict. In several
situations, in particular the Central African Republic, Iraq, Israel/State of Palestine,
Nigeria, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic, children were affected to a
degree which is an affront to our common humanity. The facts as presented in the
body of the present report speak for themselves and should shock our collective
conscience.
278. I am more convinced than ever that the United Nations and Member States
must continue to give the protection of children affected by armed conflict the
highest priority. Their plight should be the primary reason not to start conflicts and
the primary reason to end them.
279. Determining responsibility for the killing and maiming and other grave
violations against children raises the question of intention, although what is relevant
is respect for international legal obligations and the impact on children. T he case
has been made by some parties to conflict that targeting children was never a policy
or practice and that it was merely the unintended consequence of military action. In

46/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

2015, however, the case has been made in such a way that the integrity of the listing
mechanism established by the Security Council to protect children has been
threatened. This is deplorable.
280. I would like to put all parties to conflict on notice that those that engage in
military action resulting in numerous grave violations a gainst children will,
regardless of intent, find themselves under continued scrutiny by the United
Nations, including in future reports relating to children and armed conflict. Member
States must re-examine existing policies and practices to stop and preve nt grave
violations against children. Member States must also be held to account and they, in
turn, must hold perpetrators accountable.
281. I call upon all Member States not to lose sight of the vital objective at stake
here: protecting children — a moral imperative and a legal obligation. Member
States therefore must ensure that all avenues to protect children affected by armed
conflict are identified and pursued. I urge all the parties to conflict identified in the
report to work with my Special Representative to prevent future grave violations
against children.

VI. Lists in the annexes to the present report
282. There are no new parties listed in the report. In the Central African Republic,
local defence militias known as the anti-Balaka, already listed for recruitment and
use and killing and maiming of children, are now listed for sexual violence against
children. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), who were already included in annex I for the recruitment and use of children
and for attacks on schools and hospitals, are listed for the killing and maiming of
children. In Iraq, the Islamic State of Iraq (ISI)/Al-Qaida in Iraq (AQ-I) are now
listed for sexual violence against children under the name Islamic State of Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), in addition to the three other listed violations. In the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Islamic State of Iraq and Sham (ISIS) are further listed for sexual
violence against children and attacks on schools and hospitals, also unde r the name
ISIL. In Nigeria, Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati wal-Jihad (JAS), also known as
Boko Haram, is now additionally listed for the recruitment and use of children,
having been previously listed for killing and maiming and sexual violence against
children.
283. Other changes in the list resulted from the fragmentation of previously listed
parties or other changes in the landscape of armed conflict in respective situations.
In the Central African Republic, the situation remains complex and fluid. Som e
factions listed in 2014 under the “ex-Séléka coalition and associated armed groups”
disappeared, while others emerged. For the current listing, the umbrella “ex -Séléka
coalition and associated armed groups” is used. In the Syrian Arab Republic, Jhabat
Al-Nusra is now listed as Al-Nusra Front (ANF).
284. In a unilateral declaration made in Nairobi on 12 December 2013, the M23
announced the end of its rebellion and its transformation into a political party, and
was removed from annex I. In relation to Yemen, given the constant changing nature
of the situation, no changes have been made to the annexes from the previous
report, but changes may be made in future years.

15-06098

47/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

Annex I
List of parties that recruit or use children, kill or maim
children, commit rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children, or engage in attacks on schools and/or
hospitals in situations of armed conflict on the agenda of
the Security Council*
Parties in Afghanistan
1.

Afghan National Police, including the Afghan Local Police a,•

2.

Haqqani Network a,b

3.

Hezb-e-Islami of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar a,b

4.

Taliban forces, including the Tora Bora Front, the Jamat Sunat al -Dawa Salafia
and the Latif Mansur Network a,b,d

Parties in the Central African region (Central African Republic, Democratic
Republic of the Congo and South Sudan)
1.

Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) a,b,c

Parties in the Central African Republic
1.

Ex-Séléka coalition and associated armed groups a,b,c,d

2.

Local defence militias known as the anti-Balaka a,b,c

Parties in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
1.

Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) a,b,d

2.

Forces armées de la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC) a,c,•

3.

Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda (FDLR) a,c,d

4.

Front de résistance patriotique en Ituri (FRPI) a,c,d

5.

Mayi Mayi Alliance des patriotes pour un Congo libre et souverain (APCLS)
“Colonel Janvier” a

6.

Mayi Mayi “Lafontaine” and former elements of the Patriotes résistants
congolais (PARECO) a

7.

Mayi Mayi Simba “Morgan” a,c

8.

Mayi Mayi Kata Katanga a

* The parties underlined have been in the annexes for at least five years and are therefore
considered persistent perpetrators.
a
Parties that recruit and use children.
b
Parties that kill and maim children.
c
Parties that commit rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Parties that engage in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
• This party has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).

48/51

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

9.

Nduma Defence Coalition (NDC)/Cheka a,b

10.

Mayi Mayi Nyatura a

Parties in Iraq
1.

Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) a,b,c,d

Parties in Mali
1.

Mouvement national de liberation de l’Azawad (MNLA) a,c

2.

Mouvement pour l’unicité et le jihad en Afrique de l’Ouest (MUJAO) a,c

3.

Ansar Dine a,c

Parties in Myanmar
1.

Democratic Karen Benevolent Army (DKBA) a

2.

Kachin Independence Army (KIA) a

3.

Karen National Liberation Army (KNU/KNLA) a

4.

Karen National Liberation Army Peace Council a

5.

Karenni Army (KNPP/KA) a

6.

Shan State Army South (SSA-S) a

7.

Tatmadaw Kyi, including integrated border guard forces a,•

8.

United Wa State Army (UWSA) a

Parties in Somalia
1.

Al Shabaab a,b

2.

Ahlus Sunnah wal Jamaah (ASWJ) a

3.

Somali National Army a,b,•

Parties in South Sudan
1.

Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) a,b,•

2.

SPLA in Opposition a,b

3.

White Army a

Parties in Sudan

15-06098

1.

Government security forces, including the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), the
Popular Defense Forces (PDF) and the Sudan Police Forces a

2.

Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) a

3.

Pro-Government militias a

4.

Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid a

49/51

A/69/926
S/2015/409

5.

Sudan Liberation Army/Minni Minawi a

6.

Sudan People’s Liberation Movement North (SPLM -N)a

Parties in the Syrian Arab Republic
1.

Ahrar al-Sham al-Islami a,b

2.

Free Syrian Army (FSA) — affiliated groups a

3.

Government forces, including the National Defence Forces and the Shabbiha
militia b,c,d

4.

Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) a,b,c,d

5.

al-Nusra Front (Jhabat Al-Nusra) a,b

6.

People Protection Units (YPG) a

Parties in Yemen

50/51

1.

Al-Houthi/Ansar Allah a

2.

Al-Qaida in the Arab Peninsula (AQIP)/Ansar al-Sharia a

3.

Government forces, including the Yemeni Armed Forces, the First Armoured
Division, the Military Police, the special security forces and Republican Guards a,•

4.

Pro-Government militias, including the Salafists and Popular Committees a

15-06098

A/69/926
S/2015/409

Annex II
List of parties that recruit or use children, kill or maim
children, commit rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children, or engage in attacks on schools and/or
hospitals in situations of armed conflict not on the agenda
of the Security Council, or in other situations*
Parties in Colombia
1.

Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN) a

2.

Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia — Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP)a

Parties in Nigeria
1.

Jama’atu Ahlis Sunna Lidda’awati wal-Jihad also known as Boko Haram a,b,d

Parties in the Philippines
1.

Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) a

2.

Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF) a

3.

Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) a,•

4.

New People’s Army (NPA) a

* The parties underlined have been in the annexes for at least five years and are therefore
considered persistent perpetrators.
a
Parties that recruit and use children.
b
Parties that kill and maim children.
c
Parties that commit rape and other forms of sexual violence against children.
d
Parties that engage in attacks on schools and/or hospitals.
• This party has concluded an action plan with the United Nations in line with Security Council
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005).

15-06098

51/51
