(c) That the necessary steps be taken to ensure that in all circumstances contact may be
maintained between the National Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies of all countries, so
as to enable them to carry out their humanitarian task.
Forty-ninth plenary meeting,
I9 November I946.

sent la crfation de societes nationales de la
Croix-Rouge et du Croissant-Rouge, de caract.ere benevole et dument autorisees, ai!lSi que
leur cooperation;
b) Soit respecte en tout temps et en toute circonstance le caractere autonome et benevole
des Societes nationales de la Croix-Rouge et du
Croissant-Rouge, a condition que ces Societes
soient reconnues par leur gouvernement et
exercent leur activite conformement aux principes des Conventions de Geneve et de La Haye
et dans l'esprit humanitaire de la Croix-Rouge
et du Croissant-Rouge;
c) Soicnt prises lcs mesures necessaires pour
maintenir en toute circonstance le contact entre
les Societes nationales de la Croix-Rouge et du
Croissant-Rouge de tous les pays, de fa~on a
leur permettre d'accomplir leur cruvre humanitaire.
Quarante-neuvieme slance pllniere,
le 19 novembre 1946.

56 (I). Political Rights of Women

56 (I). Droits politiques de la femme

The General Asseml,ly,
Whereas
In the Preamble of the Charter the peoples of
the United Nations have reaffirmed faith in the
equal rights of men and women, and in Article 1
it is stated that the purposes of the United Nations are, among others, to achieve international
co-operation in promoting and encouraging
respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to sex,
and to be a centre !or harmonizing the actions
of nations in the attainment of these common
ends,
Whereas
Certain Member States have not yet granted to
women, political rights equal to those granted to
men,
Therefore:
(a) Recommends that all Member States,
which have not already done so, adopt measures necessary to fulfil the purposes and aims
of the Charter in this respect by granting to
women the same political rights as to men;
( b) Invites the Secretary-General to communicate this recommendation to the Governments of all Member States.
Fifty-fifth plenary meeting,
, r December I946

L'Assemblt!e glnerale,
Considlrant que
Dans le Preambule de la Charte, lcs peoples
des Nations Unies ont proclame a nouveau leur
foi dans l'egalite des droits de l'homme et de la
femme et que, dans I' Article 1, ils declarent qu'un
des buts des Nations Unies est de realiser la
cooperation internationale en developpant et en
encourageant le respect des droits de l'qomme
et des libertes fondamentales pour tous, sans
distinction de sexe, et d'etre un centre ou s'harmonisent Jes efforts des nations vers ces fins
comn1unes,
Considerant que
Certains Etats Membres n'ont pas encore accorde aux femmes les memes droits politiques
qu'aux hommes,
En conslquence:
a) Recommande que tousles Etats Membres
qui ne l'ont pas encore fait prennent les
mesures necessaires pour realiser les buts et les
fins de la Charte a ce sujet en accordant a la
femme les memes droits politiques qu'a
l'homme;
b) Invite le Secretaire general a transmettre
cette recommandation aux Gouverneroents de
tous les Etats Membres.
Cinquante-cinquieme slance pllniere,
le I I decembre 1946.

57 l I). Establishment of an International Children's Emergency Fund

57 l I). Creation d'un Fonds International de secours a l'enfance

I. The General Assembly,
Having considered the resolution adopted by
the Economic and Soci ,l Council at its third session recommending tl e creation of an International Children's Emergency Fund to be utilized
for the benefit of children and adolescents of
count1"ies which were the victims of aggression,
and recognizing the desirability of establishing
such a Fund in accordance with Article 55 of the
Charter of the United Nations,

I. L'Assemblt!e gbzerale,
Ayant etudie la resolution adoptee, au COUTS ele
sa troisieme session, par le Conseil ~conomique
et social, et qui recommande la creation d'un
Fonds international de secours a l'enfance destine aux enfants et aux adolescents des pays
victimes d'agression, et estimant qu'il est opportun de creer ce Fonds conformement a !'Article 55
de la Charte des Nations Unies,

agi: and promote the establishment and
co-operation of duly authorized voluntary
National Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies;
(b) That at all times the independent voluntary nature of the National Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies be respected in all circumstances, provided they arc recognized by their
Governments and carry on their work according to the principles of the Geneva and The
Hague Convemions and in the humanitarian
spirit of the Red Cross and Red Crescent;

90

Dt:tide,, then:fo1e:
1. There is ht:reby crealcd an J1JlernationaJ
Children's Emergency Fund to be utilized and administered, to the extent of its available resources:
{a) For the benefit of children and adolescents of countries which were victims of
aggression and in order to assist in their rehabilitation;
(b) For the benefit of children and adolescents of countries at present receiving assistance
from the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration;
(c) For child health purposes generally, giving high priority to the chiklren of countries
victims ot aggression.
2. (a) The Fund shall consist of any assets
made available by UNRRA or any voluntary
contributions made available by Governments,
voluntary agencies, individual or olhcr sources.
It shall be authoriLed to receive lunds, contributions or other assislance from any of the foregoing sources; to make expenditures and to fi
nance or arrange for the provision of supplies,
material, services and technical assistance !or the
furtherance of the foregoing purposes; to facilitate and co-ordinate activiues relating thereto;
and, generally, to acquire, hold or tramfcr property, and to take any other legal action necessary
or useful in the performance of its objects and
purposes;

l)ecid1·. Ol I OIIJfi/Uence.
1. Un Fonds international de secours a l'enfance sera cree et, dans la mesure ou ses ressources
le Iui permettront, sera utilise et gere en vue:

a) De porter secours aux enfants et aux adolescents des pays victimes d'agression et afin
d'assurer leur recducation;
b) De poner secours aux enfants et aux adolescents des pays bencficiant jusqu'ici des secours de l'UNRRA;
1) IYa,surer !'hygiene de l'enfance en general,
en anonlant la priorilc aux cnfants des pays
victirPes d"agrcssion.
2. a) Le Fonds scra conslitue a !"aide de tous
Jes avoirs disponibles provenant de l'UNRRA,
ainsi quc de toute contribution volontaire de
gouvcrnemcnts, d"organisations bcncvoles et de
sources p1ivc'cs ou autrcs. Le Fonds sera autorisc
a recevoir des dons en espcccs, des contributions
ou tous autrcs sccours provenant des sources susmcntionnecs; :1 cngagcr des dcpcnses cl a assurer
Jes fourniturcs, le materiel, Jes services et !'assistance technique nccessaires pour atteindre Jes objectifs prccitcs; a faciliter et coordonncr Jes mesures ncccssaircs a ccs fins; et, en general, a acquerir des bicns, a Jes conservcr ou a Jes transferer, ou
a prcndre toute aUlre disposition Jegale qu'il estimcrait nccessaire ou ULile a la poursuite de ses
buts et fins;
b) Le Fonds prendra, en accord avec Jes gouvcrncments :nteresscs, Jes mesures propres a assurer !"utilisation et la distribution rationncllcs
des approvisio1111cmc11ts et autres sccours qu'il
fourrut. Ccs approvisionncmcnts et autrcs secours scront mis a la disposition des gouvcrncmcnts, aprcs approbation par le i-'onds des programmes de misc en <l'll\ 1c t'·talilt, (Mr tc,
gouvcrncmcnts et comprcnant Jcs dispositions
suivantes:
i) Rapport au Fonds, lor,cp1c tdui-ti h: 111gcra ncccssairc, sur rut ilis;nion des approvisionnc·rnt·nts ,·t autrcs S('( ours;

(b) The Fund, in agreement with the Governments concerned, shall take such measures as arc
deemed appropriate to ensure the proper utiliLa·
tion and distribution ol supplies or other assistance which it provides. Supplies or other assistance shall be 111ade available to Governments
upon approval by the Fund of the plans of operation drawn up by the Governments concerned.
Provision shall be made for:
(i) The submission to the Fund '.)f such reports on the use of su pplics and other
assistance as the Fund may from time lo
time require;
(ii) E<1uitable and efficient dispensation or
distribution of all supplies or olhcr assislance, on the basis of need, withoul
discrimination because of race, creed,
nationality status or political belief;
(c) The Fund shall not engage in activily in
any country except in consultation with, and
with the consenl of, the · ~overnment concerned;
(d) The Fund shall appeal to all volumary relief agencies to continue and intcnsif y their activities and shall take lhc necessary measures in
order to co-operate with these agencies.
3. (a) The Fund shall be administcretl by an
Executive Director under policies, including the
determinalion of programmes and allocation of
funds, established by an Excculivc Board in accordance with such principles as may be laid
down by the Economic and Social Council and its
Social Commission;

ii) Rt'partition 011 dist1il111tio11 n1uitalilc t:t
bicn 01donnee des approvisionncmcnts et
autrcs st-coiu-s, comptc ten u de, bcsoins et sans
distinction de race, de religion, de nationalite
ou d'opinion politique;
c) Le Fonds n'excrcera son activite dans aucun
pays sans avoir au prcalable consulte le gouvernemcnt intcrcssc et avoir obtcnu son asscntimcnt;
d) Le Fonds invitcra toutes Jes institutions de
secours bcncvolcs a poursuivre et a intensifier leur
action et prcndra lcs mesures necessaircs en vue
de coopcrcr av~c elles.
3. a) Le Fonds sera gere par un Directeur administratif scion Jes directives donnees, notamment
en ce <Jui concerne Jes programmes et la repartition des fonds, par un Conseil d'administration,
conformcmcnt aux principes tels qu'ils pourront
etre ctablis par le Conseil economique et social
et sa Commission des questions sociales;

91

(b) The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall appoint the Executive Director, in consultation with the Executive Board;
(c) The Executive Board shall be composed of
representatives of the following Governments:
Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, China, Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Ecuador, France,
Greece, Iraq, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Union of South Africa, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom,
United States of America, Yugoslavia.
The Economic and Social Council, on the
recommendation of the Executive Board, may
designate other Governments as members of the
Board. Membership may be changed by the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the
Economic and Social Council, at any time after
the first three years of the Fund's existence. The
Board may, as occasions arise, invite representatives of specialized agencies for consultation on
matters within their competence;
(d) The Board may designate from among its
members such committees as it deems advisable
in the interest of effective administration.
The Board shall elect its own Chairman and its
Vice-Chairmen, and shall meet whenever convened by the Chairman, or upon the request of
any three of its niembers. The first meeting of the
Board shall be convened by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, at the earliest date feasible
after the adoption of this resolution. Each member of the Board shall have one vote. A majority
of the Board shall constitute a quorum and it
shall vote by a majority of the members present
and voting. Subject to the foregoing, the Board
may establish its own rules of procedure.
4. (a) Staff and facilities required for the administration of the Fund shall be provided to the
Board by the Secretary-General. The Fund may
also utilize such staff, equipment and records as
may be made available by the United Nations
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration during the period of its existence;
(b) The United Nations shall make no charge
to the Fund on account of staff and facilities, so
long as these can be provided from the established services of the Secretariat and within the
limits of the United Nations budget. If additional
funds are necessary, money for such purposes
shall be provided by the Fund;

b) Le Secr~taire general de !'Organisation des
Nations Unics nommc le Directcur administratil
apres s'ette consulte avec le Conseil d'adminis1ration;
c) Le Conseil d'administration sera compose des
representants des Gouvernements ci-apres:
Argentine, Australia, Br~sil, Republique sorialiste sovietique de Bielorussie, Canada, Chine,
Colombie, Tchecoslovaquie, Danemark, Equatcur, France, Grece, Irak, Pays-Bays, NouvelleZelandc, Norvegc, Perou, Pologne, Suede, Rcpublique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, Union
Sud-Africaine, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni, Etats-Unis d'Amerique, Yougoslavie.
Le Conseil economique et social pourra, sur la
recommandation du Conseil d'administration, inviter d'autres gouvernements a faire partie dudit
Conseil. L'Assemblee generale pourra, sur la recommandation du Conseil economique et social,
modifier a tout moment la liste des membres, apres
la troisiemc annee d'existence du Fonds. Le
Conseil peut, a !'occasion, inviter des representants d"institutions specialisees pour Jes consulter
sur des questions de Icur competence;
d) Le Conseil peut constituer, parmi ses membres, Jes comites qu'il juge necessaires pour
donner toute son efficacite a !'administration.
Le Conseil elit son propre president et ses vicepresidents. II se reunit sur convocation du president ou a la requete de trois de ses membres. La
premiere reunion du Conseil sera convoquee par
le Secretaire general des Nations Unies aussitot
que possible apres !'adoption de la presente resolution. Chaque membre du Conseil dispose d'une
voix. Le quorum est atteint lorsqu'une majorite
des membres est presente, et Jes decisions sont
adoptees a la majorite des membres presents et
votants. Sous reserve des dispositions ci-dessus,
le Conseil peut etablir son propre reglement interieur.
4. a) Le Secretaire general fournit au Conseil
le personnel et les services necessaires pour assurer
la gestion du Fonds. Le Fonds peut disposer egalement, rant que l'UNRRA ne sera pas dissous, du
personnel, du materiel et des archives que cette
Organisation peut lui ceder;
b) Les Nations Unies mettront gratuitement
le personnel et les services a la disposition du
Fonds a condition que ce personnel et ces services
soient fournis par les services deja existants du
Secretariat, dans les limites du budget des Nations
Unies. Si des credits supplementaires sont necessaires, le Fonds devra fournir Jes sommes destinees
a ces fins;
c) Le Fonds aura recours, dans toute la mesure
du possible, au personnel administratif et technique des institutions specialisees, notamment de
!'Organisation mondiale de la sante ou de ,a
Commission interimaire, afin de reduire au
minimum l'cffcctif de son personnel.
5. Le Secretaire general n'effectuera aucun paiement pour des depenses occasionnees par le fonctionnement du Fonds au moyen de sommes rec;ues
pour le financement des Nations Unies, mais le

(c) To the maximum extent feasible, the utilization of the staff and technical assistance of specialized agencies, in particular the \Vorld Health
Organization or its Interim Commission, shall be
requested, with a view to reducing to a minimum
the separate personnel requirements of the Fund.
5. The Secretary-General shall not pay from
the funds received to finance the United Nations
buclget any daims arising from the operation of
the Fund, l,ut the Executive Board is authorized

92

to pay from the Fund, claims arising from its operation.

Conseil d'administration est autorise a payer, a
meme le budget du Fonds, Ies depenses afferentes
a son fonctionnement.

6. The Secretary-General shall submit to the
General Assembly an annual audit of the accounts of the Fund.
7. The Executive Board shall make periodic
reports of its operations at such times and in such
form as the Economic and Social Council shall
provide.
8. A report shall be submitted to the fourth
session of the Economic and Social Council containing a recommended programme and estimate
of expenses incurred and to be incurred for the
Fund for 1947 which shall be subject to the
approval of the Council.
9. The activities of the Fund shall be reviewed
by the General Assembly at its second session
upon the basis of a special report from the
Economic and Social Council.

6. Le Secretaire general soumet a l'Assemblee
generale la verification annuelle des comptes du
Fonds.
7. Le Conseil d'administration etablit des rapports periodiques concernant son activite aux
dates et dans la forme indiquee par le Conseil
economique et social.
8. Un rapport sera presente au Conseil economique et social, au cours de sa quatrieme session,
exposant le programme recommande ainsi que
)'estimation des depenses effectuees et a effectuer
par le Fonds au titre de 1947, previsions soumises
a l'approbation du Conseil.
9· L'Assemblee generale, au COUTS de sa
deuxieme session, examinera l'activite du Fonds
en se fondant sur un rapport special du Conseil
economique et social.

II. The effective operation of the Fund is dependent upon the financial resources which are
put at its disposal;

II. Lebon £on( tionncment du Fonds e,t subordonne aux ressources financieres mises a sa disposition;

Therefore,
The General Assembly expresses the earnest
hope that Governments, voluntary agencies and
private individuals will give the Fund their generous support.
Fi/ ty-sixth plenary meeting,
1 I December 1946.

En consequence,
L'Assemblee ge11erale exprime le ferme espoir
que Ies gouvernements, les institutions benevoles
et Jes particuliers souscriront genereusem'ent a ce
Fonds.
Cinquante-sixieme seance pleniere,
le 1 r decembre r946.

58 (I). Transfer to the United Nations
of the advisory social welfare
functions of UNRRA ( United
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration)

58 (I). Transfert aux Nations Unies
des fonctions consultatives
exercees en matiere de service
social par l'UNRRA (United
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration)

Whereas Article 66 of the Charter of United
Nations provides:
1. The Economic and Social Council shall perform such functions as fall within its competence
in connection with the carrying out of the recommendations of the General Assembly.
2. It may, with the approval of the General
Assembly, perform services at the request of
Members of the United Nations and at the request of specialized agencies.
3. It shall perform such other functions as are
specified elsewhere in the present Charter or as
may be assigned to it by the General Assembly;

Attendu que l'Article 66 de la Charte des Nations Unies est ainsi con~u:
1. Le Conseil economique et social, dans !'execution des recommandations de l'Assemblee generale, s'acquitte de routes Jes fonctions qui entrent
dans sa competenre.

2. II peut, avec !'approbation de l'Assemblee
generale, rendre Jes services qui Iui seraient demandes par des Membres de !'Organisation ou
par des institutions specialisees.
3. II s'acquitte des autres fonctions qui Iui sont
devolues dans d'autres parties de la presente
Charte ou qui peuvent lui ~tre attribuees par
l'Ass<"mblee generale;
A ttendu que le Conseil economique et social a
recommande, le I er octobre 1946, le transfert
-aux. Nations Unies des fonctions consultatives,
urgentes et importantes, exercees en matiere de
service social par I'UNRRA, en tenant compte
specialemcnt des besoins des enfants;
Atte11du que l'Assemblee generale, ayant examine le rapport et Ies recommandatioru presentes
par le Secretaire general clans le document A/1~2.
reconnait la necessite de transferer aux Natiom

Whereas the Economic and Social Council, on
1 October 1946, recommended the transfer to
the United Nations of certain urgent and important advisory functions in the field of social welfare carried on by UNRRA, special consideration
being given to the needs of children;
Whereas the General Assembly, after examining the report and the recommendations presented by the Secretary-General in document
A/132, recognizes the necessity of transferring to

98
