TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
nd

MEETING: 31 DECEMBER 1968
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1462) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8945);
(b) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Acting Permanent Representative
of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8946) ........................................

1

Statement by the President ....................................

17

s/W. 1462

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed,of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/, . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiv Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

i

FOURTEEN

HUNDRED

AND SIXTY-SECOND

MEETING

,

Held in New York on Tuesday, 31 December 1968, at 3 p.m.
President: Lij Endalkachew MAKONNEN

(Ethiopia).

Council have been able to reach agreement on the text of a,
draft resolution which appears to command unanimous
Support. It gives me particular satisfaction that on such an
important issue faced by the Council we have been able to
obtain unanimity, and I express the hope that this
unanimous decision will have a favourable impact on the
effort being made to achieve a lasting and peaceful
settlement in the Middle East.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet So~cialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l462)

:

4, I would now request the Under-Secretary-General to
read out the text of the draft resolution.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

i

5. Mr. KUTAKOV (Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Security Council Affairs): The draft resolution readsas
follows:

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations .addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8945);
(b) Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/8946).

“The Security Council,
“‘Havtng considered the agenda contained in document

S/Agenda/l462,
“Having noted the contents of the letter of the
Permanent Representative of Lebanon (S/8945),

Adoption of the agenda

Waving noted the supplementary information provided
by the Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization contained in documents S/
7930/Add.I07 and Add.108,

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(al Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/8945);
fbl Letter dated 29 December 1968 from the Acting
Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Courrcil (S/8946)

CfiHaving heard the statements of the representative of
Lebanon and of the representative of Israel concerning
the grave attack committed against the civil international
airport of Beirut,
b”bbserving that the military action by the armed forces
of Israel against the civil international airport of Beirut
was premeditated and of a large scale and carefully
planned nature,

1. The I?RESIDENT: In accordance with the Council’s
previous decisions, I propose now, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the representatives of Lebanon, Israel and
Saudi Arabia to take seats at the Council table in order to
participate without vote in the discussion.

concerned about the deteriorating situation
resulting from this violation of the Security COUnCil
_
resolutions,

,/Zrave&

J’ “Deeply concerned about the need to assure*free
uninterrupted international civil air traffic,

At the invitation of the President, Mr. F. BOW’TOS
(Lebanon), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr, J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) took places at the Council table.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the items on its agenda.

LA,’“‘1. Condemns Israel for its premeditated military
action in violation of its obligations under the Charter
and the cease-fire resolutions;

3. I am pleased to be able to announce that, after intensive
consultations during recent days, the members of. the

I/‘$:
Considers that such premeditated acts of violence
endanger the maintenance of peace;
1

“3. Issues a solemn warning to Israel that if such acts
.were to be repeated, the Council would have to consider
i.,ifurther steps to give effect to its decisions;

passing of Trygve Lie, whose personality is so intimately
linked with the early days and the organizational stage of
the United Nations. He was a dynamic personality and a
good fighter for peace who gave shape and life to the
Secretariat and put the United Nations into action, To
Secretary-General U Thant and to the Norwegian Government we express our heartfelt sympathy and grief.

“4. Considers that Lebanon is entitled to appropriate
redress for the destruction it suffered, responsibility for
which has been acknowledged by Israel.”
6. The PRESIDENT: The text of the draft resolution has
been read out by the Under-Secretary-General, and, as no
members of the Council have asked to speak before the
vote, I propose to put the draft resolution immediately to
the vote.

13. My delegation feels called upon to explain the reasons
why it voted in favour of and supported the draft
resolution which has just been adopted unanimously by the
Security Council. This unanimity speaks for itself.
14. At our 1460th meeting, the Brazilian delegation had
the opportunity of stressing that the premeditated, unjustified attack by Israel against the civilian airport of Beirut
could not be ignored by the Security Council, My delega
tion is therefore gratified to see the Council promptly
respond, under your leadership, Sir, to this new challenge
to its authority and its prestige. The Council could do no
less and perhaps at this stage it waswiseto do no more. At
any rate the text we have adopted is a clear indication of a
firm purpose to deal with the actual threats to peace in the
Middle East.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
T’e draft resolution was adop,ted unanimously.1

7. The PRESIDENT: A numbed of members have asked to
speak now in expfanat’ion of their vote.
8. Mr. IGNATIEFF (Canada): The general attitude of the
Canadian delegation towards the question before us has
already been outlined in my statement of 30 December
[1461st meeting]. Therefore, at this juncture I shall
confine my remarks to the briefest explanation of vote on
the resolution that has just been adopted.

15. At this stage my delegation wishes to make it quite
clear that it does not condone such violent acts as the one
that recently occurred at Athens Airport. We wish to point
out, however, that no responsibility, direct or indirect, of
the Lebanese Government has been established in that
connexion. The delegation of Brazil is emphatic in its
condemnation of any act of violence or any breach of the
cease-fire, wherever it may come from.

9. I think it must be evident that the resolution just
adopted was an inevitable result of the military action
undertaken by Israel against the civil international airport
at Beirut, an action which was bound to be condemned.
But in supporting this resolution, the Canadian delegation
thinks it important to emphasize that the attack on the civil
airport at Beirut took place against a background of
growing violence throughout the area.Neither this incident
nor other incidents can be taken out of context, because
otherwise they are inexplicable.

16. As this will be Brazil’s last intervention in its present
term as a non-permanent member of the Security Council,
my delegation wishes once again to express its apprehensions with regard to the unfolding of events in the Middle
East, which may well be at this time the most sensitive and
explosive spot in the general pattern of the world political
situation.

10. Thus it must be noted that ‘the terrorist attack on an
Israeli civil aircraft at Athens Airport preceded the attack
on the airport at Beirut, although it cannot be accepted as a
justification for what happened at Beirut; that earlier
incident, which is now under judicial inquiry by the
responsible authorities concerned, must be seen as a part of
the atmosphere of hostility existing in the area. The Athens
incident did take place, damage was done, and a life was
lost, These are facts, just as the attack on the airport at
Beirut is a fact. Both actions must be understood as
expressions of extreme feelings of frustration and of anger
provoked by a state of mutual hostility, fear and suspicion,

17. We adhere to the conviction that, although the
Council should act, as it has acted today, when confronted
with an actual disruption of the peace, this body cannot
limit its action to a mere police precinct role of registering
complaints and counter-complaints. It should strive towards
a definite political settlement on the basis of the principles
contained in resolution 242 (1967) and it should do its
utmost to check the arms escalation which is daily building
up in the area. It should act as a diplomatic body
encouraging the parties towards a final settlement, which
would restore peace and security to the area. Without a
political settlement, incidents of violence are likely to
continue. Peace-making is indeed more vital amI more
important than peace-keeping.

11. In making these comments I have in mind that, as
some other delegations have already remarked, surely there
can be no peace in the Middle East,unless both sides-Israel
and the Arab States-feel free to develop their national life,
free from violence and free from the threat of violence.
Otherwise the prospects in the Middle East are grim indeed.

18. On leaving the Security Council, I wish to expressmY
heartfelt gratitude to all the representatives, on whose
advice and collaboration both my predecessorand I were
always able to count. It would be superfluous for me to add
how much I have benefited from those contacts and how
much I have learnt from this experience, which unforeseen
events have extended to the very last days of our term. We

12. Mr. DE ARAUJO CASTRO (Brazil): First of alli my
delegation is moved to join all the other delegations which
yesterday expressed their sorrow and their sympathy at the
1 Seeresolution 262

(19681.

2

express .the hope that the authority of this body will be
strengthened and reasserted in the interest of world peace
and security and we express the hope aIso that the years
ahead will be considerably less impregnated with power and
force than was this disturbed year of 1968, which brought
serious blows and frustrations to the people who seein the
Charter of the United Nations their best guarantee for a
peaceful world, free from fear and intimidation, free from
injustice and violence.

24. If you will allow me to conclude briefly on a nersonal
note, I should like to thank all my colleagues arobnd this
table for the friendship and advice they have so willingly
proffered me during the time I have served at this table.
25. Mr. CHAYET (France) (translated from French):
Before I explain my vote, allow me, Mr. President, to
associate myself with the tribute you paid yesterday to the
memory of Mr. Trygve Lie, the first Secretary-General of
the United Nations. As the present Secretary-General
recalled yesterday, Mr. Trygve Lie had the formidable task
of organizing the Secretariat of our Organization as an
instrument in the service of the States. He discharged this
responsibility meticulously. Moreover, he stood up with
honour to the danger inherent in a particular situation,
while recognizing the limits imposed on the action of one
man, by the individual interests of States. Setting a high
standard for himself, Mr. Trygve Lie imparted the first
lustre to the hazardous office of Secretary-General. He has
added lasting brilliance to the fame of his country Norway,
which he served with distinction in turn as soldier, trade
unionist, politician and statesman. He will always be
remembered as a great servant of peace. We here offer his
family, his country and the Norwegian people our deepest
sympathy.

19. Let us overcome the frustrations of this disturbed
year-a :year of aggression and a year of power-with a
solemn pledge to renew our endeavours towards strengthening an Organization which, with all its shortcomings, is
still the best hope for the peace and progress of all
mankind. My country pledges its full co-operation towards
the attainment of those lofty aims and will never shirk its
responsibilities in all forums and organs of the United
Nations.
20. Finally, Mr. President, I wish to express my highest
admiratilon for the skill and statesmanship you have
displayed in leading us in the constructive course we have
taken on the matter under consideration.
2 1. The PRESIDENT: I Thank the representative of Brazil
and should like to reciprocate the friendly sentiments he
has been good enough to express.

26. I now come to the item which we are debating. My
delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution, the
contents of which, though not absolutely satisfactory, meet.
the main concerns which I expressed at the opening of the
debate. It is natural that my delegation should have
adopted this stand which is justified by the facts of the case
fully proved in the debate.

22. Mr. BORCH (Denmark): The reasons for the Danish
vote in favour of the resolution just adopted will be
apparent from the statement I made yesterday in this
‘Council [ibid.]. In ththatstatement, moreover, I emphasized
the well-known position of the Danish Government that we
deplore any and all violent incidents arising out of the
conflict in the Middle East. We firmly maintain that all such
incidenti must be prevented. Therefore we should have
preferred the Council to deal more directly with the
criminal act of terror committed against the Israeli civil
aircraft at Athens on 26 December, an incident which is
aIso included in the present agenda of the Security Council.
However, the last preambular paragraph should leave no
doubt that the Security Council insists that all undue
interference, whatever its source, with international civil air
traffic Ibe henceforth discontinued. We hope that the
resolution will thus contribute to the restoration of respect
for international civil air traffic and for the lives and
well-being of the international public, men, women and
children who daily entrust their safety to international
airlines from all countries.

27. Israel’s attack on the international civil airport of
Beirut was in fact a patent and intolerable violation of the
various resolutions adopted by the Council on the Middle
East situation, in particular of its resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967.
28. This violation is all the more serious becausethe Israel
raid was not provoked by Lebanese action. It is uselessto
try to draw a parall&with the events at the Athens Airport.
Of course these are regrettable, and how could one fajl to
deplore any loss of human life? But the Lebanese
Government wasobviously not directly responsible.
29. The Israel aggression was premeditated. Its aim wasto
strike a vital blow at a country which has always shown
itself anxious to respect the principles of the Charter and
has therefore for many years now been admitting a very
large number of refugees. Moreover, it carried defacto war
into an area that had previously been spared and thereby
rendered the maintenance of peace all the more precarious.

23. It has been said often, but it must be emphasized
again, that violence will produce no lasting solutions.
Violence breeds violence and hampers the efforts of those
who strive for just and lasting peace in the Middle East. It is
a deplorable fact that over the last months there has been a
deterioration of the situation in the Middle East. This is the
last time I shall be addressitig the Council, and I can think
of no better way to conclude than by expressing the.sincere
hope thlat the resolution adopted today by the Council,
although specific in its aims, will help stop that trend and
prevent further violence, which, as I have already said, can
only unfavourably affect efforts towards peace in the
Middle East.

30. Our vote also corresponded to a feeling of justice
towards a country in which a sense of proportion and
moderation has been made a political principle of its policy.
Lebanon has kept faith with its vocation of uniting and not
dividing, despite the difficulties that can be imagined, has
fully assumed its responsibilities and has managed so far t?
play a moderating part which is recognized by the
international community.
3

r

31, My delegation’s vote has also reflected the solidarity
which in trying times should unite two friends, two
countries which have been so close for as long as Lebanon
and France.

39. We have been heartened to note that this time all the
members of the Council strongly condemned Israel,s
conduct and demanded that it should comply with the
principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the Security
Council. We regret t0 state that this unanimous condemnation has not been matched, on the part of a certain number
of Council members-including some very important onesby the necessary will to take action against Israel as
envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter for sucheventuali.
ties. The reluctance of those members has, unfortunately
not for the first tiIll62, resulted in a considerable weakening
of the text of dlC UXdUtbl.
The text as adopted doesnat
fully meet the requirements of the dangerous situation we
are facing in the Middle East. It is no more than the strkt
minimum, which once again counts on Israel’s compliairce
With
the principles and purposes of the Charter and cur
earlier resolutions.

32. What seemed to us neces.saryin the present situation
was to demonstrate to Lebanon that, hawcver dismayed WC
may be by the ordeal it has undergone, our main concern is
that it should be able, by obtaining the reparations and
assurances to which it is entitled, to live again in peace and
security,
33. Tins resolution is the logical outcome of a debate
during which we were happy to note a certain CWSCIISIIS of
views on the need for concerted action by the permanent
members of the Council, in order to achieve a settlement of
the Middle East conflict.

40. Normally SlIdI an expectation would be fully justified
by the obligations States Members of the United Nations
undertake in becoming Members of our Orgaezation,
Isracl”s record, however, does not encourage us to sharethe
optimism of those members whose optimistic affirmations
have so far been frustrated by Israel’s non-compliance,

34. We trust that the unanimous vote cast a few moments
ago will embody this determination to act and guarantee
that it shall be fulfilled.
35. Sir Leslie GLASS (United Kingdom): Although we
have in this resolution condemned a specific act of vialcncc
of a most grave nature, my delegation in explanation of
vote wishes once again to empl1asir.e that in its duty of
maintaining international peace and security the ~hlwi~
must take a wide view. We must recognim that such acts are
part of a tragic pattern of violent acts and violent reactions.
We must deplore all acts of violence, whcrcver they occur,
and all violations of the cease-fire. In particular, we must all
be concerned at the deeply disturbing new trend of threats
to the safety of international civil air traffic. WC must
further recognize that this pattern of violence emcrgcs from
the fundamental unsolved problems of the Middle Fast;
that the cease-fire itself, though essential, is but a ~CI~IPOrary palliative; and that the Charter of the United Nations
lays on all of us the duty to bring about by peaceful rnems
the settlemcn t of dangerous situations.

I

1

4

t
/
/

43,. Those influental members of the Security Council that
feel that this resolution is adequate to bring about Israel’s
compliance with its terms now have an opportunity cf
using their considerable influence with Israel to that end.
Israel must understand from its growing isolation in this
(hamber and in world public opinion that it must mend its
ways; it must pay adequate compensation to Lebanon for
the damage it caused.
4.3. The 1Iungarian delegation is convinced that a political
settlement of the Middle East situation must lead through s
radical revision of Israel’s policies. It was with *at
eventuality in mind that we voted in favour Of the
resolution just adopted.

37. The PRESIDENT: I am sure I speak not only for
myself but also for my colleagues who are also leaving the
Council at the end of this year when 1 say that we
appreciate the very friendly sentiments expressed by the
representative of the United Kingdom.

of Soviet Socialist Republics):
I should hke to begin QJY
statement by recalling that partings always lSive IrSeto a
‘0
certain sadness, which may be greater in some casesthan in
others but is undoubtedly a natural feeling. wi* such
feclmgs, therefore, we bid farewell today to our co11eagues9
the representatives of a number of States, who are leaviag
rhc Senlrity Clmncil. We, the Soviet PeoPle, however1m
the most difficult and mournful circumstances prefer
optimism to pessimism. SO, iI1 taking leave Of Our co1lCagUcS,wc would express this optimism in the wordsOfthe
Kussian proverb: “Mountain and mountain will neverIneet,

38. Mr. CSATQRDAY (Hungary): Earlier in the discussion
my delegation stated its viewson the extreme seriousnessof
the most recent aggressive action by Israel directed against
the civil international airport of Beirut. We stressed that
similar acts of armed aggression, in addition to constituting
a flagrant violation af the Charter, tend to heighten tension
in the area and seriously diminish the chances of a political
settlement of the Middle East situation.
4

44, Mr. MALIK

(union

(,mrlslarctd frt)m

Russian):

45. I
make
prono
end (
delegs
armec
deem!
46. 1
Deter
at the
attack
“retal
Deter
airlint

41, The present resolution, while condemning Israel for its
armed attack against Lebanon, again requires that Israel
should stop its armed aggressive acts against its neighbours.
That demand is clearly warranted by the continuing
activities of Israel, whose air force carried out the dastardly
act on the Ucirut civil airport three days ago and whosejet
fighters, morcover, have been deliberately violating Leban011”sair space cvcr since, thus creating the risk of a new,
outbreak of fighting and more destruction of human and
material values, which constitutes a grave breach of
international peace and security.

36. May I take the opportunity of this last debate in 1068
to say a brief farewell to our collcagucs who are leaving us
at the end of this year: you, Sir, as the representative of
Ethiopia; and the representatives of B&l,
Canada,
Denmark and India. Nothing tcachcs one so much about a
man as the experience of long days and nights in the
Council, and we have learned from that experience that we
arc losing outstanding colleagues with whom WChave been
privileged to serve.

but n
collea,
Securi

‘47. ’
act as
48. >
ing tc
measl
take
interr
of ai
boycc
block
etc;).
P
;49.
sad a
anotl
they
Natic
Law
amon
“ever
reprir
doctr
Mr. ‘c
prohi
howe
force
50.
aerol
the a
the
unac
51.
band
of ai
That
of al
argue
2 S’
Sew?
3 II

but man and man always”. Thus we hope to meet our
colleagues again and work with them as we have in the
Secur:ity Council.

ity of the LebaneseGovernmentfor the,attack on the Israel
aircraft at Athens Airport. The Lebanc;seGovernment
disclaimsall part in that action. It shouldbe emphasized
that the Israelaircraft wasfired on by the citizensof a third
State and, what is more, in the territory of a third State. In
accordancewith international law a State can be held
responsibleonly for acts committed by its own organs,
armed forces and citizens in the territory of a State.
International law doesnot hold a State responsible
for acts
of citizens of other Statesin the territory of a third State.
Accordingly, in the caseunder considerationthe so-called
“retaliatory” action taken by IsraelagainstLebanonconstitutes a flagrant violation of the United NationsCharter,an
act of armed aggression,
in relation to which the Security
Council may take action under Articles 41 or 42 of the
Charter of the United Nations.

45. 1 should now like, in exercise of my right of reply, to
make the following observation. In connexion with the
pronouncement made by the Israel representative at the
end of our last meeting in reply to the Soviet Union
delegation’s statement at that meeting concerning Israel’s
armed aggression against Lebanon, the Soviet delegation
deems it necessary to make the following statement.
46. IIn the Israel Government’s official statement of 30
December 1968 and in the Israel representative’s statement
at the Security Council meeting on the same day, the armed
attack on Beirut airport was described as an act of
“retaliation”
for the shooting at Athens airport on 26
December 1968 on an aircraft belonging to the Israel
airline.
’ 47. The attempt by the Israel Government to describe that
act as a “retaliatory” measure has po foundation in law.
48. .As the Soviet delegationhasalready observed,according to classicalinternational law, reprisalsmeant one of the
measureswhich, without declaring war, one State could
take in answer to violation by another of the rules of
international law. They were of two kinds: without the use
of armed force (embargo, seizure of merchant vessels,
boycott, etc.), and with the use of armed force (naval
block.ade, shelling or occupation of part of the territory,
etc:).
p

52, Israel armed forces have invaded the air spaceof
Lebanon-this must be especiallyemphasized;they have
invaded the air space of Lebanon and damagedState
property of Lebanonand property of the airlinesof other
countries. Theseacts constitute a flagrant violation of the
GeneralArmistice AgreementconcludedbetweenLebanon
and Israelon 23 March 1949.4
53. That Agreement provides in particular that “No
element of the land, sea or air military or paramilitary
forces of either Party . . . shall commit any warlike or
hostile act againstthe military or para-militaryforcesof the
other Party, or against civilians in territory under the
control of that Party; or shall. . . passover for any purpose
whatsoever the Armistice DemarcationLine . , . or enter
into . . . the air spaceof the other Party”.
54. The Soviet delegationdeemsit necessaryto emphasize
in particular the following provision: by the Armistice
Agreement between Lebanon and Israel, Israel is not
entitled to enter the air spaceof Lebanon.ThisIsraelhas
done, and by its action it hasflagrantly violated, not only
the United Nations Charter and international law, but also
its own document-the Armistice Agreementwith Lebanon.
Theseare the facts, and no amount of manoeuvringby the
Israel representative here can justify Israel’s aggression
againstLebanon.

49. According to modern international law, reprisalstaken
CD1 a State as a meansof self:defenceagainstillegal acts of
another State are permitted only within strict limits, i.e. if
they do not involve the use of armed force. The United
Nations Special Committee on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States reached the unanimous conclusion that
“every State has the duty to refrain from acts of armed
reprisal”,2 This point of view is also expressedin the
doctrine of a number of bourgeoisjurists. In particular
Mr, Verdross writes: “The Charter of the United Nations
prohibits not only war but alsoarmedreprisals;it doesnot,
however, prohibit reprisals without the use of armed
force”.
50. The Israel argument that the destruction of the
aeroplanesat Beirut Airport was a retaliatory’measurefor
the actsof fighters of the organization of Palestinerefugees,
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, is
unacl:eptablefor the following reasons.
51. In international law, support given by a State to armed
bands organized on its territory and entering the territory
of another State must be regardedas an act of aggression.
That is how suchacts are describedin the Soviet definition
of aggressionproposedin 1953.3 However, no convincing
argumentswere adducedby Israel to show the responsibil-2 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-third
Session, agenda item87, para.111.
3 Ibid,, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 1 I, annex.

55. InasmuchasIsrael,by its actions,hasinflicted damage
on Lebaneseterritory, it must be held materially responsible. To this must be addedthat reports are comingin
from all parts of the world of the indignationwhich this
new act of aggressionby Israel against Lebanon has
everywhere aroused. The Governmentsof many States
throughout the world have issuedstatementsin which they
roundly condemnIsrael’spolicy of aggression
and military
provocation towards the Arab States.Peace-lovingStates
demand that the Security Council should take severe
measures
againstthe aggressor.
56. Wehave just beeninformed in a communiquethat the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the German Democratic
Republic has sent the following telegramto Ambassador
Makonnen, Presidentof the Security Council:
“On behalf of the Government of the GermanDemocratic Republic, I wish to expressmy seriouscbncernand
4 official Records of the Securiry Council, Fourth Year, Special
Supplement No. 4.

5

indignation at Israel’s criminal attack on the international
airport of Beirut. This bare-faced provocation constitutes
a gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations. It
heightens the danger of ever-increasingand wider military
clashes in the Middle East and undermines the implementation of the Security Council resolution of 22
November 1967. The Government and people of the
German Democratic Republic demand that the Security
Council shall apply appropriate sanctions against the
aggressor and take steps to prevent fresh acts of aggression by Israel.”

61. I wish to state officially that the Soviet Union, as a
major Power, has no .part in this business. We have nothing
to do with it, nor did we express any opposition to these
provisions, which were included in the original-quite
forceful-draft resolution condemning the Israel aggression.
I wish to make this point clear, for this newspaper, which is
an organ of big monopolistic United States capital and
Zionist circles, very often indulges in ultra-scurrilous
slander against the Soviet Union. For this reason also I wish
to declare officially at this meeting of the Security Council
that th.e Soviet Union, as a major Power, has no part in this
dirty affair.

57. The Soviet delegation has already explained in its
statements in the Security Council the position of the
Soviet Union towards this new piratical act of aggressionby
Israel-the raid on the international airport of Beirut. The
unanimity with which the members of the Security Council
have condemned in their statements the criminal actions of
the’ Israel soldiers must surely confirm recognition of the
urgent need to take the most energetic steps to restrain the
high-handed Tel Aviv extremists, put them in their place,
and compel them to respect Security Council decisions and
stop sabotaging the efforts to achieve a peaceful political
settlement in the Near East.

62. The results of these manoeuvres and intrigues are plain
to see. Not only does the resolution just adopted by the
Security Council bear the stamp of compromise; it is also
an example of how much harm can be done to the work of
devising effective measures against aggression by the backstairs intrigues and machinations of those who continue to
protect the aggressors and thereby incite them to new
criminal acts of aggression against the Arab countries.
63. Of course, the resolution contains a number of
provisions which tend in the right direction: condemnation
of IsraeI for its aggressive acts against Lebanon, and
recognition of Israel’s responsibility for the damage and
destruction wrought on the Arab airlines and Beirut
Airport. It also issues a warning to Israel and considers that
such premeditated acts of violence endanger the rmintenance of peace. All this is contained in the resolution, but is
clearly not enough. We are convinced that the interests of
achieving a political settlement in the Near East and
ensuring the success of the noble mission of Ambassador
Jarring, who is executing the instructions of the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, based on the Security
Council’s decisions, and also the interests of peace in that
part of the world, would be served by a decidedly more
forceful and clear-cut Security Council decision, providing
for the adoption against the aggressor of the measures
envisaged in Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations. This is all the more necessarybecause at this very
moment when the Security Council is considering the
question of Israel’s attack on Beirut Airport, Israel troops
are committing new outrageous and provocative acts of
aggression against the Arab State of Jordan.

58. Unfortunately, however, while certain members of the
Security Council who have spoken in the debate, including
even some permanent members, have verbally condemned
the piratical attack by the Israel aggressorson Lebanon, in
what moreover seemed to be quite strong terms, nevertheless they have shown no desire or anxiety to proceed from
words to action and join forces with all the other members
of the Security Council in an effort to securethe adoption
of the only decision which the troubled situation in the
Near East demands: a decision in keeping with this
Council’s chief duty-to restore and maintain international
peace.
59. It is now already quite evident that those who have
encouraged and abetted Israel aggression in the past have
this time, too, done everything possible behind the scenes
in the Security Council in the way of “arm-twisting”, asit
is called in United Nations terminology, to water down the
draft resolution and weaken its impact on aggressionand its
effectiveness, thereby preserving the Israel aggressorsfrom
the international and political sanctions which they would
justly and legally incur in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.

64. The Security Council was informed of this in a letter
from the Permanent Representative of Jordan, Ambassador
El-Farra, addressed to the President of the Security Council
/S/8951], in which he writes:

60. This is also confirmed in today’s edition of The New
York lYmes, which, without any reference to sourcesalthough these are obvious-reports:

“On 29 December 1968, at 1205 hours local time,
Israel military forces opened fire from heavy artillery and
indiscriminately shelled the following areas for four
hours: Al Shunah Al-Janoubiyyah, Urn Ash-Shurat and
the Ring Hussein bridge.

“In the private consultations before the session
Edouard Ghorra, the chief Lebanese delegate, proposed
that. the Security Council vote a boycott of Israel’s
commercial aviation under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter, which provides for economic sanctions.

‘LAG a result of this lawless and wanton attack, two
civilians were killed and nine others were wounded,
including a woman and a child.

“This idea was discarded, however, in view of the
opposition by the major Powers . . .“.

“The Israel indiscriminate shelling caused severe damage
to a mosque, to the Municipality Building, the Post Office
and the local market. Four civilian cars were destroyed.”

The newspaper coyly refrains from mentioning which of
the major Powers opposed this proposal.
6

65, Gentle!men, you all heard yesterday the over-acted
dramatic pathos with which the Israel representative spoke
of a single Israel citizen who waskilled at Athens. But here,
in the official letter from the Jordan representative, it is
reported that as a result of this unlawful and senseless
attack two1 citizens were killed. How does the Israel
representative react to these murders? According to his
lO@C,
to answer this question it would be necessaryto carry
out a raid on Tel Aviv Airport and destroy thirteen aircraft
or, as he said at our last meeting, “a handful or so of
aeroplanes”. A nice “handful”--thirteen modern aircraft,
including a Boeing 707 and a Caravelle! It would not be a
bad thing if each Government represented here had a few
such “handfuls” of aeroplanes.

72. Secondly, the resolution adopted by the Security
Cmmd can ody do any real good if all the members of the
Council, especially the permanent members, take all the
necessary steps for their part to preclude a repetition of
Israel’s acts of aggression against the Arab States.

66. But t’he Israel representative, defending this illegal and
aggressive action, seeks to play down its significance. He is
ready to speak of the death of a citizen of this country, but
passes over without comment the murders committed by
Israel troops.

73. It was precisely on this understanding-I emphasize
this-and in view of the position of the Lebanesedelegation
in regard to this draft resolution that the USSR delegation
voted for it, albeit with the most serious reservations,
becausein our view it is weak and inadequate.

67. Those are the facts, which even the eloquent
Mr. Tekoah cannot refute.

74. The PRESIDENT: Speaking again for myself and for
my colleagues who are leaving the Council, I should like to
express appreciation to our colleague, Ambassador Malik,
for the messageof good wishesthat he addressedto us.

68. We have just received a communique from United
Press International, an American agency. I quote:
“Amman radio reported three Israeli helicopters escorted by two jet fighters swooped down on a Jordanian
security forces patrol thirty miles north of Aqaba and just
inside the border and killed three men and wounded two
others in an attack which burned the ~ar.“~
Once again murders, once again bloodshed, and all this the
result of acts of aggression by Israel troops.
“Israel did not acknowledge a helicopter attack but said
only ‘an army unit’ pursued a number of Jordanian
infiltrators into Jordan and killed one of them. It said the
infiltrators had lobbed mortar shells at the Tinma copper
mines in the Negev desert.
“Eshkol, speaking in Jerusalem, said Israel ‘would
prefer criticism to sympathy’.“5
Eshkol can be satisfied. There was more than enough
criticism of Israel here in the Security Council. Indeed there
was not only criticism, but strict censure.
“He asked the world at large to consider what would
have happened if the attack on an El Al Airliner at
Athem Airport by two Arab commandos had killed all
fifty-seven aboard.
“He said the Israeli raid on Beirut caused no 10s~ Of life
even though it means added risk for the attackers.‘ls
But although there were no murders in Beirut, deaths are
officially reported in the letter from the representative of
Jordan and in this report of Amman Radio, transmitted by
United Press International. More murders, more bloodshed.
69. These are the facts, and the Security Council must
undoubtedly take them into consideration.
5 Quoted in English by the speaker.

70. In the light of what has been said, the delegation of
the Soviet Union considers it necessaryto draw special
attention to the following.
71. First, the fact that the draft resolution adopted by the
Security Council was introduced by its President cannot
mean and must not be taken to mean that the Soviet Union
should be regarded as a co-sponsorof the text.

75. Mr. BEN KACI (Algeria) (translated from French):
During the discussion of the Lebanese complaint, in this
Council, my delegation has had an opportunity to set forth
its position briefly. With your permission, Mr. President, I
will now explain in greater detail the position of my
country as defined by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria in his
messageto the Secretary-General of the United Nations, His
Excellency, U Thant :
“Scarcely has the General Assembly ended a session
which has been largely dominated by Israel expansionism
and its dire consequences to international peace and
security, when a new act of aggression has been committed against an Arab country of the Middle East, dangerously increasing the tensiiiti in that region and rendering

still more remote and illusory the possibility of an
adequate settlement.
“The unspeakable attack on the international airport of
Beirut was carried out by methods which have become
commonplace. Increasing its warlike declarations, intimi-

dations and threats, Israel is today more than ever
identified with permanent aggression against the Arab
countries, although for a certain sector of internationsl
public opinion aat is no cause for concern or alarm. The
crjminal destruction of numerous aircraft belonging to
citiI transport companies and of technical installations
vital to the safety of air navigation in a region crowded
with international traffic undeniably illustrates Israel’s
determination to snap its fingers at international morality
and conventions and at the resolutions of the Security
Council and General Assembly.
“This fresh provocation directed against Lebanon and
the entire Arab world is a further act of defiance to the
international community. In fact these acts of aggression
are additional evidence of the consternation felt by Tel

80. Before concluding, Algeria would like to pay a fervent
tribute to those members who are participating for the last
time in the Council’s work. Leaving aside political diver.
gences and conflicting views, we are bound to recognize the
exceptional moral qualities and undeniable competence ef
those who are preparing to leave us.

Aviv at the growing successesachieved by the Palestinian
patriots in their legitimate struggle against the foreign
usurper to recover their inalienable ,rights and of the ever
keener awarenessthroughout the world of the injustice
done to the Palestinian people and of the new dimensions
of its splendid resistance to the occupying Power. Our
indignation is all the greater because this attack has been
committed against another Arab country which, by very
definition and by vocation, identifies itself with the
promotion of justice and peace.

81. This tribute is addressed to you, Mr.President, a
worthy representative of an African sister country with
age-old traditions, who have on many occasions made a
decisive contribution to the settlement of the problems
referred to us.

“Whatever the motives attributed to the demonstrations
and deeds of the noble Palestinian resistance, it is an
objective reality which cannot in any way be imputed to
a sovereign, independent country which is a Member of
the United Nations.
“Israel has just been guilty of a heinous crime which
will undermine neither the unshakable determination of
the Arab countries to free their occupied territories nor
that of the Palestinians to obfain justice by methods to
which they have been driven on every side.”

82. This tribute is also addressed to our friend and brother
the Ambassador of India, who is aware of the profound
esteem in which my country and our delegation hold both
himself and his colleagues.
83. We are far from forgetting our illustrious friend
Ambassador Castro of Brazil, who in the course of events
has shown us that his personality is outstanding in every
respect, and whose distinguished attributes are matched
only by his modesty.

76. In our opinion the criminal attack committed by the
Israel authorities on Lebanese territory on Saturday, 28
December, constituted a serious threat to international
peace and security. Consequently the Security Council
should have taken the necessary steps in accordance with
the Charter, in particular Chapter VII, in order to put an
end to the systematic policy of aggressionpursued by the
Israel authorities vis-a-vis the Arab world. A Security
Council resolution on a problem of such gravity for peace
should necessarily have reflected, in clear and plain terms,
the Council’s determination to take speedy and effective
action against the aggressor. Such determination is all the
more necessary because according to the latest newsIsrael,
not satisfied with its aggression of 28 December, is
concentrating its troops on the frontiers of Lebanon and
violating that country’s air space with impunity. We are
today witnessing an escalation of the policy of war and
aggression which the Israeli authorities have been applying
for twenty years against Palestine and the Arab countries.
The dangerous situation now prevailing in the Middle East
and the threats which hang over that region in consequence
of the recent attacks on Lebanon call for serious attention
by the Security Council-whose main mission is to preserve
peace in the worldland for urgent effective and rigorous
action calculated to discourage both aggression and the
aggressor.

84. We also venture to pay tribute to the representative of
Canada, a, country whose international vocation is be.
coming ever more apparent and with which Algeria maintains increasingly fruitful and friendly relations.
85. Lastly, we salute the representative of Denmark,
which occupies a very important place on the map and will
leave by its retirement a big void in our midst.
86. The PRESIDENT: Thank you. Again I make myself
the spokesman of my colleagues around the table to whom
our distinguished colleague, the representative of Algeria,
has made reference, in reciprocating in full measure the
friendly sentiments that he has been good enough to
addressto us.
87. Mr. WIGGINS (United States of America): I wish first
of all to join my colleagues in expressing my country’s
sorrow at the death of Trygve Lie, the first Secretary.
General of the United Nations. This Organization will
always bear the imprint of his inspired leadership in its
most formative early years. We regret the passing of one of
the great statesmen of our time.
88. In view of the extent to which this debate has
wandered from the matters relevant to the agenda adopted
on Sunday, 29 December [146&h meeting/, I feel obliged
to say that the remarks of my delegation have been
addressed to the attack upon Beirut Airport on 28
December and the incident at Athens Airport on 26
December.

77. A resolution to this effect would undoubtedly have
helped to easethe tension which is building up unceasingly
on account of the concentrations of Israel forces on the
frontiers of Lebanon.
78. My delegation voted in favour of the resolution for the
following reasons: first, the resolution condemns the Israel
authorities in clear and plain terms for their aggression of
last Saturday; secondly, it emphasizes Lebanon’s right to
redress; thirdly, it issues a warning to Israel and envisages
further measures to be taken in caseof any new aggression.
In short, we voted for the resolution because it is
exclusively in favour of the Lebanese complaint,

89. We wish quite explicitly to dissociate ourselves from
the sweeping generalizations, the crude denunciations and
the reckless attacks upon Israel for alleged policies and acts
having nothing to do at all with the episodes properly
before us. Israel is not here on trial for its life. Israel is not
being asked here to defend its right to exist. This Council is
not a court sitting on all the issues of the 1967 war, the
1956 war, the 1948 war, and authorized to pronounce final

79. That is how we Interpret the reference in the preamble
to document S/Agenda/1462.
8

judgement on all the matters in between the wars, If it were
such, an omnipotent court, we doubt not but that Israel
could give an effective accounting of its struggle to survive
the repeaLtedacts of hostility that have contributed to the

96. Mr. M’BENGUE (Senegal) (translated from French):

My delegation would like briefly to explain its vote, as I
had the opportunity to define in my last statement [ibid.]
my country’s position on this problem.

climate in the Middle East out of which these latest acts of
violence have emerged.

97. In supporting the draft resolution my delegation
wished once again to,express its opposition to recourse to
violence for the settlement of international problems. My
country’s political policy is shaped by principles. The
unjustified and unjustifiable attack on Beirut Airport,
which it absolutely condemns, is bound to extend the area
of conflict and deal a very severe blow to the economic life
of Lebanon.

90. It has been alleged in the course of this debate that my

Government, in supporting the resolution before us, has
exhibited1 inconsistency. It is the kind of inconsistency of
which Albraham Lincoln spoke when he said that he stuck
by his friends while they were right and parted with them
when they were wrong. We do not apologize for the fact
that our policies are governed by principle or for the
coincidence that friends sometimes disagree on principle.
On the contrary, we suspect that if some other members of
this
Council were equally willing to differ with their friends
on occasion, peace would be more secure than it now is.

98. In voting for the draft resolution my delegation is also
convinced that it has acted in accordance with justice.
99. Before concluding this short statement I should like
on behalf of my delegation to pay a last tribute to the
outgoing members of the Council. We all know how great
has been their devotion to the cause of peace. Throughout
these last months we have had an opportunity to appreciate
their qualities of heart, their talents, courtesy and wisdom.
They have always co-operated with us fruitfully and
constructively in our work.

91. I have spoken previously on the views of my Government towards disarmament in the Middle East and on the
willingness of the United States, at any time, to discuss
measures to limit the flow of arms into the area. President
Johnson has repeatedly pointed out that the suspension of
this
traffic is one of the conditions of peace in the Middle
East.

100. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of
Senegal for his expression of friendly sentiments.

92. The resolution we have just adopted does not entirely
suit my delegation. It is our view that all these interventions
against (civil aviation are intolerable and that they place in
jeopardy the lives and property of innocent persons, even
when bY good luck or good fortune that risk does not result
in great loss of life. This body, in our view, should put the
United !Nations in the forefront of an effort to perfect new
rules of international law that will give to the great airports
of the world and to civilian air transport generally a special
status that will provide for appropriate examination of
every situation in which that status is disregarded. Not
having dealt extensively with this matter in this resolution,
it remains for the Security Council or other appropriate
agencies; to deal with it soon, so as to make it clear that no
pretext whatever justifies interference with international
civil aviation,

101. Mr. SOLANO LOPEZ (Paraguay) (translated from
Spanish): The reasons which determined the affirmative
vote by which my delegation contributed to the unanimous
adoption of the resolution this afternoon are to be found in
the statement which I made at our last meeting and to
which I would therefore refer the Council.
102. Nevertheless, I should like to emphasize three points
to which my delegation attaches special importance.
103. First, the achievement of a stable and just peace in
the Middle East is the fundamental and permanent objective of my delegation’s action both inside and outside this
Council. Consequently we regard every single act of
violence committed in breach of the Council’s cease-fire
decision of 1967 as a further obstacle to the achievement of
that objective, making an inherently difficult and complex
task still more difficult.

93. Notwithstanding
any differences over language or
substance, however, my Government has supported this
resolution and endorses its condemnation of the military
action against the airport at Beirut, in accordance with my
Government’s initial response to this operation.

104. Secondly, in contributing by our vote to the adoption of today’s resolution we hope that its effects will be
manifested by scrupulous respect for the Council’s ceasefire decision which I have mentioned, to facilitate the
creation of a climate at least sufficiently favourable to the
success of Ambassador Jarring’s difficult mission.

94. I wish, in conclusion, to add my tribute to our
colleagues who now conclude their work upon this Council.
Even in the brief time that I have had an opportunity of
working with them, their ability and skill and statesmanlike
qualities have made a profound impression upon me. They
deserve the praise of their colleagues here, the thanks of
their own countries and that of all the nations of the world
as well.

105. Thirdly, we would draw attention to the last pmambular paragraph of the resolution, which reflects the
concern of this Council and its members with the need to
preserve free and uninterrupted international air traffic. MY
country is land-locked, far from the sea, and consequently
attaches vital importance to air communication. For the
same reasons, any act which conspires against, interferes
with or jeopardizes freedom of air transit deserves our
unqualified condemnation.

95. T:he PRESIDENT: I am sure that I express the feeling
of all my colleagues around the table when I say that the
friendly sentiments of our colleague, Ambassador Wiggins,
are fully reciprocated, and that we have also greatly
enjoyed his short but eventful and stimulating SSSOCiatiOn
with UIShere at the United Nations.

9

/
:

that the Arab States are waging against Israel today. It is
the same war that the Arab States still refuse to end.

106. I now venture to turn to another question. The terms
of office of five members of this Council expire at midnight
tonight: Brazil, Canada, Denmark, India and your own
country, Mr. President, They and their representatives have
served this Council, the United Nations and the cause of
international peace and security with great distinction, and
I deem it an honour to express to them my country’s
sincere appreciation.

114. History, truth and fact do not change at the whim of
the winds that blow through the cold corridors of the
Kremlin. As long as this Arab war of aggression against
Israel continues, Israel will insist on its right to defend itself
in the best way it finds necessary and possible, whether the
mardians of international law in Moscow are pleased by it
or not. That is especially so as the United Nations itself has
already established, in particular in resolution 213 1 (XX) of
21 December 1965, that the organization of, assistance to,
fomenting, financing, inciting or tolerating of terrorist
activities directed against another State is to be regarded as
aggression. It is to be observed that that resolution was
initiated by the Soviet Union, which in all its definitions of
aggression has always included indirect armed attacks by
irregular forces and terrorist groups. Thus, in a draft
resolution submitted by the Soviet delegation to the
General Assembly on 5 January 1952, we read:

107, I acknowledge personally that in the year in which I
have served on this Council I have learnt much of great
value from the representatives of those countries-from
yourself, Mr. President, and from Ambassadors de Araujo
Castro, Ignatieff, Borch and Parthasarathi, all of whom
honour me with their friendship. To each one as he leaves
this Council I offer my sincere and heartfelt personal
thanks.
108. The PRESIDENT: Again I should like to be the
spokesman for my colleagues and friends in expressing our
gratitude for the warm and friendly remarks addressedto us
by Mr. Solano Lopez.

“The GeneralAssembly,

109. I should like also to say that we have now exhausted
the list of speakers, and, with the permission of the Council
I should like to make some concluding remarks. I understand that the representative of Israel wishes to speak in
exercise of the right of reply, and I now give him the floor.

Y’onsidering it necessary to formulate directives for
such international organs as may be called upon to
determine which party is guilty of aggression,

110. Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): A meeting of the Security
Council without a verbal skirmish between the Soviet
representative and myself would be considered unusually
dull. I would be the last one thus to detract from the drama
of our deliberations. Therefore allow me to refer, first of
all, to the statement made today by the representative of
the Soviet Union.

“1. That in an international conflict that State shall be
declared the attacker which first commits one of the
following acts:

“Declares:

‘L
.

.

“(f) Support of armed bands organized in its own
territory which invade the territory of another State, or
refusal, on being requested by the invaded State, to take
in its own territory any action within its power to deny
such bands any aid or protection.“a

111. On 21 May 1948 the Soviet representative in the
Security Council and present Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the USSR stated:

Surely that definition applies to the operations of terror
organizations against Israel from the territory of Lebanon
and other Arab States.

“The USSR delegation cannot but express surprise at
the position adopted by the Arab States in the Palestine
question, and particularly at the fact that those States-or
some of them, at least-have resorted to such action as
sending their troops into Palestine and carrying out
military operations aimed at the suppression of the
national liberation movement in Palestine.“6

115. The time has come for the Soviet Union to stop
giving advice on how to conduct and how not to conduct
military activities, especially when these activities are
undertaken in self-defence. The time has come for the
Soviet Union to help in securing peace in the Middle East
by terminating its unilateral support of Arab aggression.

112. On 28 May 1948, the representative of the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic stated:
‘L. . . we do not know of a single caseofinvasion of the
territory of another State by the armed forces of Israel,
except in self-defence, where they had to beat off attacks
by the armed forces of another State on Israel territory,
That wasself-defence in the full senseof the word.“‘l

116. For months now we have been treated to the Soviet
representative’s expertise on the concept of aggression. I
should like to tell him, in the words of an ancient Hebrew
saying : “Taunt not your neighbour with your own blemish”. It is a wise saying that has stood the test of centuries.
Soviet concepts are new, and time has not always been kind
to them. I would suggest that the Soviet representative and
his Government ponder over this Hebrew saying: “Taunt
not your neighbour with your own blemish”.

113. The war that was described in 1948 as a war of
Israel’s defence is still continuing. It is still the same war
6 Official

.

Records of the Security Council, Third Year, 299th

meeting, p. 7.
7 Ibid., 307th meeting,p. 15.

8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixth Session,
Annexes, agendaitem 49, document A/C.6/L.208.

10

117. This morning, at approximately 7.30, a package
containing ten sticks of dynamite with detonators inserted
and a timing device already released was found in a school
bus in the Israeli village of En &mm. “Iknks
to the
watchfulness of one of the passengers, who alerted the
driver, (catastrophe was averted. In a grocery store several
kilometres away, a stick of explosive was found in a milk
bottle and rendered harmless before it caused disaster. That
is the kind of cowardly and sneaking Arab warfare that
Israel is subjected to, in violation of the cease-fire. That is
the kind of warfare, organized, sponsored and encouraged
by the Arab Governments, that Israel has to defend itself
against. That is the kind of warfare that some in this
Chamber prefer to close their eyes to.

should make the Arab Governments understand the full
depth of Israel’s determination to ensure its right to peace
and security. When the Arab States realize that determination, become persuaded by its tenacity and draw the
appropriate conclusions, there will be peace in the Middle
East. There is nothing that the people and Government Of
Israel desire more. There is nothing that depends more cm
the Governments of the Arab States,
122. The PRESIDENT:
The representative of Saudi
Arabia has asked to speak in exercise of his right of reply,
and I now call on him.
123. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia}: Thank
you,
Mr. President, for giving me permission to speak again.

118. By ignoring the fundamental principle of the United
Nations, equality of all Member States, the resolution now
adoptecl by the Security Council is contrary to the United
Nations’ Charter and cannot therefore be considered as
applicable. A resolution which fails to take account of
Israel’s rights under the cease-fire, disregards the right of its
citizens to be free from Arab attack, overlooks and slights
Israeli dead and wounded, is an affront to the basic values
of the United Nations. The resolution reflects the moral,
political and juridical bankruptcy of the Security Council in
respect of the Middle East situation, It cannot but raise the
question asked by the Psalmist in the Bible: “How long will
ye judge unjustly, and respect the persons of the wicked? “.

124. I have some comments to make on the resolution
that has just been adopted. As you may <recall, Sir, I
reserved my right to address myself to the resolution. I
tried to take down the text of the resolution from the
dictation of the Under-Secretary-General. I could not do
that fast enough, however, because I do not know
shorthand. Fortunately, I was furnished with a typewritten
copy of the resolution. Curiously enough, the resolution
was not circulated in the Council. Of course, like any other
organ of the United Nations, the Council is master of its
own procedure. However, if my memory is correct, this is
the first time in the history of the United Nations and of
this Council that a resolution has been adopted without
having first been circulated in order to give those who wish
to address themselves to the substance of the text the
benefit of knowing the contents. Members have a right,
once they have been called on to speak, to address
themselves to the substance of a resolution,

119. The people of Israel will see in today’s decision
another sign that the strength to vindicate- their rights and
protect their legitimate interests must come from within
themselves, This is the world we live in. The troubles and
grief and suffering of a nation frequently remain of limited
concern to others. We have recently witnessed an entire
people enslaved and then almost forgotten. Massacres of
human beings are still taking place in some parts of the
world without evoking undue anxiety. Thus it has also been
in the Middle East. The central and gravest fact in that
region--the Arab war of aggression relentlessly pursued
against Israel since 1948, the continued Arab warfare in
violation of the cease-fire of 1967-is frequently lost sight
of or relegated to the background.

125. But fortunately, whilst the explanations of vote were
going on, I had the opportunity of reading and studying
that resolution. First of all, I must salute all the members of
the Security Council for having, in such a short time,
achieved a unanimous agreement on what I might call a
common denominator of condemnatjon, and also for
decrying the wanton act committed at Beirut Airport, and
also for warning Israel that it may expect what is
tantamount-of
course, I am paraphrasing-to
economic
and other sanctions, as provided in Chapter VII of the
Charter.

120. !However, the people of Israel cannot afford the
luxury of such callousness. There is a daily struggle for life,
a continuous titantic contest with death. Let no one
misjudge their mood and their resolve. Let no one make the
mistake of thinking that the people of Israel might be
swayed by inequitable pronouncements. Let no one make
the mistake of thinking that the fate of the people of Israel
can be decided by others; not the fate of a people with a
4,000 year history; not the fate of a people which has
re-established its sovereignty after twenty centuries of
subjugation, exile and dispersion; not the fate of a people
that h.as been subjected to genocide; not the fate of a
people that has waged a war of defence and survival for
twenty years.

126. All that is good enough, and the members of the
Council should be congratulated, as I said. Coming frorp
various parts of the world and representing various States
and areas of the world, it was really quite unusual that such
a resolution should have been adopted. But in the light of
my own humble past experience, having personally heard
Israel being condemned many times in this Council,
without any effect whatsoever, I begin to question whether
any condemnatory resolution will carry weight with the
usurping State of Israel. On the other hand, the warning of
the use of sanctions is tantamount, in my view, to the
derision that Israel has manifested towards con&mnation;
it will, as we have just heard from the representative of
Israel, cast the resolution by the wayside, Not only that;
but I will come to that question a little later.

121, That is why the attitude and actions of the Governments in the area, not Security Council resolutions, will
determine the destiny of the Middle East. That is why
Israel’s action in Beirut, taken in defence of its rights,
11

127.
paragraph

However,
I must call attention
to a particular
word
4 of the rcsoh~tion.
which reads as follows:

in

“C~nsi&x
that L&anon
is entitled to appropriate
redress for the destruction it has suffered, responsibility
for which has been acknowledged by Ismel.“”
We migfit go to tfle origin of the world “redress”. It is iiS if
somebody
WIls naked
and 11~ was re-tiresscd.
Irh:IIlOIl
wx
“se-dressed”
in the contest
of “~~5nsoled”‘!
Why does tflc
Cnuncil
not call things
by their n;unes?
There is the word

“reparations”’ w~~ichcould be used instead of “redress”. Or
“compensation’“, Why did the Council not call things bJ
their names’? No wonder Ambassador Malik said the
resolution was inadequate. Whom are WC fooling here by
the word “redress”“? The representative of Israel is llf.lrCildy
laughing; and hc has the right to laugh, because foe kIlMVs
there
will
be no redress. Redress lay whom:
the lnitcd
Kingdom insumncc companies? My friends from Lebanon
have not provided me with the insurance policies su that I
could
read the fine print and see what it soys. Is it to bc
redress by the insumnce companies or by the culprit? Well,
it seems that Lloyds of I.,ondwl is paying what is stipulated.
It is the best insurance company in the world, in .Cpite of
what the British have done in Palestine. I tflink they will
pay and wil! no doubt gain a greater reputs:ion and will
gather more insurance business from the world, hecausc
there are going to be many incidents, maybe. SO that is a
gap in the resolution which should never flsve been allowlttl
to appear: merely providing for “retfrcss”‘, without spcs
cifying who is to effect that redress.
128. Now, I listened very carefully to my friend the
representative of the United States, 1l15nc other than the
illustrious Ambassador Wiggins, whom WC have come to
admire during his short tenure of office, and wu shall all be
sad when he leaves the United Nations enviously, I might
say, for he will have a retreat in the state of Mninc, f’ar f’rom
the madding crowd. Howcvcr, Mr. Wiggins and we all
respect and admire Wm..-referred to a country which hc
described as being a friend. First of all, WCuse the wurcf
“friend” individually. We may somctimcs have different
views but still be friends. But wf~n it comes to the (“ouncil,
journalistic terms such as “friend” should be wei&ed and
seen in the context in which they have hecn used.
Mr. Wiggins mentioned that friends disagree 1 am o1‘course
paraphrasing --and should be admonished wlm they err.

130.

Arld

110W We Want

as friends,

because

it ,

1.31. Mr. W&ins said the Council is not a court ofjustice
tIlW true. The council, as ye all know, wasconstituted bqT
tfW Cfl:lrk?r to deal with situations wfich may endanger
~C:ICC especially world peace-in any area, We knew that
We wcrp SigIliitoriestll the Charter in 1945.I witnessed&
signing trf the cfkarter. This is why we told tf.,e United
StittCSGovernment to refer the question ofpalestine ta the
~llttXIlatiOllIl~
(‘Ollrt
of Justice. Some members of the state
I~cpxtrncnt
were
favourable
to the idea. It iS true, the
%YXIrity
~OllIlCi~
iS rlot a cINlrt of justice;
but there was a
Court
Of justice,
OIIC ba\lIld to the United Nations,l-he

President of’ the United States, none other than
?13r.Truman, refused 1 however. In 1948, twenty-oneyears
a&). WC i%lrikCd(>ur friends--and here I use the word
“friends’” in the SellSe that we have a great many interestsh
I’(lIllIll~~Il
with tfle Crnitcd States--we warned them that this
question midIt irlvolvc IN and all the other Arabs in great
diffieultics. but they did not heed our warning,
132. I think I IWC a rigflt to refer to that historic event.
‘I’flc pufiticians SW to it that the question wasnot referred
to the IntcrIliiti~5Il~ll

C‘onrt

of Justice,

133. Mr. Wiggins, my good friend, you said, “Israel is not
trial for its life”. I au paraphrasing; I jotted down a few
wrlrtfs of WhiIf you said, but I grasped the substanceof it.
Of course Israel is not on trial for its life. There is anitem
flex wflich we have been dealing with; specifically it
concerns the aggression against Lebanon.

IHI

fLi4. “Its strugglu to survive is legitimate”-again I am
I~ar:ipflritsing Mr. Wig@s. I should like to ask my good
friend Mr. Wiggins the following question: do not the
I’alcstinians have the right to survive and return to their
hc,mclond:’ I repeat : inasmuch as Mr. Wiggins saysthat
IsracI is not on trial for its life, and that its struggleto
survive is legitimate, 1 should like to inquire from our
friend: do not the Palestinians have the right to surviveaad
rettIm

115 their

Il<5mclimd’!

13.5. ‘Tirue and again

129. Now, this is my question: by the nmc token, my
dear Mr. Wiggins, and using that word “friends” to describe
the country I represent and your country, we fmve
consistently disagreed with the United States Government,
in SO far as its support Of Israel is concerned.
This is nothing
new; this was SO CVCI~ before tfte partition of Palestine; it
goes back to the time when the late Franklin liooscvcft met
with the late King Abdul Aziz in 1943, during the Second
World War. After that conversation the late President had
with His Majesty the late King, Mr. Roosevelt said: “I have
learned in a short time what I could never flave learned
from all ttlOsc Who were infOrming
mu about
the PiIle!itine
question”, and he promised Iiis Majesty the late King that
he would not do anything with regard to the Palestine
question without consultation witfl him, or with Saudi
Arabia, for that matter. lJnfortunately, the President died
110t t00 k5Ilg afterwards.

t0 talk

fiigh time that we should do SO,although I am surecertai
things
have IllreX~y
been mentioned; they do bear rePeti.
fiw howcvcr. bCCfi1lSC,
IIS We Say in Arabic,
there is benefit
sometimes in repetitiun.

“Israel is a fait
that there is a
I’il]cstirtiaIl puoplc which has an identity, just as the
L,cb;Incsc
I~e0ple hits, the Syrian people, the Iraqi PeoPf5
;UIYpople, for that matter, whether they happen to beh
the Middle ~;ast, in I,,ittirl Arncrica, in North Amedca,
wherever they may be. Yesterday /1461st meeting]*
rllerltiorled tflitt IIOIW other rhan a great President of the
(,Jnftcd States, Mr. Wilson 5 enunciated the Principle Of
s~~~~~et~r~~~i~~;]ti~~11
itt
the Conference of Versailles. Ever
sirlcc tflat d:ty the CJnftcd States has been Proudofbehga
&;ll~lpic)l~ of fihcrty. Wflat would those who struggledfor
tfleir survival ;Lsa peeopfoagainst the British have saidabout
Lafayette when he Ieft tfle shores of France to assistthe
ac:cr)f~~pli;

strIig$e

it

is here

of’ those

we have been told,
to stay”. We reply

AmcricimS

Who,

CU~OUSlY
enough,

were

many of them of AngI<l-Saxon origin but who werefighting
for their
self-detcrrnination
in America? Would he have
been called a11abettor, a traitor‘? I do not think that in the

annals

Lafayei
Americ
men li
colonie
YOU Pr
autono
136. I
Palestil

by wh;
mw I
137. I
just
01
includi

under
Pafestii
138. ’
Nation
to bea
for all
came 1

Zionisl
1914,
Mr. Mc
Amba:
“We a
illogic:
themsf
Mr. MI
there
knew
he was
139.
nous
cent

1
c

any 0
junctu
what 1
rule c
Count
there
it tha
barred
self-de
all the
140.
al rela
betwe
people
that n
a grea
other
have
intere

141.
ests a
are st
and s

annals of British history-Sir
Leslie will bear me outLafayette was ever called a traitor. On the contrary, the
Americans had their champions in the British Parliament,
men like Burke, who said that the Americans in the
colonies-or the British in the colonies in the New World, if
you prefer to cdl them that-should have some sort of
autonomy or independence.

spite of our warnings-and, I saw you, Mr. Wiggins, when it
was announced that your Government was considering
sending fifty Phantom jets. You will remember that; it was
early in the session. I did not do it on my own. I was
requested to do so by four Arab Foreign Ministers who had
cut off rtlations with your Government. I told you: “you
are not only exacerbating relations with those Governments
but, unfortunately-and
this is not in our interest-you are
also alienating all the Arab people, a hundred million of
them.” But your Government saw fit, dressing its policy
with such words as “friendship”, to go ahead. Sometimes
they use figures of speech such as “that oasis of democracy
in the Middle East”, meaning Israel-forgetting what the
Arab has contributed in history and culture. Even your
alphabet came from Lebanon, that tiny State of Lebanon.
That was the first alphabet as I told you yesterday, on the
sarcophagus of Hiram of Byblos, thirteen centuries before
Christ. You forget that.

136. Have the Arab States no right to say that the
Palestinians are entitled to independence? By what logic,
by what standard have they no right to say so? There are
many parallels in history.
137. Let US not address our speeches to just our friends or
just our enemies. We should all live as a human family,
including the Jews who came from eastern Europe, but not
under the deceitful banner of those who have usurped the
Palestinian people.
138. The State of Israel was constituted by the United
Nations because of pressure which the Zionists had brought
to bear on the Western Powers. Let us admit that once and
for all.. I explained in many of my interventions how it
came to happen, that it was because of the influence the
Zionists wielded in Western Europe, at one time, and, since
1914, in the United States of America. None other than
Mr. Morgenthau, who at one time was the United States
Ambassador to Turkey and a loyal American Jew, said:
“We are first and foremost Americans, and Zionism is an
illogical movement that may bring sorrow to the Jews
How prophetic he was, That is in
themsdves.”
Mr, Morgenthau’s memoirs. I am not sure, but I believe that
there is someone here in this city who is his grandson. I
knew his son; he was a Zionist, Mr. Morgenthau’s son, and
he was at odds with his father.

142. The Bible? Of course the Bible. The Bible is our
Bible too. It is our Book. It was not written by eastern
European Jews, Khazars, converted into Judaism in the
seventh century, The Bible was written by prophetsof the
area who were Semites.Thesegentlemen-thereis nothing
wrong in being from Europe-were convertedinto Judaism.
They may havebeenmixed with someSephardicJews.They
are no more Semitesthan, asI said,a Scandinavianwho has
embracedChristianity, or for that matter Judaismor Islam,
is a Semite. They can never make a nationality out of a
religion in the twentieth century. In fact, they are a
conglomeration of peoplesfrom everywhere. Due to an
unfortunate situation in Eurape in the SecondWorld War,
they huddled together underthe bannerof Israel.
143. Mr. Tekoah no doubt is an eloquent speaker.He
modulateshis voice and usesadjectivesmostly deleterious
to the Arabs. But the Arabs have a tongue too. However,
we will not use such deleteriouswords, nor throw aspersionsat any human being. 1 think it is beneathmy dignity
to do so. Also, I respectthe dignity of the humanperson,
and I will defend his dignity if anyoneasanindividual tries
to insult him.

139. Israel was constituted at the expense of the indigenous :people of Palestine who, in 1919, constituted 94 per
cent of the people of that land. Can the United States or
any other Power contest that fact? I do not want at this
juncture to give an array of facts, to marshal1 the details of
what Ihappened during the period of the Mandatory Power’s
rule over Palestine. It is all in the record, even of this
Council. The Council is indeed not a court of justice; but
there were permanent members in the Council who saw to
it that the International Court of Justice in 1947 was
barred from pronouncing itself on the question of the
self-determination of the Palestinian people. That is where
all the perfidy stems from.

144. Mr. Tekoah quoteswhat suitshim from the Bible. I
can quote chapter and versefrom the Bible; that is not a
way out. It may be an oratorical stance,but how true that
Hebrew saying, “Don’t throw taunts at your neighbour
with your blemish”.
145. I wish to refer Mr. Tekoah to the New Testament,
which is part of the Bible: “You seethe thorn that is in
your brother’s eye,but you do not seethe beamwhichis in
your own”-a little thorn in your brother’seye. That was
Christ. He was a Semite, incidentally. He wasnot from
easternEurope. Mr. Tekoah usedsuchwordsas“cowardly”
and “sneaking”, We can usesuch words. Thosecowitrdly
and sneakingpeople of Europe who were fighting for the
liberation of their countries were heroes,but thosePalestinians,becausethey comefrom Asia-someof you Western
countries have changedyour terminology during the last
twenty years,but your attitude is still the same-thoseof US
coming from Asia are a secondclassor a third classpeople.
Incidentally, Mr. Malik, you are Asian too. Be carefulthat
you are not consideredassecondclass.

140. There is nothing about friendship here in international relations, unfortunately. Though there can be friendship
between peoples, usually it is between individuals. With
peoples, there are interests that may harmonize or may not,
that may in fact conflict. However, the Arab world did have
a great community of interests with the United States and
other Western countries, and for the last twenty years we
have been telling them that they were threatening those
intemsts-not to speak of friendship.
141. There are not only harmonizing or conflicting interests amongst peoples and nations. But, unfortunately, we
are still pursuing a policy based on the balance of power
and spheres of influence. And here the United States, in
13

146. Israel is a conglomeration of people of many nationalities. The Arabs believe that they have been gathered
there by leaders who are secular so that one day they may
exploit the whole of Asia and Africa. whom do they tfrink
they are fooling? I feel sorry, indeed sorry I am not saying
this sarcastically--.for Mr. Tekoah, the reprcscrrtative of that
State. For one day he will wake up,-1 could be flis father;
Ike will wake up; he is still young--to the tact that ml one
can rob a people of its birthright. Of course he will say that
the Israelis are one people. But I just said tfiat they are a
conglomeration of people whom their secular leaders
-mostly secular; some of them may be religious. are trying
to thrust as a wedge to Penetrate the Arab lands.
147. But let us forget about the Arab Governments and
the Arab lands. What about the Palestine people, tfmse
people who are perpetrating acts of vi01c11~e because tfley
can do notking to regain their homeland, except by
shaking, or rather jolting the people~of the world into a
consciousness that they have been neglected and ignored.
Do you consider tfiose people as sub-human, instead of
feeling sad and trying to redress--here is the word that
should be used, redress-“what you Western countries mostly
have done to make them wfrat tfley are today: desperadoes,
frustrated. Think of your days of struggle, the colonial
days, and think of 1776. Are tfrey sub.human, those
Palestinians? You talk of the Arab Governments. who are
Arab Governments? They come and go,
148. It is the next generation amongst the Arabs, Jews or
gentiles that we salute. They know what has been done. It
will be unfortunate if the redress has to come about by
violence. Do you think that we welcome violence’? No, sir.
We have been trying to evolve our Arab nations, to shape
our destiny. Like other people we make mistakes, But a
wedge fram eastern Europe was placed, pointing at the
Arab east with all that it involves in economic exploitation.
Money, standards of living--we do not live by standards of
living alone. For heavens sake, we could have been your
friends and the friends of all the peoples in the world if you
had left us alone and not made us the pawns of the balance
of power. This question is not in the hands of the Arab
Governments. It is in the hands, first and foremost, of tfrc
Palestinian people, who will resolve the question. Either
that, or they will die; and I doubt that the other Arabs. the
Arab people, not tfte Governments-will let them die.
Because, as I said in anotfzer meeting, when it comes to
opposing tyranny, every Arab, rightly or wrongly, becomes
a Palestinian. People, not Governments, shall decide;
Governments try to survive by hook or by crook in every
country.
149. GO and sell your Phantoms, The Russians wilt also
self arms. But why? Because the Russians sell arms to the
Arab States, the United States has to sell Phantoms to
Israel. You are the arbiters of the balance of power, But the
Russians would not have sold arms to the Arab States
-remember we are not customers of the Russians; 1 am
talking objectively-.-if there were no Israel introduced into
the area, a foreign incursion. But this is your answer: wfzat
shall we do? It is a fait accompli. A stamp of legality had
already been appended to agreements in tfle United Nations
by a vote brought about by pressure, But there is a
solution. The solution is to poll the Palestinian refugees and

ask how manY of them would want to go back to tfeii
homeland, to five on their lands and tend their orchards,
I 50. After a few more incidents, as will be the order ef
tfre days”-asI mentioned two years ago here in tMs Council
this is a link in a long chain-ask how many Israelis would
like to emigrate
frOIn
Israel? Those who allegedly are
friends of Israel, open the doors of your countries and you
Will SW how they will swarm in. Those Israelis are good
technicians. They Wil mcrease
your
skyscrapers, machinery
and computers. Tfley are physicists. Let us Arabs evolvecur
(1~11
institutions, We arc beginning to have our own
technicians,
our
0~11
graduates.
We have 6Q,ooo students
abroad, 1%Om
of them
in tfle United States and Canada
And they take issue with US, the representatives ei
ChWXI~IWlItS,
that We are neglecting the Pafestinians.They
are the pi&KS of the future, not you and I, Mr, Wiggins,er
our ilk, WCh~vc rcaohed our sixties. ~frey are the people to
decide the future, not tfre past Presidents of the United
States, Youth has awakened, and the Arabs have meir own
youth. Youth is rebelling against injustice everywhere,
including the United States-1 do not know about Russia,
Arab youth will rebel against injustice.
15 1. Once in a while I like to make people laugh, asa
relief from the tragedy that is confronting us. When yeu
laugfr it may purge you of whatever looms in your spirit ef
darkness because of the tragic situation. I say this judiciously because, God forbid, if tftis balance of power game
sfmuld get out of hand, there will be a conflagration, we
shall all burn and blow up. IS this the fate of man, after
6,000 years of history?
152. It seems, as 1 said the other day in the Assembly,
only yesterday that the Sumerians in Iraq invented the
wheel. And the dinosaur survived for two hundred miffion
years before it became extinct. Because man does not
choose to live by truth and justice, he may render himself
extir1c.t in time. flc has probed outer space, but unfortunately he has not gained mastery over his inner self. These
are the words of a man not only representing Saudi Arabia,
but dedicated to this Grganization, without which we shall
founder. We must mend our ways. We do not use such
words as “friendship” and this and that journalisticaIly, but
we go to tfle root of the matter, if we choose to surviveas
homt~ saf)iars in tins world.
153. I tfumk you, Mr. President, for having granted me
permission to speak, and I flave a few words to sayto You,I
coI~grat\~latc you 011 having presided over this Council with
the dignity of a 1m11, as we say in Arabic, a man ef
“‘origin”, witfr tfrc inteffigcnce and perspicacity that became
evident to all members of the Council and also to Your
colleagues in the General Assembly.
154. At tfre same time I congratulate you, not that You
are turnillg your back on the Council, but mat you are
making your exit, luckily for you, because nettlesome
questions will continue to confront this Council as long as
,na,l does not decide to face such questions justly and
witfrout using tfs old rubrics and slogans mat spelt the
foundering of the League of Nations.
155. Tfre PRBSIDENT:
In reciprocating me friend*y
sentiments of my good friend, Ambassador Raroodyy’

\

4

,

should
look ar
that W
the H
friends
advice.
should
and en
156. ’
speak :
him.

c

157. 1
(transk

/

attacks
permit
to ref
represe
frank,
down
the Se
statem
order
into a
inclusil
has no
incider
Membf
the caI
nation;
Mr. Wi
have b
has nc
Counci
158. ’

the USI
he res
Union,
conduc
matter
avoid I
the SC
that i!
Nation
tions t
genera
nation;
armed
159.
the Ch
law.
160.
lated t
in that
is why
incontc
peace-l
161. :
_ Ministr

should like to say that he is one of those people on whom I
look a:; the father of the United Nations in the same sense
that Winston Churchill used to be regarded as the father of
the House of Commons. I have always enjoyed his
friendship. I have always relied on his encouragement and
advice. At this time, when I am leaving the Council, I
should like to thank him for the very friendly sentiments
and en~couraging words that he has expressed.

quotation does exist. The statement was made when Israel
was not ruled by so aggressive a clique as it is now. Power in
Israel has now been taken over by a group of-persons who
think and act aggressively.

156. The representative of the Soviet Union has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply, and I now call on
him.

163. The Soviet Union is closely following developments
in the Near East. That is quite understandable, because
everything that happens in the Near East and the Mediterranean region directly concerns the Soviet Union. If
there is war there, the firing is on our own doorstep. If
there is peace, we work quietly, develop our productive
forces and raise our people’s living level. We therefore
cannot be indifferent to events in the Near East.

162. Experience has shown that it was previously this
group which embarked upon a course of aggression-an
expansionist course of aggression towards the Arab States.

157. ‘Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
{translated from Russian): Before reacting to the usual
attacks on the Soviet Union which the Israel representative
permits himself at Security Council meetings, I should like
to refer to a single sentence which Mr. Wiggins, the
representative of the United States, used and which, to be
frank, pleases me. He said, if I understood and noted it
down correctly from the interpretation, that this Council,
the Security Council, is not a court. That is an excellent
statement. The delegation of the Soviet Union precisely in
order to prevent the Security Council from being turned
into a peculiar kind of court has twice objected to the
inclusilon in its agenda of document S/8946. This document
has noNthing to do with the Security Council, because the
incident took place in the territory of a sovereign State
Member of the United Nations, at the airport of Athens,
the capital of that State; and the national authorities and a
natiomrl court can deal with it. If this argument by
Mr. Wiggins had been advanced earlier, we should clearly
have been able to discuss it and keep this document, which
has nothing to do with the Security Council, off the
Counc.il’s agenda.

164. From the first day of the crisis our country has been
on the side of the Arab peoples, and we are proud that it
has. We have come forward in defence of their national
independence and of their territorial integrity, which has
been violated by the aggressors.
165. The Soviet Union has decisively condemned Israel’s
aggressive action and supported the efforts of the United
Nations to restore peace in the Near East, It is making every
effort to restore peace in that area and to achieve a peaceful
political settlement. This fact is known to the Security
Council, the United Nations, the peoples of the world, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations and Ambassador
Jarring, who is carrying out an international mission on
instructions from the Secretary-General of the United
Nations with the full support of the Soviet Union.
166. Just when efforts are being made both inside and
outside the United Nations to achieve a peaceful settlement
of the Near East problems as quickly as possible, and just
when the Arab States have declared most definitely their
readiness and intention to seek such a settlement on the
basis of the Security Council’s decisions, the Government
of Israel is repeating again and again that it will continue to
sabotage those decisions. Those are the facts,

158. ‘The Israel representative employed in his statements
the usual familiar tactics. When he is at a loss for arguments
he resorts to slander and fabrication against the Soviet
Union.. But that is a very weak position. Israel’s aggressive
conduct cannot be justified by methods of this kind. As a
matter of fact, he had to employ these tactics in order to
avoid replying to the plainly-worded questions contained in
the Soviet delegation’s statement. The first question was
that international law and the Charter of the United
Nation.s prohibit armed reprisals. No matter what quotations t.he Israel representative may have cited here, it is a
generally recognized fact, an international rule, that international law and the Charter of the United Nations prohibit
armed reprisals.

167. Mr, Tekoah, you are fond of quoting newspapers,
including your favourite New York Times. Would you
kindly read the report in today’s New York Times of the
fresh efforts ‘made by the Soviet Union to achieve a
peaceful political settlement in the Middle East? For you,
reports in The New York Times always ring with a
convincing argument. Please acquaint yourself with this
one.

159. Anyone who resorts to them commits a crime against

the Charter of the United Nations and against international

168. In conclusion, I can only remark that the longer the
present ruling circles of Israel continue to obstruct a
peaceful settlement in the Near East, the more dearly they
will have to pay for it. The peoples cannot allow Israel to
violate the political and economic interests and the security
of States in the Near East or of their neighbours.

law.
160. ‘The second question was that Israel flagrantly violated the Armistice Agreement between Lebanon and Israel
in that the Israel air force invaded Lebanon’s air space. That
is why the Israel delegate, in order to escape from these two
incontsestable facts, had to slander the Soviet Union and its
peace-l.oving policy.

169. Those are the facts of the case, and no slanderous
fabrications or inventions by the Israel delegate about the
policy of the Soviet Union will succeedin diverting
attention from them or distorting the real situation. The

161. He quoted a statement by Mr, Gromyko, the present
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union. Yes, that
15

rcpresentativc [I was going to say his desiderata) come t’
or not. The disaffection from which the United Nae,
suffering is very largely due to Israel. Is it not surpri
therefore, that the representative of Israel should a(i’.Lrcss
one of the principal organs of the United Nations, yours
with the arrogance which marked his statement a fee
minutes ago?

sincere wish of the Soviet Union is to achieve a peaceful
political settlement in the Near East.
170. The PRESIDENT: The last speaker inscribed on my
list for exercise of the right of reply is the leader of the
delegation of Lebanon, on whom I now call.
17 I. Mr. I3OUTROS (Lebanon) (ttmslatclcl from Ikm’lr):
Mr. President, I should like to have welcomed today’s
resolution with unreserved gratitude and with satisfaction
unclouded by regret, Indeed, all the delegations in this
Council, and you at their head, Mr. President, deserve my
country’s thanks for the unanimous moral support you
have given it during this session by formally condemning
Israel and denouncing its aggression.

177. On another aspect: I am bound to endorse the view
implied in your decision that no effect should be given to
Israel’s counter claim against Lebanon based on the Athens
incident, with which--as more than one speaker has pointed
out here my country and my Government have absolutely
nothing to do.
178. Your decision of today, though inadequate, is pcvcr.
thclcss a milestone on the road to peace of which you arc
the supreme guardians, I hope it wilI be a barrier to
injustice, adventure and aggression. Whether it will, on]!
time ~a11 show. For my part 1 regret to say &spite m-e
eilrIlest wishes to the contrary-that
the answer w
certainly be negative as far as it depends on Israel. The pa,.,,
is geIlNdl~
il pointer to the future.

172. Unfortunately this decisicm obliges me to express
reservations, for it has not drawn the conclusions that it
should have drawn from your findings and has hesitated to
order the application to Israel of Chapter VII of the
Charter. This deliberate omission might have bee11 intclligible in regard to a country which wasan intcrnntionaI first
offender: but it is no longer so in regard to such a notorious
and hardened recidivist as Israel. International ethics and
mornlity have been flouted by Israel for SO long that
platonic decisions, even of the Security Councils--all the
decisions accumulated against it-seem after all to be of INI
use but to furnish the Council’s archives.

179. 1 should not wish to end without a word about the
last paragraph of the Council’s decisipn, to which the
reprcsentntive of Saudi Arabia has just referred-the paragraph concerning indemnity and reparation. Unfortunately
I am not sufficiently familiar with English to understand
the shades of meaning of the word “redress”. I have before
mc the French translation of this text, which usesthe word
“r&mtiotz”.
If words still have meaning, in my opinion
there is clearly no need to split hairs here. Nevertheless, I
must add that my delegation has not taken any major
intcrcst in this question since it has desired to prove that its
prime concern was the condemnation of Israel and the
adoption of sanctions against it-that is, respect for the
principles which are the pride of your Charter. Lebanon
wished as far as possible to keep away considerations which
might have seemed rather sordid from the issues of major
principle which wcrc at stake.

173. I am quite aware that the decision contains a
paragraph solemnly warning Israel to desist on pain of a
decision to take coercive measures against it, There is the
real essence of the problem, for in attacking the civil
international airport of Beirut the aggressorWilS well ilWarC
that it was flouting international law, armistice agrccmcnts
and cease-fire decisions. Neverthclcss it deliberately chose
to run this risk and commit this further act of dcfiancc to
the Security Council and the international community.
174. To become ‘convinced of this fact it is only necessary
to scan the Israel press and the statements of the Israel
authorities following this aggressive incident. In these
statements, without caring a rap for the rciiction of public
opinion or governments, they maintain that their alleged
security-it is hard to see how security comes into the
picture-is more important than the currents of intcrnationd public opinion. After that, is there any ground for
believing that a platonic condemnation will restrain Israel?
I shouId willingly believe it if my expericncc and daily
events did not keep on proving me right, This very day
further threats are being made against Lebanon and arouse
fear of new adventures, new acts of aggression. The same
applies to the other Arab States,

l&O. The PRESIDENT: The representative of Israel has
indicated a desire to exercise the right of reply, and I now
give him the floor.
181, Mr, TEKOAH (Israel): I shall not prolong the
discussion with the Soviet representative, but I should Iike
to leave him with one thought to ponder over.
182. A quarter of a century after a desperate fight for Iifc
against IIitIer’s Nad hordes, the Soviet Union finds itself
today completely identified in the Middle East with
aarcssive Arab Governments, which are the only Onesin
the entire world that still publish and still distribute HiWs
hfcitt ~mnpfi Twenty years after supporting, in the words
of Mr. Gromyko, “the ‘Jewish national liberation movement
in Palestine”, tllc Soviet Union now gives succour and
encouragement to Arab terror organizations openly Pro.
claiming as their aim the destruction of the Jewish State
and the annihilation of its people. I have no doubt that the
time will come when the Soviet Government and the Soviet
people will look with a blush of shame upon this GsgraccfuI
chap&r of Soviet history.

17.5. Whatever happens in the future-and I must cmphasize this here and now-your decision commits you irrevocably to meet Israel’s acts of aaression with sanctions
U~CSS
paragraph 3 of your decision is to bc a dead Ictter,
which is just what you do not want it to be.
176. Israel is likely to be the chief agent of the bankruptcy of the United Nations if it is allowed to go an
flouting the international communit:r. It depends on you,
gentlemen, whether the predictions just made by the Israel
16

ct:

Statement by the President
:

twenty-third sessionof the General Assembly in the
problemsof the humanenvironment.

183. The PRESIDENT: There are no other names on the
list of speakers. With the permission of the members of the
Council, I should like to say a few words.

192. Then we have the beginningof the Viet-Nam peace
talks in Paris.Although the United Nationsis not directly
involved in those talks, the Secretary-General
playeda very
persistent and vital part in their initiation. Here againa
hopeful beginning has been made which, if followed up.
with commongoodfaith anddetermination,can leadto the
achievementof a just and lastingpeacein South-EastAsia.

1,84. Distinguished colleagues and friends: since this
happens to be the last month of Ethiopia’s membership of
;’ the Security Council and since, by happy coincidence,
( Ethiopia’s
representative has bad the honour of being
~ President of the Council during this month, perhaps I may
be allowed to say a few words in concluding the work of
the Council on this the last day of 1968.

193. I have picked out thosefour areasof international
endeavourat randomas constitutingthe credit sideof the
international balancesheet.The debit sideis unfortunately
too long to elaborate.There are still many world problems
which continue to test and challengethe very raisond’btre
of our Organization.And if I may beallowedto sayso,the
problemsof southernAfrica must figure at the top of this
awful list.

( 185, 1 should like first of all to say what a tremendous and
~ challenging experience it has been to serve on the Council
~ during these past two years.
I
1

186. It may be said that the year 1968 has brought little
change to the characteristic ups and downs in international
. relations of recent years, with events that have caused
recurrent cycles of hope and despair and of,optimism and
frustration. But the present year and the year that preceded
it have not, I submit, been completely empty of achievements which, if modest, are none the less meaningful.

194. It has been said in justification of the existenceof
the United Nations that if it did not exist we would be
obligedto bring it into existence.Weareall awarethat the
alternative to life with the United Nationsis life without
international law and morality. Surely the validity of that
propositionis clearly demonstratedby the declineand fall
of the League of Nations and by all that happened
thereafter.

187. AS we look back in thoughtful reminiscence to what
we have tried to do together in this Council and to world
events in general, we can at least record certain hopeful
beginnings.

195. While it is our primary duty to seethat the United
Nations lives, it is our supremeresponsibilityto guard
against the danger of the United Nations slowly and
inadvertently falling into the sameunfortunatesituationof
.erosionof authority and prestige.That is boundto happen ,
unlesswe, the membership,.wakeup to our responsibilities
and becomewilling to respectand to obligerespectfor the
principlesof the Charter andall decisions
basedthereon.

188. For one thing, we can take some deserved pride in
the fact that in our work in the Council during the past two
years, and in the face of grave ‘dangers to world peace, we
have lived up to our collective responsibility as Council
members and have honestly tried to face international
reality by always relying on a&ion through the method of
mutual
consultations and consensus.Today’s outcome is
but one good example of this encouragingtrend in the
Council’s effort to advanceits work.
189, We have alsomade a good beginningin unanimously
adopting resolution 242 (1967) of November 1967, which
established the machinery and laid down basicprinciples
for the attainment of a just and lastingpeacein the Middle
East.
190. We have likewise taken somemeaningfulstepsin the
direc.tion of world disarmament. The treaty to ban the
spread of nuclear weapons is a potentially significant
forward step in that direction, The promisesof that accord
must be madegoodby further progressin this field.

197. And so, my friends and colleagues,
aswe prepareto
receivenew membersin the Councilfor’next year, we must
do so with a certain senseof cautiousoptimism,coupled
with a senseof dedicationanddeterminationto continueto
strive together for our mutual well-being-indeedour very
survival.

191, Again, during this’ time the United Nations hasalso
manifested a high interest in the problemsof outer space,as
well as those of inner space,and has adoptedappropriate
resolutions which affirm the universal interest. The recent
wondrous achievements of the United States Apollo 8
project mark both a new climax and the beginningof a new
era in the relations between man and the vast world of
nature that surroundhim. It is also relevant to note in this
connexion that appropriate interest was shown by the
$

196. By virtue of their greatpower and the responsibility
given to them in the Charter, the permanentmembers
obviously hate a specialrole to play in this regard,andI for
one feel that periodic meetingsbetweenme four permanent
membersof the Council within the framework of ‘the
United Nations, as suggestedat. the beginningof the
twenty-third sessionof the General Assembly by the
Secretary-Generaland asrecently calledfor by the Government of France, would enhancethe effectivenessof the
Organization and would advance the cause of world
understandingand peace,The Middle Eastcouldperhapsbe
the first of the problemson which suchconsultationsCO$
be profitably conducted, sincein that particular caseall
four permanentmembershave supportedthe Middle East
resolution242 (1967) of November1967,

198. Again I thank all my colleaguesin the Council for
their friendship and their co-operationandfor the ‘wonder17

‘.

ful opportunity and experience of having worked with
them during these past eventful years.

close and fruitful association with them during the past two
years,

199. I wish also to thank the Secretary-General and,
through him, all my colleagues in the Secretariat, including
the staff-the interpreters, the verbatim reporters and all
others-for their unfailing kindness and courtesy during my

200. In conclusion I wish to one and all avery happy and
.’
prosperous NewYear.
\:,.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price: $U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

,s

Ths meeting rose at $30 p.m.
I ,’
~
.:’
,,” ,;

in other

‘currencies)

35019-October

1972-2,050

.
