S/2007/307/Rev.1

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 June 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 5 June 2007 from the Secretary-General
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the Security Council consultations held on 1 June
2007. You will recall that, during the discussion of the African Union-United
Nations report on the hybrid operation in Darfur (S/2007/307), I indicated that the
African Union had requested some additional clarifications and revisions to the text.
Based on further consultations with the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Alpha Oumar Konaré, those adjustments have now been reflected in
the attached text.
Mr. Konaré is taking appropriate steps to submit the report to the members of
the African Union Peace and Security Council.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-36968 (E) 070607

*0736968*

S/2007/307/Rev.1

Report of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of
the African Union Commission on the hybrid operation
in Darfur
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the African Union Peace and
Security Council communiqué of 30 November 2006 and the statement by the
President of the Security Council issued on 19 December 2006 (S/PRST/2006/55),
in which the Council endorsed the conclusions of the 16 November 2006 high-level
consultation on Darfur, held in Addis Ababa. The Addis Ababa conclusions called
for a comprehensive approach to the peace process in Darfur, including
re-energizing the political process, strengthening the ceasefire and a three-phased
approach to peacekeeping, culminating in an African Union-United Nations hybrid
operation. The Council of Ministers of the Government of the Sudan subsequently
endorsed the Addis Ababa conclusions and the Abuja decision on 3 December 2006.
2.
The present report proposes a mandate and a structure for the hybrid operation
in Darfur and provides details on the various components of the proposed operation
and their specific tasks. Additionally, the report describes the ongoing efforts of the
international community to support the peace process in Darfur and to strengthen
the African Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS).

II. Background
3.
After the signing of the N’Djamena Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement
between the Government of the Sudan, the Sudan Liberation Movement/Army
(SLM/A) and the Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) in April 2004 and the
follow-up agreement of 28 May 2004, the African Union deployed AMIS and
gradually expanded it to its current strength of over 7,000 personnel, including
5,197 protection force personnel, 946 military observers and 1,360 civilian police.
4.
As the observer mission evolved into a complex peacekeeping operation, and
owing to uncertainty regarding its financial sustainability, the African Union Peace
and Security Council, in its 12 January 2006 communiqué, expressed its support, in
principle, for a transition from AMIS to a United Nations operation. That decision
was subsequently reiterated in the Peace and Security Council communiqué of
10 March 2006, which called for the transition of AMIS to a United Nations
operation. Such a transition was also endorsed by the United Nations Security
Council in its presidential statement of 3 February 2006 (S/PRST/2006/5) and its
resolutions 1663 (2006) and 1679 (2006). In its resolution 1679 (2006), the Council
called for a joint African Union-United Nations technical assessment mission to the
Sudan/Darfur to assess the requirements for strengthening AMIS and the possible
transition of AMIS to a United Nations peace operation.
5.
On the basis of the recommendations of the joint African Union-United
Nations technical assessment mission conducted in June 2006 and the report of the
Secretary-General of 28 July 2006 (S/2006/591), on 31 August 2006 the Security
Council adopted resolution 1706 (2006), in which it authorized the expansion of the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) into Darfur and invited “the consent

2

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

of the Government” for the deployment of a multidimensional United Nations peace
operation in Darfur. However, the Government of the Sudan did not give its consent.
6.
At its 63rd meeting, held at the level of Heads of State and Government in
New York on 20 September 2006, the Peace and Security Council took note of
Security Council resolution 1706 (2006), as well as the Government of the Sudan’s
decision not to consent to the deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Darfur. It requested the African Union Commission, with the support of
African Union member States, the United Nations and other partners, to take all
necessary measures to enhance AMIS on the basis of the concept of operation
approved by the Military Staff Committee of the African Union at its meeting of
23 June 2006.
7.
Out of deep concern for the difficulties that AMIS and its mandate have been
faced with, as well as continued insecurity in Darfur, on 16 November 2006 the
Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission co-chaired
in Addis Ababa a high-level consultation of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, the African Union Peace and Security Council members, a number
of other African countries, the Government of the Sudan, the European Union and
the League of Arab States. The objective of that high-level consultation was to
identify concrete steps to be taken to improve the situation in Darfur. The meeting
reached a number of conclusions based on three requirements: re-energizing the
political process, establishing a strengthened ceasefire and defining the way forward
for peacekeeping in Darfur.
8.
The Addis Ababa conclusions proposed a number of principles to guide efforts
to re-energize the political process under the joint leadership of the African Union
and the United Nations and establish a strengthened ceasefire. The Addis Ababa
conclusions also outlined the way forward with regard to peacekeeping, focusing on
a three-phase approach of United Nations support for AMIS, consisting of a light
support package, a heavy support package and an African Union-United Nations
hybrid operation.
9.
The high-level consultation underlined that the hybrid operation should be
capable of contributing to the restoration of security and the protection of civilians
in Darfur and should be logistically and financially sustainable, and further noted
the need to take into account security along the borders between the Sudan and
Chad and the Central African Republic.
10. On 30 November 2006 in Abuja, the African Union Peace and Security
Council held its 66th meeting, at which it endorsed the Addis Ababa conclusions in
its communiqué and decided with regard to the hybrid operation that:
(a) The Special Representative shall be jointly appointed by the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
after appropriate consultations, as per the practice;
(b) The Force Commander, who should be an African, shall be appointed by
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission in consultation with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations;
(c) The Mission shall benefit from United Nations backstopping and
command and control structures;

07-36968

3

S/2007/307/Rev.1

(d) The size of the force shall be determined by the African Union and the
United Nations, taking into account all relevant factors and the situation on the
ground, as well as the requirements for it to effectively discharge its mandate.
11. On 19 December 2006, the Security Council issued a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2006/55) in which it endorsed the Addis Ababa conclusions and the Abuja
communiqué of the Peace and Security Council and called for their implementation
without delay, also calling on all parties to facilitate the immediate deployment of
the United Nations light and heavy support packages for AMIS and a hybrid
operation in Darfur, for which backstopping and command and control structures
and systems would be provided by the United Nations. On 23 December 2006, in a
letter addressed to the Secretary-General, President Omer Al-Bashir confirmed that
the Addis Ababa conclusions and the Abuja communiqué “constitute a viable
framework for peaceful settlement of the conflict in Darfur” and reaffirmed the
readiness of the Government of the Sudan to implement the Addis Ababa
conclusions and the Abuja communiqué. The Government of the Sudan also
informed the African Union of its acceptance of the decision of the Peace and
Security Council.

III. Status of implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement
12. Since its signing on 5 May 2006 in Abuja, the Darfur Peace Agreement has run
into considerable difficulties. Only two of the four parties that negotiated the
Agreement signed it in the end. Those that refused to sign objected to certain
provisions of the power-sharing, wealth-sharing and final security arrangements
protocols of the Agreement, including the provisions on senior Darfurian
representation in the national Government, the creation of a Darfur region, the
amount allocated for compensation of victims of the conflict and the disarmament of
the Janjaweed. More than one year after its signing, the Agreement has yet to
achieve its objectives of bringing peace and security to the people of Darfur and
paving the way for a just, peaceful and lasting political solution to the conflict in
Darfur.
13. Nevertheless, significant efforts are being made by the African Union, the
Darfur Peace Agreement partners, including the United Nations and signatories of
the Agreement and the Declaration of Commitment in establishing implementation
structures, such as the Darfur Assessment and Evaluation Commission, and
operationalizing some provisions of the Agreement.
14. With regard to the power-sharing protocol, for instance, even though
SLA-Minawi leader Minni Arko Minawi was appointed Senior Assistant to the
President and Chairman of the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority in October
2006, the Regional Authority itself, which is a critical aspect of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, since it represents the Darfur regional administration, was inaugurated
only on 23 April 2007. This has significantly affected all other aspects of
implementation of the Agreement since its signing. At the same time, the
relationship between Minawi as Chairperson of the Regional Authority and existing
Government structures in the three Darfur states needs to be fully clarified, and
adequate infrastructure and logistics provided for the consolidation and effective
functioning of the Regional Authority.

4

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

15. Meanwhile, a number of ministerial, gubernatorial and legislative posts have
been filled by representatives of SLA-Minawi and those movements that have
signed the Declaration of Commitment to the Darfur Peace Agreement. The
Government of the Sudan claims to have implemented up to 85 per cent of the
power-sharing component of the Agreement. There will therefore be a critical need
to revisit the matter in the framework of re-energizing the political process and
broadening the support base of the Agreement in order to provide fresh and concrete
incentives for the non-signatory groups to join the peace process.
16. No significant progress has been made in the implementation of the wealthsharing provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement and compensation provisions
remain outstanding. The Darfur Joint Assessment Mission, which was required to
assess development and reconstruction needs in Darfur, has had to suspend its work
because of security concerns. Consequently, the donors’ pledging conference that
was to be held in 2006 was postponed on account of the fact that the Joint
Assessment Mission process was not concluded.
17. Various constraints related largely to logistics and funding, as well as the lack
of an all-inclusive political process, have hindered meaningful progress in the
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement provisions relating to the
comprehensive ceasefire and final security arrangements. Although steps by both the
Government of the Sudan and the Ceasefire Commission have been taken towards
finalizing the “Plan for the disarmament of the Janjaweed/armed militias”, the actual
neutralization and disarmament of the Janjaweed are yet to start, with all the
attendant implications for security in Darfur. In addition, the verification of parties’
locations has been completed in only two out of the eight sectors (sectors I and II).
18. The Darfur Peace Agreement provides for non-military logistic support to the
movements, after they fulfil certain conditions, including redeployment. However,
although those conditions have not been met, at its fifth session, held in El Fasher
on 7 February 2007, the Joint Commission observed that the prevailing insecurity in
Darfur is also linked to the absence of legal means of livelihood for elements
belonging to both the signatory and non-signatory movements.
19. The Joint Working Commission on the Final Security Arrangements is
currently drawing up an inventory of the movements’ forces and their requirements.
AMIS has meanwhile concluded arrangements for the establishment of the Logistics
Coordination Committee, which would be responsible for supervising and
coordinating logistic support for the movements’ forces. The Logistics Coordination
Committee will also determine their requirements in terms of rations, water, shelter,
medical supplies and clothing. The Committee, whose membership includes the
African Union, the United Nations and donors, will report to the Ceasefire
Commission. Meanwhile, the Government of the Sudan continues to provide
financial and other logistic assistance to the movements on a voluntary basis.
20. The effective launching of the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation is also
affected by the narrow political space in Darfur, owing generally to the difficulties
facing the Darfur Peace Agreement. Nevertheless, the Preparatory Committee for
the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation, inaugurated in November 2006, has
made significant progress in setting up the structure and preparatory work of the
process. Consultations still continue regarding the nomination of the Chairperson of
the Dialogue and Consultation.

07-36968

5

S/2007/307/Rev.1

IV. Security situation
21. Ceasefire violations continued even after the signing of the Darfur Peace
Agreement. Those violations had a devastating impact on the civilian population,
increased displacement and reduced humanitarian access. The 19 February 2007
report of the joint African Union-United Nations quick review of the situation on the
ground in Darfur stated that the security situation in Darfur had remained unstable
since the June 2006 joint African Union-United Nations technical assessment
mission to the Sudan/Darfur and Chad. While the situation has improved slightly in
some areas, it has deteriorated significantly in others. This deterioration is
attributable largely to the delay in the implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, the fragmentation of the parties and the fight for control and supremacy
in their respective areas of influence.
22. The period from July 2006 to January 2007 has witnessed increased insecurity
and the militarization of some camps for internally displaced persons and a sharp
reduction in humanitarian access. Targeted attacks on non-governmental
organizations and AMIS personnel and property have continued on a larger scale,
and cases of abduction of AMIS personnel, carjacking and banditry along major
supply routes have also increased.
23. In Northern Darfur, major fighting between Darfur Peace Agreement
signatories and non-signatories, including aerial bombardment of villages, has led to
civilian casualties and overall insecurity. In December 2006 and January 2007
Government forces, on a number of occasions, bombarded the planned locations of
the SLA reunification conference north of El Fasher, thwarting the efforts of SLA
commanders to consolidate their groups. Furthermore, attacks by the Janjaweed
against areas under rebel control have continued, with severe consequences for the
civilian population. From 11 January to early April 2007 there was a lull in the
direct engagement of the Sudanese Armed Forces in Northern Darfur. However, the
presence of proxy militias and the Government’s inability to contain them continued
to create insecurity.
24. The quick review report also noted an increase in inter- and intra-tribal
fighting in Southern Darfur, in the Kass region south of Jebel Marra. In February
2007 alone, violent clashes between the Rizeigat and Tarjem tribes led to 250
fatalities in Southern Darfur. The quick review also identified cross-border attacks
and the presence of Chadian rebels in Western Darfur and that of Sudanese rebels in
eastern Chad as the main reasons for the acute deterioration of the security situation
in the border area and the deterioration of bilateral relations between the two
countries. Although various initiatives continue to seek a solution to the ChadSudan situation, insecurity continues to endanger the lives of civilians on both sides
of the common border.
25. Attacks on AMIS and insecurity continued in March and April. Three AMIS
soldiers were killed in an attack on 5 March 2007 at an SLA-Minawi checkpoint in
Gereida. On 31 March 2007 in Northern Darfur, a helicopter transporting a senior
AMIS delegation, including the AMIS Deputy Force Commander, received fire in
the general area of Kurni, which is an SLM/Wahid-controlled area. Five AMIS
peacekeepers were killed in an attack by SLM-Minawi forces on 1 April 2007 while
guarding the water point in Umm Barru, Northern Darfur. Three of the assailants
were killed in the attack and their weapons were recovered. On 10 April another

6

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

member of AMIS died of injuries sustained in an attack in Sartony, and on 14 April
2007, near AMIS headquarters, another AMIS officer, on his way home after work,
was killed by unknown armed elements. Meanwhile, an AMIS officer who was
abducted on 10 December 2006 is still missing.
26. The lull observed between January and early April was broken by resumed
Sudanese Armed Forces bombing raids in Northern Darfur. On 19, 21 and 23 April,
the Sudanese Armed Forces conducted aerial bombings in Jira, Umm Rai, Anka and
Hashasba. On 24 April, the Chairman of the Ceasefire Commission issued a
statement in which he expressed his dismay about information he had received
concerning the Sudanese Armed Forces aerial bombardments on 19 and 21 April in
Jira and Umm Rai villages in Northern Darfur. He noted that the incident was
especially shocking, as it happened at a time when the non-signatory factions of the
Sudan Liberation Army, had extended invitations to the international community to
attend a planned commanders conference.
27. In Southern Darfur, intense inter-Arab tribal clashes between the Tarjem
(Aballa) and the Rizeigat (Baggara) took place on 31 March and 1 April in the
Bulbul Abu Zazur area, killing some 60 persons and injuring 21 others, mostly
Tarjem. In Western Darfur, similar clashes on 13 and 14 April between Gimir
militias and Dorok communities led to 56 casualties, the burning of 17 villages and
the displacement of 500 to 700 families. Following the attack, Gimir militias took
control of the land of the burned villages. On 26 April some 300 armed men
attacked internally displaced persons in Argo and Dabanera camps near Tawilla,
Northern Darfur, committing acts of looting, physical assault and kidnapping.
28. So far in 2007, nearly 130,000 people have been displaced because of
insecurity in Darfur. At the same time, numerous humanitarian organizations
reported unusual access constraints due to insecurity. Moreover, hostilities on both
sides of the Chad border caused the temporary influx of 12,000 Chadian refugees
into Western Darfur in February 2007.

V. Implementation of the Addis Ababa conclusions and
Abuja decisions
29. In the light of the difficulties in the implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement and in view of the continuing insecurity in Darfur, a number of steps
have been taken to carry out the November 2006 Addis Ababa and Abuja decisions.
1.

Re-energizing the political process
30. The Addis Ababa conclusions identified a number of general principles to
guide the re-energizing of the Darfur political process, including the need to resolve
the Darfur conflict through an all-inclusive political solution and to uphold the
Darfur Peace Agreement as the basis for that process, and that the mediation should
be under African Union and United Nations leadership. They also underlined that
the African Union remains the lead actor in the process of implementing the
Agreement.
31. The Addis Ababa conclusions further expressed a number of concerns
regarding the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement. Firstly, the
conclusions noted that the Agreement is not sufficiently inclusive and that this has

07-36968

7

S/2007/307/Rev.1

led to insecurity, a deterioration of the humanitarian situation and limited
humanitarian access. Secondly, the Agreement has not been sufficiently
disseminated in Darfur and is thus opposed by many Darfurians. In addition, the
high-level consultation identified other concerns, including the proliferation of
peace initiatives, the fragmentation of the non-signatories, the regional dimension of
the conflict, which has complicated the search for a solution, and the slow pace of
implementation of the Agreement.
32. The Addis Ababa conclusions therefore recommended that the various peace
initiatives be brought under a unified umbrella, jointly led by the African Union and
the United Nations. To that end, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the Secretary-General appointed Salim Ahmed Salim and Jan Eliasson,
respectively, as their Special Envoys for Darfur, to focus on re-energizing the
political process, to make the Darfur Peace Agreement more inclusive and to
broaden support for the Agreement.
33. The Special Envoys have conducted three joint missions to the Sudan/Darfur,
during which they consulted with high-level Government officials, including
President Al-Bashir, First Vice-President Salva Kiir, Vice-President Ali Osman Taha
and Senior Assistant to the President Minni Minawi, as well as other stakeholders,
representatives of the rebel groups, civil society, opposition political parties, tribal
leaders and internally displaced persons. A preliminary outcome of those initial
consultations was that all the parties consulted, including the Government of the
Sudan, agreed that there could not be a military solution to the crisis in Darfur and
that a political solution was the only way forward to a lasting peace. In this regard,
both the Government of the Sudan and the other parties broadly accepted the fact
that the Darfur Peace Agreement could not be considered a “take it or leave it”
document. At the same time it was also understood that the Agreement would not be
renegotiated in its entirety. All parties therefore welcomed the initiative led by the
African Union and the United Nations to broaden the support base of the Agreement
and to ensure that it is owned by all the people of Darfur. Within that framework,
those consulted agreed to cooperate with the efforts of the Special Envoys. There
are, however, areas of divergence, as some leaders of the non-signatory movements
refuse to accept the Agreement as a basis for renewed negotiations.
34. The Special Envoys have also started consultations with regional actors,
including Eritrea, Chad, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and Egypt, to ensure that the
broader regional dimensions are fully reflected in their efforts and to harmonize the
various peace initiatives currently under way. Meanwhile, AMIS and UNMIS have
established a Joint Mediation Support Team based in Khartoum and El Fasher in
order to assist the two Envoys in their efforts. As agreed during the high-level
meeting convened by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on 28 April 2007 in Tripoli on the
political process in Darfur, the Special Envoys are developing a road map for the
peace process meant to address the outstanding concerns of the people of Darfur.
2.

Establishing a strengthened ceasefire
35. Ceasefire violations continued after the signing of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, and signatories and non-signatories alike have acted with impunity. The
gravity of this situation for the civilian population underscores the urgent need for a
strengthened ceasefire in Darfur. The Addis Ababa conclusions stated that there can
be no effective ceasefire mechanism or peacekeeping operation without peace firmly

8

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

grounded on an all-inclusive political process. Indeed, mainly because the
Agreement was not signed by all parties, its ceasefire mechanisms failed to function
effectively.
36. The Darfur Peace Agreement signatories, particularly the Government of the
Sudan, did not agree to the participation of the non-signatories in the work of the
Joint Commission and the Ceasefire Commission established by the Agreement. The
Government of the Sudan also evoked security reasons for not allowing the
non-signatories to be part of the mechanisms, as it believed they would be collecting
information to be used against Government military positions. The Government also
contends that the N’Djamena Agreement never provided for such representation. For
their part, the non-signatories objected to being part of the mechanisms of an
Agreement they are not party to, insisting that the proceedings of the Ceasefire and
Joint Commissions must be based on the N’Djamena Humanitarian Ceasefire
Agreement in order for them to participate.
37. In the light of these challenges, at its third session, held on 12 November 2006
in Addis Ababa, the Joint Commission approved the establishment of a dualchamber Ceasefire Commission. The first chamber is for the signatories of the
Darfur Peace Agreement and the Declaration of Commitment, and the second
chamber is for the non-signatories. Although the second chamber was established at
the El Fasher level, it failed to function effectively due to procedural issues raised
by the non-signatories, particularly the Justice and Equality Movement, which
continue to insist that proceedings of the chamber be based on the N’Djamena
Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement. They also stated that, unless their
representatives are deployed throughout the sectors and are represented in the Joint
Commission, they will continue to boycott the second chamber. Meanwhile, the
Government of the Sudan continues to oppose the deployment of non-signatory
party representatives to all the sectors, citing security concerns. To date, no
consensus has been reached on this matter. It is likely that the Ceasefire
Commission will continue to be largely ineffective until all the stakeholders,
especially those that are violating the ceasefire in Darfur, agree to sit and work
together in a one-chamber Ceasefire Commission to facilitate credible investigations
and appropriate sanctions against those who are found guilty of violations.
38. Other problems plaguing the effective functioning of Darfur Peace Agreement
ceasefire mechanisms include the increasing fragmentation of the parties and the
high cost of providing a large number of representatives with allowances. The
unpredictable funding of AMIS, which has resulted in backlogs of unpaid mission
subsistence allowance, not only to military observers and the protection force, but
also to the party representatives on the Ceasefire Commission, has further
compounded the problem.
39. At its fifth session, held on 7 February 2007 in El Fasher, the Joint
Commission advised the African Union to take appropriate steps to address these
challenges. The Joint Commission also called on the parties, particularly the
Government of the Sudan, to address their differences and allow the full functioning
of the second chamber. In order to address these problems, AMIS considered a
number of options in consultation with the international partners, including the
United Nations, and decided to reduce the scale of party representation and amount
of mission subsistence allowance paid to party representatives at the Ceasefire
Commission level, and review the status and privileges of party representatives to

07-36968

9

S/2007/307/Rev.1

the Ceasefire Commission. As the present report was being finalized, efforts were
under way in Khartoum, involving the African Union, the United Nations and
representatives of international partners, with the objective of regularizing the
situation in a manner that would be acceptable to the affected parties, the African
Union, the United Nations and the partners.
3.

The way forward for peacekeeping
40. The Addis Ababa conclusions also emphasized the need for an effective
peacekeeping operation, which would contribute to the restoration of security and
protection of civilians in Darfur and also ensure full humanitarian access. This
would contribute to creating the confidence and environment that are required for
the effective conduct of the peace process. The high-level consultation decided that
peacekeeping in Darfur needs to be enhanced and made effective. To achieve this
requirement, a three-phased approach was adopted and agreed upon by the African
Union, the United Nations, and the Government of the Sudan. The approach consists
of a United Nations light support package to AMIS, a United Nations heavy support
package to AMIS and the establishment of a hybrid operation in Darfur. In order to
ensure transparency and facilitate the implementation of these plans, a tripartite
mechanism involving the United Nations, the African Union and the Government of
the Sudan was established in November 2006 in Khartoum and El Fasher.

(a)

Status of the light support package
41. As a first step towards the three-phased approach to peacekeeping in Darfur,
elements of the light support package for AMIS were jointly agreed upon by the two
organizations and subsequently endorsed by the Government of the Sudan through
President Al-Bashir’s letter of 23 December 2006 to the Secretary-General. The
package is designed to assist AMIS in the establishment of an integrated command
and control structure and to increase the effectiveness and coordination of its
operations. The light support package comprises equipment and personnel fully
dedicated to supporting AMIS in the following four areas: logistical and material
support, military staff support, advisory support for civilian police and civilian
support in the areas of mine action, humanitarian liaison, public information,
mission support and support for the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement.
42. In order to ensure accountability for the United Nations equipment and
personnel deployed in support of AMIS, the African Union and the United Nations
signed a memorandum of understanding; as at 8 May 2007, the tripartite mechanism
has facilitated the United Nations deployment of 42 military, 32 police and
25 civilian personnel to support AMIS in the Sudan/Darfur. With the exception of
medical and public-information equipment and 36 armoured personnel carriers,
other logistical and material support contained in the package was handed over on
11 January 2007.
43. The deployment of an additional 36 military, 1 police and 9 civilian personnel
who have been identified and recruited is on hold, pending progress in the
construction of office facilities and living accommodations that are compliant with
United Nations safety and security standards in Darfur. There is also an outstanding
requirement for contributions of 27 staff officers and 36 armoured personnel carriers
from United Nations Member States. The major challenges to the full

10

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

implementation of the light support package, however, remain the lack of security
and inadequate infrastructure in Darfur and AMIS camps.
(b)

Status of the heavy support package
44. The heavy support package, as agreed upon by the African Union and the
United Nations, is composed of military, police and mission support personnel and
equipment, as well as civilian staff to provide support in a range of areas, including
civil affairs, humanitarian liaison, public information, mine action and support for
the Darfur political process. The package includes 2,250 military personnel to be
deployed in the areas of transport, engineering, signals and logistics, surveillance,
aviation and medical services; 301 police personnel and three formed police units;
and 1,136 civilian personnel, including 74 substantive and 78 support staff
dedicated to supporting AMIS, as well as 984 mission support staff to support the
military and police deployment. On 24 April 2007 the United Nations Controller
notified the appropriate body of the General Assembly that $68 million in current
UNMIS resources would be used to meet the immediate requirements for the
implementation of the heavy support package.
45. Details of this package were communicated to the Government of the Sudan by
the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission in
identical letters addressed to President Al-Bashir on 24 January 2007. In his
response, dated 6 March 2007, President Al-Bashir accepted some aspects of the
package and expressed reservations with regard to others, in particular as they relate
to the Darfur Peace Agreement, and proposed that further discussions take place to
address them. As agreed at the summit meeting on Darfur on 28 March 2007 in
Riyadh, a meeting of experts from the African Union, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan took place on 9 April in Addis Ababa to discuss the
Sudan’s reservations about the African Union-United Nations heavy support
package for AMIS. Following those consultations, the Sudanese Government
formally confirmed its agreement with the jointly developed African Union-United
Nations proposal for the heavy support package on 16 April 2007, through a letter
addressed to the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission by the Permanent Representative of the Sudan to the
United Nations.
46. In order to ensure the effective implementation of the heavy support package
and in the light of the envisaged deployment of the hybrid operation, a
reconfiguration of certain substantive capacities of the heavy support package as
presented in the Secretary-General’s report on Darfur of 23 February 2007
(S/2007/104) will be undertaken. The Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council will be kept informed of those actions.
47. The expeditious implementation of the heavy support package, in close
cooperation with the African Union, requires urgent contributions of capable troops
and police by Member States, the agreement of the Government of the Sudan on
land and water drilling in Darfur, the deployment of two additional AMIS battalions
with requisite equipment and the restructuring of AMIS, which now has eight
sectors, into three sectors. It also requires the immediate support of international
partners for the expansion of nine AMIS camps to accommodate the deployment of
the two additional AMIS battalions, the three sector headquarters and, temporarily,
heavy support package engineering elements.

07-36968

11

S/2007/307/Rev.1

(c)

Status of planning for the hybrid operation
48. While the light and heavy support packages are designed to deliver critical
capabilities that will enhance the mobility and effectiveness of AMIS, the issues of
adequate and predictable funding, as well as the long-term logistical sustainability
of the African Union Mission, remain unaddressed. Based in part on these concerns,
the Addis Ababa conclusions recommended that an African Union-United Nations
hybrid operation be deployed in Darfur and that the United Nations provide funding
for it.
49. A number of basic principles regarding the hybrid operation were agreed upon
between the United Nations and the African Union during consultations on the
margins of the African Union summit in January 2007 on the basis of the Addis
Ababa and Abuja agreements of November 2006. The African Union and the United
Nations subsequently agreed upon the terms of reference for the Joint Special
Representative, as well as a framework containing the African Union-United
Nations agreed principles for taking forward the preparations for the hybrid
operation, which were communicated to President Al-Bashir in identical letters sent
by the Secretary-General and Chairperson Konaré on 6 March 2007.
50. At the meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council on
30 November 2006, it was also decided that “the size of the [hybrid] force shall be
determined by the African Union and the United Nations, taking into account all
relevant factors and the situation on the ground, as well as the requirements for it to
effectively discharge its mandate”. Accordingly, the African Union and the United
Nations conducted a joint quick-review mission in Darfur from 8 to 19 February
2007. In view of the emerging security trends described above, the quick-review
mission assessed that the force requirement for the hybrid operation would be
19,000 to 20,000 troops, as well as 3,772 police officers and 19 formed police units.
51. Subsequently, from 19 to 26 March 2007 in Addis Ababa, African Union and
United Nations multidisciplinary teams conducted joint planning for the African
Union-United Nations hybrid operation in Darfur. The teams included experts in the
areas of political affairs, civil affairs, humanitarian affairs, human rights, refugee
returns and reintegration, military and police planning, security, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and mission support. Section VI below reflects the
outcome of that planning exercise.

VI. African Union-United Nations hybrid operation
52. Taking forward the decisions included in the Addis Ababa and Abuja
agreements requires that the hybrid operation implement all aspects of the Darfur
Peace Agreement and all subsequent supplementary agreements that assign tasks to
the African Union and the United Nations.

A.

Mandate
53. The hybrid operation will require a mandate approved by the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations Security Council. As concluded
at the 16 November 2006 high-level consultation in Addis Ababa, and decided by
the Peace and Security Council communiqué of 30 November 2006 and the

12

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

statement by the President of the Security Council of 19 December 2006
(S/PRST/2006/55), the hybrid operation should focus on the protection of civilians,
the facilitation of full humanitarian access and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes. It should also contribute to the restoration of
security in Darfur, inter alia, through the implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement.
54. The African Union-United Nations agreed framework on the hybrid operation
envisaged that elements of its mandate would be drawn from the Darfur Peace
Agreement, the current AMIS mandate, the Secretary-General’s report of 28 July
2006 on Darfur (S/2006/591) and relevant communiqués of the African Union Peace
and Security Council and resolutions of the United Nations Security Council. It will
also be informed by the security situation in Darfur. On the basis of these
considerations, the proposed mandate of the hybrid operation in Darfur should be as
follows:
(a) To contribute to the restoration of necessary security conditions for the
safe provision of humanitarian assistance and to facilitate full humanitarian access
throughout Darfur;
(b) To contribute to the protection of civilian populations under imminent
threat of physical violence and prevent attacks against civilians, within its capability
and areas of deployment, without prejudice to the responsibility of the Government
of the Sudan;
(c) To monitor, observe compliance with and verify the implementation of
various ceasefire agreements signed since 2004, as well as assist with the
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements;
(d) To assist the political process in order to ensure that it is inclusive, and to
support the African Union-United Nations joint mediation in its efforts to broaden
and deepen commitment to the peace process;
(e) To contribute to a secure environment for economic reconstruction and
development, as well as the sustainable return of internally displaced persons and
refugees to their homes;
(f) To contribute to the promotion of respect for and protection of human
rights and fundamental freedoms in Darfur;
(g) To assist in the promotion of the rule of law in Darfur, including through
support for strengthening an independent judiciary and the prison system, and
assistance in the development and consolidation of the legal framework, in
consultation with relevant Sudanese authorities;
(h) To monitor and report on the security situation at the Sudan’s borders
with Chad and the Central African Republic.
55. In order to achieve these broad goals, the operation’s tasks would include the
following:
(a)

Support for the peace process and good offices:

(i) To support the good offices of the African Union-United Nations Joint
Special Representative for Darfur and the mediation efforts of the Special
Envoys of the African Union and the United Nations;

07-36968

13

S/2007/307/Rev.1

(ii) To support and monitor the implementation of the Darfur Peace
Agreement and subsequent agreements;
(iii) To participate in and support the major bodies established by the Darfur
Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements in the implementation of
their mandate, including through the provision of technical assistance and
logistical support to those bodies;
(iv) To facilitate the preparation and conduct of the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue
and Consultation, as stipulated in the Darfur Peace Agreement;
(v) To assist in the preparations for the conduct of the referendums provided
for in the Darfur Peace Agreement;
(vi) To ensure the complementary implementation of all peace agreements in
the Sudan, particularly with regard to the national provisions of those
agreements, and compliance with the Interim National Constitution;
(vii) To liaise with UNMIS, the African Union Liaison Office for the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and other
stakeholders to ensure complementary implementation of the mandates of
UNMIS, the African Union Liaison Office for the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the hybrid operation in Darfur;
(b)

Security:

(i) To promote the re-establishment of confidence, deter violence and assist
in monitoring and verifying the implementation of the redeployment and
disengagement provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement, including by
actively providing security and robust patrolling of redeployment and buffer
zones, by monitoring the withdrawal of long-range weapons, and by deploying
hybrid police, including formed police units, in areas where internally
displaced persons are concentrated, in the demilitarized and buffer zones,
along key routes of migration and in other vital areas, including as provided
for in the Darfur Peace Agreement;
(ii) To monitor, investigate, report and assist the parties in resolving
violations of the Darfur Peace Agreement and subsequent complementary
agreements through the Ceasefire Commission and the Joint Commission;
(iii) To monitor, verify and promote efforts to disarm the Janjaweed and other
militias;
(iv) To coordinate non-combat logistical support for the movements;
(v) To assist in the establishment of the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme called for in the Darfur Peace Agreement;
(vi) To contribute to the creation of the necessary security conditions for the
provision of humanitarian assistance and to facilitate the voluntary and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons to their homes;
(vii) In the areas of deployment of its forces and within its capabilities, to
protect the hybrid operation’s personnel, facilities, installations and equipment,
to ensure the security and freedom of movement of United Nations-African
Union personnel, humanitarian workers and Assessment and Evaluation
Commission personnel, to prevent disruption of the implementation of the

14

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

Darfur Peace Agreement by armed groups and, without prejudice to the
responsibility of the Government of the Sudan, to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence and prevent attacks and threats against
civilians;
(viii) To monitor through proactive patrolling the parties’ policing activities in
camps for internally displaced persons, demilitarized and buffer zones and
areas of control;
(ix) To support, in coordination with the parties, as outlined in the Darfur
Peace Agreement, the establishment and training of community police in
camps for internally displaced persons, to support capacity-building of the
Government of the Sudan police in Darfur, in accordance with international
standards of human rights and accountability, and to support the institutional
development of the police of the movements;
(x) To support the efforts of the Government of the Sudan and of the police
of the movements to maintain public order and build the capacity of Sudanese
law enforcement in this regard through specialized training and joint
operations;
(xi) To provide technical mine-action advice and coordination and demining
capacity to support the Darfur Peace Agreement;
(c)

Rule of law, governance, and human rights:

(i) To assist in the implementation of the provisions of the Darfur Peace
Agreement and any subsequent agreements relating to human rights and the
rule of law and to contribute to the creation of an environment conducive to
respect for human rights and the rule of law, in which all are ensured effective
protection;
(ii) To assist all stakeholders and local government authorities, in particular
in their efforts to transfer resources in an equitable manner from the federal
Government to the Darfur states, and to implement reconstruction plans and
existing and subsequent agreements on land use and compensation issues;
(iii) To support the parties to the Darfur Peace Agreement in restructuring and
building the capacity of the police service in Darfur, including through
monitoring, training, mentoring, co-location and joint patrols;
(iv) To assist in promoting the rule of law, including through institutionbuilding, and strengthening local capacities to combat impunity;
(v) To ensure an adequate human rights and gender presence capacity, and
expertise in Darfur in order to contribute to efforts to protect and promote
human rights in Darfur, with particular attention to vulnerable groups;
(vi) To assist in harnessing the capacity of women to participate in the peace
process, including through political representation, economic empowerment
and protection from gender-based violence;
(vii) To support the implementation of provisions included in the Darfur Peace
Agreement and any subsequent agreements relating to upholding the rights of
children;
(d) Humanitarian assistance: to facilitate the effective provision of
humanitarian assistance and full access to people in need.

07-36968

15

S/2007/307/Rev.1

B.

Structure
56. As stated in the communiqué of the African Union Peace and Security Council
of 30 November, the hybrid operation will be headed by a Joint African UnionUnited Nations Special Representative for Darfur. On 8 May 2007, the SecretaryGeneral and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission jointly appointed
Rodolphe Adada as Joint Special Representative of the African Union and the
United Nations for Darfur. In that capacity, he will have overall authority over the
peacekeeping mission in Darfur, oversee the implementation of its mandate and be
responsible for the mission’s management and functioning. As subsequently agreed
between the African Union and the United Nations, the Deputy Joint Special
Representative will also be appointed by both organizations. Based in El Fasher,
Darfur, they will report to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and
the Secretary-General through the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security and the United Nations Under Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, respectively.
57. The Force Commander, who, in accordance with the Abuja communiqué, will
be African, and the Police Commissioner of the operation will be appointed by the
African Union in consultation with the United Nations, and will both report to the
Joint Special Representative. The Force Commander and Police Commissioner will
be assisted, respectively, by a Deputy Force Commander and a Deputy Police
Commissioner, who will also be jointly appointed. Operational directives will be
implemented through an integrated headquarters structure, including a mission
support division led by a United Nations director of administration, as provided for
in the agreed African Union-United Nations framework document on the hybrid
operation which was communicated to the Government of the Sudan on 6 March
2007. The Force Commander will exercise command and control over air support
assets through the Joint Operations Centre and over mission enablers through the
Joint Logistics Operations Centre and the chief, of integrated support services. The
overall management of the operation will be based on United Nations standards,
principles and established practices.
58. All command and control structures and main offices of the operation will be
located in Darfur. In order to ensure that it operates effectively, a joint support and
coordination mechanism, with dedicated staff capacity, will be established in
Addis Ababa.
59. While the hybrid operation will function separately from UNMIS and the
African Union Liaison Office for the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, there will be a strong liaison component between UNMIS, the African
Union Liaison Office for the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the operation. This will ensure complementarity of efforts between
the African Union and the United Nations with respect to the implementation of the
Darfur Peace Agreement and the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, and will also
facilitate logistical support by the United Nations. UNMIS will continue to be
headed by a Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
60. There will also be liaison arrangements between the operation and the Special
Envoys of the United Nations and the African Union for Darfur. These arrangements
will be based on the Joint Mediation Support Team, which currently provides
substantive and logistical support to the two Envoys.

16

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

61. The ongoing humanitarian operations in Darfur will be distinct from the hybrid
operation and will continue to be coordinated by the UNMIS Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General/Resident Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator, with the support of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, in accordance with recognized humanitarian principles and international
humanitarian and human rights law. When appropriate, subsequent recovery
operations will be coordinated by the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, with the support of the Resident Coordinator’s office. This
arrangement respects the need to maintain a distinction between humanitarian
operations and the political, military and security presence in Darfur.
62. Pending the possible establishment of a United Nations multidimensional
presence in eastern Chad and the north-eastern part of the Central African Republic,
the hybrid operation will establish civilian-military liaison offices in both those
countries for coordination with their authorities in the border region and with United
Nations-African Union offices/agencies located there.
63. In the 16 November 2006 high-level conclusions, it was agreed that
backstopping and command and control structures for the hybrid operation would be
provided by the United Nations. The November 2006 conclusions were
subsequently endorsed by the meeting of the African Union Peace and Security
Council of 30 November 2006 and the statement by the President of the Security
Council of 19 December 2006 (S/PRST/2006/55). Against that background, and
bearing in mind that unity of command and control is a basic principle of
peacekeeping, further clarity and agreement on the United Nations role in command
and control will be required by United Nations troop- and police-contributing
countries in order for them to provide personnel for the hybrid operation. Clarity on
such matters as they relate to financial administration would also be required by
United Nations financial bodies in order to provide funding for the operation. At the
same time, the implementation of all aspects of the operation’s mandate would
require close cooperation with national and local authorities, who bear the primary
responsibility for essential aspects related to the peace process.

C.

Components

1.

Support for the peace process and good offices
64. The political affairs component of the operation will support the mandate of
the Joint Special Representative to assist with the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements and the joint African UnionUnited Nations efforts of the Special Envoys to make the peace inclusive and
broaden the base of the Agreement. In this regard, the political affairs component
will liaise with all stakeholders involved in the Darfur peace process, monitor
relevant developments of the peace process and perform early warning and conflict
analysis functions. It will also prepare reports of the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission to the Security Council and to the
African Union Peace and Security Council.
65. The component will provide political guidance to all other components and
will be responsible for ensuring that reconciliation initiatives are coordinated with
security, recovery and development efforts in Darfur. It will also ensure a
complementary implementation of all peace agreements in the Sudan and will

07-36968

17

S/2007/307/Rev.1

pursue, in particular, an approach consistent with the national provisions of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement.
2.

Civil affairs
66. The civil affairs component will assist in the implementation of the Darfur
Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements through support to reconciliation
processes, including at the grass-roots level, the conduct of the Darfur-Darfur
Dialogue and Consultation and the functioning of the institutions established under
the Darfur Peace Agreement, including the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority,
the Land Commission and the Civil Service Commission. The component will also
assist in the capacity-building of national institutions and civil society organizations
in Darfur.
67. The component’s activities in Darfur will include the holding of workshops on
various governance and peacebuilding aspects, with the aim of promoting a culture
of peace and establishing contacts with key stakeholders to support dialogue and
reconciliation among conflicting parties.
68. Given the complex conflict dynamics and the necessity for grass-roots
engagement in the peace process, civil affairs officers will be deployed throughout
Darfur. To achieve this goal, civil affairs officers currently serving in Darfur under
the UNMIS mandate would be absorbed in the operation along with the civil affairs
staff provided for in the light support package and heavy support package for AMIS.

3.

Security — military
69. The primary purposes of the military component of the operation will be to
assist in establishing a stable and secure environment in Darfur, monitor and verify
ceasefire violations, protect civilians at risk and support the implementation of the
Darfur Peace Agreement and any subsequent complementary agreements. Initially,
the focus of these security operations will be on contributing to the protection of
civilians and the provision of security for vulnerable populations.
70. While protecting civilians, the military component of the operation will also
implement specific security provisions assigned to the African Union and the United
Nations under the Darfur Peace Agreement and subsequent agreements. The
operation will build on the efforts of AMIS to verify and ensure the effective
separation of forces by robust patrolling of redeployment and buffer zones and the
withdrawal of long-range weapons. It will also monitor, investigate, report and
resolve violations of the Darfur Peace Agreement through the Ceasefire Commission
and the Joint Commission; monitor the border between the Sudan, Chad and the
Central African Republic; and support the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process. In the light of the security situation, the scale and complexity
of such tasks will require a force larger than that provided by the current strength of
AMIS, including robust command, control and communications systems. The harsh
terrain and lack of road infrastructure, in particular during the rainy season, will
require a force equipped with high mobility ground vehicles and a strong air
component. As indicated above, this was confirmed by the quick review mission on
19 February 2007.
71. The operation’s military force must be capable and ready to deter violence,
including in a pre-emptive manner. The force would possess surveillance

18

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

capabilities, an assessment capability to steer operations and the air and response
forces necessary to address threats to security. Reserves will also be needed to deal
with any sudden deterioration in the security situation. In addition to infantry
battalions, a force reserve company and one infantry company per sector as sector
reserve will provide the Force Commander and sector commanders with adequate
capabilities to respond to threats or security incidents.
72. The operation will also face unprecedented logistical challenges in deploying
and supporting a large force and in mitigating its environmental impact. Under the
Darfur Peace Agreement, the operation will also be required to coordinate
non-combat logistics support to the movements. A significant number of enablers
would therefore be required, in addition to those provided in the heavy support
package, to facilitate early deployment. Additional military logistics elements will
enhance support in the early stages, provided that Member States are prepared to
assist with various capacities, such as strategic lift capacity, in addition to what is
provided for in the heavy support package.
73. Based on these requirements, a joint military concept of operations is being
finalized by the African Union and the United Nations, designed to perform three
core complementary functions: protection, liaison, and monitoring and verification.
The military component of the operation will be deployed throughout Darfur and
organized into three sectors: North, South and West.
74. While all force elements have a role to play in protection, the core of the
protection element will be a framework of mobile infantry battalions. Priorities will
be to provide security to internally displaced persons camps, area and route security,
demilitarization and patrolling of humanitarian supply routes and nomadic migration
routes and, where necessary, escort for humanitarian convoys, as per established
guidelines. The force will also need to protect United Nations and African Union
personnel, installations and property, including logistics locations and supplies in
transit. Another priority is to gradually extend wider area security to create
conditions conducive to a return to normal community life.
75. Company-level operations on the ground will be fundamental to the
achievement of early stabilization. Infantry companies will conduct proactive patrol
programmes, using both high mobility vehicle patrols for greater area coverage and
foot patrols around towns and villages to reassure the local population. Armoured
personnel carriers will be required to protect troops in high-threat areas. Elsewhere,
robust patrolling techniques without armour will be used to restore confidence. As
confirmed by the quick review mission, patrolling at night will be especially
important, using basic night patrolling skills, and using specialized night
observation equipment. Given the vast size of Darfur, even a large force could not
have a presence in all parts of the territory. However, airmobile patrols by military
aviation could deliver infantry quickly to more remote areas in order to improve
security.
76. The military liaison capability of the military component of the operation will
consist of dedicated liaison officers who will maintain close liaison with the
national and local authorities, other parties, tribal leaders and local communities. A
strong liaison capability will be required for close working relations with the police
and other components of the operation. Liaison with the humanitarian assistance
community will also be important in order to ensure synergy.

07-36968

19

S/2007/307/Rev.1

77. In addition to protection and liaison, the military component will continue the
efforts of AMIS in monitoring and verifying the implementation of the security
provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements. All force
elements will have a role to play in this regard, but the core of this capability will be
provided by military observers, ground surveillance companies in each sector and
air surveillance. These elements will monitor and verify compliance with the Darfur
Peace Agreement and track the activities of armed militias and other armed groups.
Surveillance companies and military observers will monitor and submit reports on
the dynamic security situation in order to, inter alia, alert commanders to potential
threats, thereby directing the patrolling activities of infantry battalions.
78. As indicated above, the African Union-United Nations quick review mission
confirmed that the magnitude of the protection task and the need to ensure
compliance with the Darfur Peace Agreement will require a large, mobile and robust
military force. The key operational requirements have been defined as high troop
density to provide wide area coverage; high mobility to move forces rapidly in
response to developing crises; and robust military capability to deter violence,
including in a pre-emptive manner. Based on the assessment of the quick review
mission, two options for the size and composition of the military component were
developed, as described in paragraphs 79 and 80 below. These capabilities will be in
addition to the units provided in the heavy support package. Both options depend on
the successful implementation of the light support package and the heavy support
package as well as the early and effective restructuring of AMIS into three sectors.
These options differ in the level of mobility and troop density of the force.
79. The first option, based on the 19 February 2007 African Union-United Nations
review of the June 2006 technical assessment mission’s “troops-to-task” assessment,
calls for 19,555 troops, consisting of: 18 infantry battalions; three infantry reserve
companies; three surveillance companies and a force reserve company; three fixedwing operational surveillance aircraft; six to eight helicopters for tactical use;
18 military utility helicopters; up to 120 liaison officers; and 240 military observers.
Each of the three sectors will comprise five to seven infantry battalions, one
surveillance company and one reserve infantry company. This force represents an
optimal balance of key operational capabilities that would credibly contribute to a
secure environment.
80. The second option will consist of 17,605 troops, that is, 15 infantry battalions.
This option would have one infantry battalion less per sector, but an additional rapid
reaction company per sector in order to compensate for the reduction in the infantry
level through rapid response by air. This second force configuration option,
however, would not envisage the deployment of 12 companies to the 12 locations
that were identified by the quick review mission as requiring a continuous troop
presence. The absence of these 12 companies would reduce the capacity to provide a
secure environment in these locations and therefore carries a higher risk with regard
to the protection of civilians and African Union/United Nations personnel operating
in areas with lower or no troop presence. This option, therefore, critically depends
on the day/night rapid reaction capabilities and the early full deployment of all air
assets. It also renders the force more vulnerable to the constraints of weather on
operations. Additional infantry battalions are inevitably required if rapid reaction
and air assets cannot be generated.

20

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

4.

Security — police
81. The implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement and any subsequent
agreements will require the police component to engage the national and local
authorities and carry out, inter alia, the following core functions: establish and train
community police in internally displaced persons’ camps; capacity-building of the
Government of the Sudan police in Darfur in accordance with international
standards of human rights and accountability; institutional development of the
police of the movements; conduct proactive patrols to monitor the policing activities
of the parties in internally displaced persons’ camps, demilitarized and buffer zones
and areas of control; address issues relating to gender-based violence and abuse of
children; report on the welfare of detained persons; monitor and verify security in
internally displaced persons’ camps and for investigations conducted by the
Government police; and advise on the development of policing plans and monitor
their implementation. The representation of the operation’s police on the Darfur
Security Arrangements Implementation Commission and subsidiary bodies is
essential to carrying out these tasks. Police involvement would contribute to the
effectiveness of the Commission and support the long-term integration of former
combatants.
82. Taking into consideration the provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement and
bearing in mind the responsibilities of the Government of the Sudan in the area of
policing, the police component of the operation would expand upon the primarily
advisory/observer posture of the AMIS civilian police towards active support for the
efforts of local and national authorities to establish long-term rule of law through
mentoring, advising, training, and reform and institutional development of the
Sudanese law enforcement agencies. The reform of law enforcement agencies would
go a long way in facilitating the building of trust and confidence in police
institutions throughout Darfur, particularly in areas controlled by the movements.
The operation would be more effective in supporting the reform of Sudanese police
services in Darfur if it were provided with specific authorization in this regard
through its mandate. Developing the capacity and capability of law enforcement
authorities is also resource-intensive and the financial requirements relating to
police activities will need to be included in the budget of the planned operation.
83. Formed police units will be an integral element of the police component. They
will assist in providing protection for civilians and personnel and property of the
operation, in collaboration with the military component of the operation. Moreover,
they will be required to conduct independent and joint patrols with the police and
military of the operation, the Government of the Sudan police, the police liaison
officers of the movements and the community police within and in the immediate
vicinity of the internally displaced persons’ camps in the demilitarized and buffer
zones. Formed police units will be available to support the Government of the
Sudan police and police of the movements in responding to public order situations
that may arise and to build the capacity of the Sudanese law enforcement agencies
through specialized training and joint operations.
84. According to the quick review mission, in order to perform the above tasks
and contribute to the restoration of security and protection of civilians in Darfur, the
police component of the operation will require 3,772 police officers and 19 formed
police units. The AMIS civilian police and United Nations police provided for in the
light and heavy support packages for AMIS will form the core of this component.

07-36968

21

S/2007/307/Rev.1

5.

Security — disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
85. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration component of the
operation will support national and local institutions in implementing the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme called for in the Darfur
Peace Agreement. To that end, the component will provide: technical assistance for
operational planning and implementation of the disarmament and demobilization
processes; field assessments and surveys to profile the forces; supporting
information and sensitization strategies for all stakeholders; and capacity-building.
86. Pursuant to the Darfur Peace Agreement, support to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process in Darfur will include monitoring the
assembly of combatants, securing disarmament and demobilization sites,
undertaking the disarmament of the movements, weapons storage and weapon and
ammunition destruction, assisting in the registration of the disarmed combatants,
assisting with the demobilization activities, provisioning and distributing reinsertion
packages and supporting the sustainable reintegration of the former combatants into
civilian life. The removal of children associated with the armed forces or groups and
militia will be given priority and will not await a formal disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process for adult combatants.
87. It is the responsibility of the Government to provide adequate funding and
non-military logistics to support the assembly of former combatants. At the request
of the Joint Commission, the African Union will solicit support from international
donors and organizations for non-military logistical supplies, communication
equipment and funding for such supplies for the forces of the movements. Member
States are urged to support all efforts in this important endeavour. In addition to the
disarmament programme conducted under the framework of the Darfur Peace
Agreement, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration component will
support the development and implementation of a civilian disarmament programme
to counter the proliferation of weapons in the region.

6.

Protection and promotion of human rights
88. The human rights component of the operation will assist the parties in the
implementation of relevant provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement and any
subsequent agreements. This will involve a wide range of protection and promotion
activities, which will be carried out in keeping with international human rights law
and other relevant international standards and in close cooperation and coordination
with the parties, while complementing and building on the work carried out by the
United Nations country team.
89. In addition to the mainstreaming of human rights within the operation, the
human rights component will carry out a wide range of monitoring, investigation,
reporting, advocacy, protection, advisory and capacity- and institution-building
activities, including support for the establishment of a national human rights
commission, in keeping with the Paris Principles and as noted in the Darfur Peace
Agreement. The component will also engage with the authorities, other parties to the
Agreement and relevant United Nations and non-governmental organizations, with a
view to identifying options for appropriate actions to stop, prevent and/or pre-empt
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms.

22

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

90. The monitoring of the human rights situation in the demilitarized zones, areas
of displacement and return, including during the process of return, focusing
particularly on vulnerable groups, will be a core activity of the human rights
component. In addition, the human rights component will monitor the work of law
and order institutions and traditional dispute settlement mechanisms, for which full
and unhindered access will be essential. In conjunction with other components, the
human rights component will also assist national stakeholders in the capacitybuilding and development of a transitional justice strategy.
7.

Rule of law
91. AMIS does not have a rule of law, judicial systems and prisons advisory
component. This activity is essential to the multidimensional peacekeeping strategy
envisaged for the operation. The rule of law, judicial and prisons advisory
component of the operation will assist all stakeholders in promoting the rule of law,
including through support to the strengthening of an independent judiciary and
professional corrections system and combating impunity, working in close
cooperation with the United Nations country team, the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
non-governmental organizations. The rule of law component will also assist in
addressing property and land disputes and compensation related to the Darfur Peace
Agreement and any subsequent agreements.
92. Based on a complementary approach, rule of law activities will focus on
engaging the national authorities and supporting efforts to reform the judicial
system through appropriate vetting measures, juvenile and gender justice and
overall legal reform, including strengthening customary law to ensure compliance
with international standards. Ongoing programmes and comparative advantages of
other United Nations actors will be fully acknowledged in all efforts to ensure the
effective and efficient functioning of the courts, the police and the prosecutorial
authorities, with a view to ending the climate of impunity. This will also involve
assistance to local and national authorities in the establishment of mobile courts, the
expansion of access to justice and legal aid and the strengthening of traditional
forms of justice, in keeping with national laws and international human rights
standards, and should include the empowerment of the legal profession and civil
society. A particular focus on efforts to effectively address property and land
disputes and compensation issues related to the Darfur Peace Agreement will be
essential and, in the longer-term, may include law reform in those areas.
93. Efforts will be made, in consultation with the Government of the Sudan, to
provide additional capacity, strengthen, restructure and reform, as necessary, the
prison system in Darfur, in accordance with international standards. This will
require that corrections officers be seconded from Member States under the same
conditions as seconded United Nations police staff. As appropriate, efforts will be
made to provide advisory services for strengthening the prison system and
addressing prison reform issues in Darfur, including training prison staff,
monitoring their performance in promoting a human rights approach to prison
management, and mentoring senior and middle-level prison management.

07-36968

23

S/2007/307/Rev.1

8.

Humanitarian liaison
94. The humanitarian liaison component will maintain liaison between the
operation and the humanitarian community on all relevant issues, including, but not
limited to, the provision of humanitarian assistance, the protection of civilians and
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons. In addition, the component
will support the work of the Joint Humanitarian Facilitation and Monitoring Unit.
As a liaison component, it will establish and maintain dialogue and coordination
between the military and police components and the humanitarian community,
ensuring the mutual exchange of information about ongoing humanitarian and
military activities and issues and respective mandates, deployments and operations,
and will advocate for humanitarian issues with the other components of the
operation.

9.

Child protection
95. The child protection component will assist in the implementation of the
provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements related to
monitoring the recruitment and use of children by armed forces and investigating
other crimes against children, including abduction and sexual violence. In
cooperation with other actors, the component will provide capacity-building to
military observers and national monitors to carry out investigations of ceasefire
violations related to children in armed conflict and ensure that ceasefire institutions
can effectively address such violations. The child protection component will also be
able to participate in those investigations and will support, in cooperation with other
actors, the police component of the operation with the resources and capacity
needed to monitor violations of the rights of children in cooperation with other
actors.

10.

Gender
96. The gender component will develop and implement plans to guide the process
of gender mainstreaming in all aspects of the work of the operation. The Component
will provide leadership and guidance on gender mainstreaming, provide training on
gender issues and facilitate the organization of meetings, workshops and seminars
aimed at raising awareness and understanding of gender issues within the operation.
97. The component will also develop a gender action plan, in collaboration with
existing mechanisms, which will focus on prevention of and response measures to
any involvement of personnel of the operation in sexual or gender-based violence.
The component will also work in cooperation with other actors to ensure the
participation of women in all decision-making structures established by the Darfur
Peace Agreement, including the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority, the Land
Commission, the Rehabilitation and Resettlement Commission and the DarfurDarfur Dialogue and Consultation.

11.

HIV/AIDS support
98. While cooperating and coordinating closely with other specialized units of the
United Nations country team, including the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the World
Health Organization (WHO), the HIV/AIDS component will focus on the
development of HIV/AIDS sensitization and awareness programmes and a

24

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

comprehensive HIV/AIDS prevention programme for operation personnel.
Programmatic HIV activities will continue to be the responsibility of the United
Nations country team.
99. In collaboration with the wider United Nations system and relevant local
authorities, the HIV/AIDS component will provide technical support, within the
limits of its capacity, to the Transitional Darfur Regional Authority in order to
ensure that HIV/AIDS prevention is addressed. Technical assistance will also be
provided to integrate HIV/AIDS considerations in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration activities and to support HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention
strategies in the training and capacity-building programmes of community police in
internally displaced persons’ camps.
12.

Mine action
100. The current landmine threat in Darfur is estimated to be low. However,
explosive remnants of war are prevalent and the potential for targeted new mine use
exists. The presence of landmines and explosive remnants of war on routes will
affect the mobility of the operation’s personnel and the provision of humanitarian
assistance. The presence and the possible new use of such devices will not only
affect the implementation of peacekeeping operations, but also the local population
and returnees, jeopardizing the overall peace process. Addressing this problem will
require specialized risk education, in consultation with the Government of the Sudan
and the other parties, in addition to area and route survey and clearance capacity.

13.

Public information
101. The public information component of the operation will implement a
proactive, comprehensive public information strategy designed to explain and
promote its mandate and activities to all stakeholders. This will include specific
information campaigns on different aspects of the operation’s work, aimed at
audiences across the operational area, aiming to promote the objective
understanding of the Darfur Peace Agreement and other peace initiatives in Darfur.
The public information component of the operation will have its headquarters in
El Fasher, with information officers and resources deployed throughout the three
Darfur states. It will comprise the following main components: a spokesperson’s
office and media relations component; an extensive outreach and advocacy
programme; a radio production and broadcasting operation designed to provide
coverage throughout the entire area of Darfur; a print and production component; a
website for the hybrid operation; a television/video operation; and a photographic
operation. The public information component will include military and police public
information officers. It will work closely in the development and implementation of
information campaigns with the civil affairs component of the operation, the United
Nations country team and other agencies, funds and programmes. The Government
of the Sudan will be expected to provide all necessary access to this important
component, including access to airwaves.

14.

Safety and security
102. Given the unstable security environment in the Darfur states, a Darfur staff
security cooperation mechanism will be established to ensure cooperation among
organizations with security capacities in order to promote a safe and secure

07-36968

25

S/2007/307/Rev.1

environment for mandate implementation and programme delivery activities. The
mechanism will also assist with the application of the modalities of the United
Nations security management system within the operation, as well as other United
Nations organizations present in Darfur.
15.

Conduct
103. The Personnel Conduct component of the operation will assist the Joint
Special Representative in developing and implementing strategies and mechanisms
to identify, prevent, investigate and respond to all forms of misconduct, including
sexual abuse and exploitation. The component will increase awareness of operation
personnel of acceptable standards of conduct through various campaigns and
training programmes and will increase their general awareness of the importance of
preventing abuses and ensuring adherence to the code of conduct by all United
Nations staff. The component will prepare databases of complaints, establish
mechanisms to register complaints of such abuses and, if necessary, investigate such
incidents.

16.

Mission support
104. The establishment of a multidimensional operation in the Darfur region of the
Sudan will face formidable logistical challenges. Darfur is a remote and arid region,
with harsh environmental conditions, poor communications, underdeveloped, poor
infrastructure and extremely long land transport and supply lines from Port Sudan.
The scarcity of water presents a particularly difficult challenge, which must be
addressed at both the political and logistics level, between all parties.
105. Successful operations will require significant efforts to upgrade and develop
the infrastructure of the region in the predeployment phase of the operation. The
efficient clearance of assets by customs is also critical to the operation, ensuring that
essential items can be deployed and positioned in a staged manner. Existing runways
will be expanded and improved in order to handle larger cargo aircraft.
Simultaneously, housing, equipment and facilities for personnel sent in advance of
the operation will need to be constructed and upgraded to meet United Nations
standards.
106. In its start-up phase, the operation will rely heavily on military enabling units,
including heavy transport lift units, engineering units and aviation units. Troops and
formed police units must be self-sustaining upon deployment, with the exception of
field defence stores, which will be supplied by the United Nations. The force
structure will incorporate the second-line logistics capabilities required to support it
after deployment. Troop-contributing countries and police-contributing countries
should ensure that their equipment can operate under the local conditions, taking
into account the high temperatures and the ubiquitous heavy dust and sand.
107. An integrated operation headquarters will be established in El Fasher, with
three joint sector headquarters in El Fasher, Nyala and El Geneina. The deployment
of personnel will take into account environmental constraints, including the
availability of water. The main logistics base will be established in Nyala. It is
envisaged that the majority of the operation’s staff will be accommodated in camps
developed on greenfield sites in accordance with United Nations safety and security
standards.

26

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

108. The United Nations will begin pre-positioning strategic deployment stocks
immediately following the authorization of the operation in the Security Council.
Following the usual priority for deployment, the positioning of strategic deployment
stocks is followed by the emplacement of crucial engineering equipment so that the
construction of new camps and the expansion of existing campsites can commence.
Construction priority will be given to the headquarters and logistics base locations.
109. Strategic sea and airlift will be required for the deployment of such equipment
into the Sudan, supported, as necessary, by short-term contracts for deployment
inside the country. Where practicable, UNMIS air assets will also be used to assist
in the deployment of the operation.
110. Successful logistics support of the operation will require substantial financial
investment in human and material resources to establish necessary facilities and
services. In addition, the Darfur Peace Agreement calls for both community police
centres/police posts and logistics support for the establishment of assembly sites for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme, in consultation with
the parties. The extent of logistical support by the operation at the assembly areas
remains to be defined and will have corresponding financial and logistics
implications.
111. A joint African Union-United Nations operations and logistics task force will
be established early in the predeployment phase of the operation to determine the
details of joint operations and logistics work, with particular reference to the
possibility of obtaining economies of scale with existing UNMIS and AMIS
facilities and arrangements.
112. Most importantly, the full cooperation of Government authorities will be
required in areas such as timely access to land and water, the provision of suitable
premises and the timely clearance of goods from customs. In addition, full support
will be needed to overcome any administrative constraints and facilitate operations,
including full freedom of movement and access. The UNMIS/AMIS experience has
shown, on repeated occasions, that inordinate delays in the clearance of goods and
related administrative processes through the respective Government ministries can
have a crippling effect on operations.

D.

Force and personnel generation
113. Consistent with the Addis Ababa conclusions and the communiqué of the
African Union Peace and Security Council of 30 November 2006, all efforts will be
made to ensure that the peacekeeping force will have a predominantly African
character. To that end, suitable offers from African troop- and police-contributing
countries will be considered first. However, at the extent that African troop- and
police-contributing countries are unable to meet the force requirements, offers from
other contributing countries will be considered. The final choice of troop- and
police-contributing countries will be jointly agreed upon by the African Union and
the United Nations after due consultation with the Government of the Sudan. The
police and force generation process will follow General Assembly rules and
regulations.
114. Civilian personnel for the operation will be hired, after appropriate
consultations between the African Union and the United Nations, under United

07-36968

27

S/2007/307/Rev.1

Nations contracts in accordance with established United Nations selection and
recruitment guidelines, standards and procedures. For unity of effort and efficiency,
all United Nations and African Union personnel deployed to the operation will be
administered in accordance with United Nations rules, regulations, policies,
directives and administrative instructions, as well as standard operating procedures,
including, but not limited to, those relating to performance, conduct and discipline.

E.

Resource requirements and funding sources
115. Based on the Addis Ababa conclusions, as endorsed by the African Union
Peace and Security Council at its 66th meeting in Abuja in November 2006, it is
assumed that States Members of the United Nations will be prepared to consider a
recommendation from the Secretary-General to provide funding for the operation in
Darfur through the United Nations assessed budget governed by the United Nations
Financial Rules and Regulations. To that end, effective financial management and
oversight mechanisms will be put in place. Should the Security Council decide to
establish the operation as envisaged in the present report and as requested by the
African Union, the Secretary-General will submit to the General Assembly the
necessary recommendations in this regard without delay.
116. For the start-up of the operation to be managed successfully, the African Union
would need to resolve the issue of the ownership of the equipment donated by the
partners for use in Darfur; the United Nations will provide technical and
professional assistance in support of these efforts where required. The African
Union will have to ensure that mechanisms remain in place to deal with all
liabilities incurred prior to the start-up date of the operation. In addition, both the
United Nations and the African Union will ensure that political and legal safeguards
are firmly in place for the handover of land titles and rights of use for the operation.

VII. Risks and challenges, including regional considerations
117. The continuation and sustainability of AMIS operations is critical for the
implementation of the three-phased peacekeeping plan agreed by the African Union
and the United Nations. The unpredictable nature of AMIS funding is therefore a
great risk as it could jeopardize the continuation of AMIS operations. It could also
lead to gaps and delays in the implementation between the different phases of the
plan and could undermine the effectiveness of United Nations support to AMIS. The
plan for deploying the African Union-United Nations hybrid operation is based on
the assumption that the light and heavy packages of United Nations support to
AMIS, as defined by both organizations, are implemented successfully and the
capacity of AMIS is significantly strengthened.
118. Progress on the peacekeeping front requires the firm commitment of all
parties, including the Government of the Sudan, to the Addis Ababa framework,
which recognizes effective peacekeeping as an integral part of the solution to the
conflict in Darfur. Without effective peacekeeping, the humanitarian and security
situation will continue to deteriorate and instability in Darfur could spread to the
entire region.

28

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

119. Since the peace process still faces many challenges, the deployment of the
operation in the absence of an all-inclusive political agreement on a broadened
Darfur Peace Agreement is a significant risk. Despite the public commitment of the
Government of the Sudan and most non-signatory groups to negotiate amendments
to the Agreement, some non-signatory groups are still posing preconditions to their
participation in the political process and questioning the acceptability of the African
Union mediation team. Furthermore, the Justice and Equality Movement and the
National Redemption Front reject the Agreement as a basis for negotiations.
120. Another key challenge remains the fragmentation of the non-signatory groups.
The reunification of their leadership or, at the very least, the harmonization of their
positions in anticipation of the political talks on the Darfur Peace Agreement is
necessary not only for the successful outcome of the efforts of the African UnionUnited Nations joint mediation, but also for the attainment of a sustainable and
self-enforced ceasefire. Efforts currently being made by AMIS leadership to
strengthen the ceasefire mechanisms are conditioned on the meaningful and
constructive participation of all parties.
121. In addition to the fragmentation of the non-signatory groups, new fault lines
have emerged in the conflict, making it more complex. The scale of recent inter- and
intra-tribal fighting reinforce the need for an all inclusive and comprehensive
process.
122. The regional dimension of the conflict in Darfur, in particular as it relates to
the border crisis between the Sudan and Chad, is such that Darfur cannot be treated
in isolation from Chad. Normalization of the bilateral relationship between Chad
and the Sudan is not only essential to the success of the peace process in Darfur, but
also for the internal stability of Chad. Both countries should be strongly encouraged
to respect each other’s territorial sovereignty and to implement existing agreements
of non-aggression. Key regional actors should be encouraged to use their influence
over some rebel groups to support a peaceful resolution of the conflict.
123. Progress on the peacekeeping front also faces serious operational challenges.
The vastness of Darfur is such that even a large force will not be in a position to
have an effective presence everywhere. The ongoing fighting and fragmentation of
territorial control restrict freedom of movement in Darfur. Moreover, Darfur is an
arid, landlocked region, over 1,000 miles away from any body of water. These
geographical conditions, combined with the lack of infrastructure, pose tremendous
logistical challenges to the timely deployment of a significant peacekeeping
presence in Darfur.

VIII. Observations and recommendations
124. The present report is the outcome of joint consultations conducted in Addis
Ababa in March 2007 by African Union-United Nations multidisciplinary teams and
the high-level consultations between the two organizations led by myself and the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission on 16 and 17 April 2007 in
New York. It represents the determination of the United Nations and the African
Union to carry through on the Addis Ababa conclusions and subsequent decisions,
which are based on the assumptions that the prospect of an effective peacekeeping
operation will contribute to the creation of confidence among the parties and
guarantee a safe environment for a meaningful political process. The Addis Ababa

07-36968

29

S/2007/307/Rev.1

conclusions define a comprehensive approach to peace in Darfur, based on the
interdependence of the three tracks, namely, the political process, the ceasefire and
the peacekeeping plan. Alleviating the ongoing humanitarian suffering in Darfur
requires progress on these three fronts in the context of a comprehensive
international strategy, which would also address rehabilitation and economic
development.
125. A peacekeeping operation cannot assist in restoring security in Darfur in the
absence of an inclusive political process. At the same time, a political solution will
be unsustainable if the parties do not have confidence that a strong, impartial,
proactive peacekeeping force is being deployed to support and monitor its
implementation. While the conflict in Darfur has devastating security implications
and humanitarian consequences, it is essentially a political problem, which can only
be resolved through a political solution. The United Nations and the African Union
therefore appeal to the parties to immediately cease the pursuit of a military solution
and commit to honouring their ceasefire commitments, as agreed to in N’Djamena
Humanitarian Ceasefire Agreement, the protocols signed in Abuja and relevant
provisions of the Darfur Peace Agreement. As international efforts are mobilizing in
support of a political solution, the Government of the Sudan continues to bear the
responsibility to protect the population and give all citizens a share in the future of
the country.
126. The United Nations and the African Union also urge members of the Security
Council and regional stakeholders to lend their strong support to the joint mediation
efforts of Salim Ahmed Salim and Jan Eliasson, which aim to advance an inclusive
political process and help address the grievances which remained outstanding when
the Darfur Peace Agreement was signed, including an effective end to the political
and economic marginalization of Darfur. A sustained political process supported by
a strong peacekeeping operation in Darfur would assist with the region’s integration
in the Sudan by supporting reconciliation, political representation, participation in
public administration and increased economic opportunity for the people of Darfur.
The United Nations and the African Union are confident that a political process
pursued in earnest would also help the Government of the Sudan build trust with the
international community. As agreed upon during the high-level meeting in Tripoli on
28 April 2007, the United Nations and the African Union Special Envoys for Darfur
are developing a detailed road map, including the status of implementation of the
Darfur Peace Agreement, possible issues for negotiations and an architecture for
mediation.
127. The operation will be an unprecedented undertaking, which will pose
significant challenges for both organizations, including the issue of unity and
coherence of command. It also requires the consent and full cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan and all parties. The operation’s success depends critically
on whether the Government of the Sudan will come to see the hybrid operation,
including the United Nations role, as part of the long-term solution to the conflict in
Darfur. It would be essential, therefore, for the mandate of the operation to reflect
the agreement of the parties on its role in monitoring and supporting the
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement and any subsequent agreements.
128. The implementation of the operation also requires, as an immediate priority,
the reinforcement of AMIS through the generation and deployment of the heavy
support package. The United Nations and the African Union pay tribute to AMIS

30

07-36968

S/2007/307/Rev.1

and its staff on the ground for their courageous service in carrying out the Mission’s
critical mandate under difficult circumstances. They also urge Member States to
make urgent contributions to United Nations support for an enlarged and
strengthened AMIS and to assist in finding a viable and sustained solution to the
financial crisis of the Mission in the context of the expected deployment of the
hybrid operation.
129. As we proceed with these plans, no effort should be spared to urgently
improve the humanitarian situation in Darfur. The United Nations and the African
Union acknowledge the signing by the Government of the Sudan of the joint
communiqué with the United Nations of 28 March 2007. Its immediate
implementation will ease the administrative burden on humanitarian operations and
facilitate their work to alleviate the plight of the people in Darfur.

07-36968

31
