United Nations

S/PV.6240

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6240th meeting
Tuesday, 15 December 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kafando . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Burkina Faso)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Vilović
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African
Republic and on the activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
Office in that country (S/2009/627)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-64893 (E)

*0964893*

S/PV.6240

I invite Mr. Grauls to take a seat at the Council

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
table.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic and
on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country
(S/2009/627)

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2009/627, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic and on the activities of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Central African Republic, in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde and Ambassador
Jan Grauls. I now give the floor to Ms. Zewde.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. PoukréKono (Central African Republic) took a seat at
the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Sahle-Work
Zewde, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic.
It is so decided.
I invite Ms. Zewde to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission and Permanent Representative of
Belgium.
It is so decided.

2

Ms. Zewde: I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December. Since this is also
your country’s last month as an elected member of this
Council, along with Libya, Viet Nam, Croatia and
Costa Rica, I would like to pay tribute to the
outstanding work you have done for the African
continent and, indeed, for international peace and
security. May I take this opportunity to also
congratulate incoming members Nigeria, Gabon,
Bosnia, Brazil and Lebanon on their recent election. I
hope we can count on their support during their tenure
in the Council.
This is my first briefing before the Security
Council following my appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Central
African Republic. It coincides with the presentation of
the last report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2009/627) before
the transformation of the United Nations PeaceBuilding Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA) into the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African
Republic (BINUCA).
For the past six months, I have held consultations
with the stakeholders in the peace process. These
include the political parties, the armed groups, civil
society, development partners, regional organizations
and neighbouring countries. I would therefore would
like to share my observations and initial thinking on
how we could address the present situation in the
country.
The Central African Republic has experienced
violence and confrontations between the Government
and the rebel groups since 1999. The signing of the

09-64893

S/PV.6240

various
peace
agreements,
the
Libreville
Comprehensive Peace Agreement of 21 June 2008 and
the holding of the inclusive political dialogue in
December 2008 gave hope for a return to normalcy in
the country. The process has now reached a critical
stage where the successful holding of elections before
the end of April 2010, and the completion of the
disarmament and demobilization part of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) operations
before elections will determine the fate of the political
process. These two major events are among the key
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
and are critical to the lasting stabilization of the
Central African Republic.
An Independent Electoral Commission was
established on 8 October and the United Nations has
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
Government of the Central African Republic on
electoral assistance, while such partners as the
European Union, the International Organization of la
Francophonie, the United States Agency for
International Development and the African Union are
involved in the coordination of assistance to the
Central African Republic for the conduct of the polls.
In the meantime, a number of factors could derail
the electoral calendar. These include attempts by some
political actors to create a constitutional vacuum and
request an extension of the mandate of the current
Administration beyond April 2010, restrictions on the
ability of political leaders to carry out normal political
activities, and the possibility that political leaders may
incite hatred or divisions. In addition, the current level
of insecurity generated by the activities of those armed
groups that have not yet joined the peace process, the
movements of the Lord’s Resistance Army in some
parts of the country, and the delay in the
implementation of the disarmament and demobilization
programme pose a serious threat to the entire peace
process.
The economic progress accomplished so far
resulted in the attainment of the completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt
Initiative earlier this year. However, much more
remains to be done to fight poverty. The Government’s
programme of civil service reform and its fight against
corruption, as well as the introduction of a statutory
declaration of assets by senior civil servants and heads
of public companies, are encouraging. The audit of
such key economic sectors as forestry, mining and
telecommunications recommended by last year’s
inclusive political dialogue should be carried out.

09-64893

The United Nations has continued to work
closely with the Government of the Central African
Republic authorities to pursue the implementation of
12 priority projects to the tune of $10 million by the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) to address the immediate
needs of the country in priority peacebuilding areas.
The level of implementation of most of these projects
should be increased and the PBF Steering Committee,
which I co-chair with the Central African Republic’s
Minister of Planning, Economic Affairs and
International Cooperation, has been discussing
strategies to accelerate the process of implementing
these key projects. Discussions have already started on
the release of a second allocation with the convening of
a national consultation on 25 September to revise the
national PBF priority plan of June 2008 to align it with
the main pillars of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic.
The implementation of the strategic framework
remains the most viable way for dealing with the
challenges facing the Central African Republic in the
three key peacebuilding areas of security sector reform
and DDR, good governance and the rule of law, and
socio-economic development. In that regard, I wish to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to
members of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
especially its country-specific configuration for the
Central African Republic chaired by Ambassador Jan
Grauls of Belgium, for their commitment to the
sustainable stabilization of the Central African
Republic. The PBC delegation’s recent visit to the
Central African Republic indicated the readiness of the
Commission to support the efforts of local authorities.
To achieve peace and stability in the Central
African Republic, the Government, national political
actors and other stakeholders should show commitment
and political will to confront the multiple challenges
facing the county. Similarly, concerted regional and
international support and assistance are required at this
very critical point to support the peace process. In this
connection, political discussions and good offices with
all the parties and actors in the peace process should be
intensified in order to obtain the full implementation of
the outcome of the Libreville Comprehensive Peace
Agreement and the inclusive political dialogue.
The capacity of the Dialogue Follow-up
Committee set up on 29 January should be reinforced
to speed up the decision-making process and ensure the
implementation of the decisions. Mediation efforts and
local peace initiatives should continue to ensure that
the forthcoming polls do not ignite a political crisis.

3

S/PV.6240

Meanwhile, the permanent consultation framework
recommended by the inclusive political dialogue
should be established. As recommended by the recently
deployed United Nations electoral needs assessment
mission to the Central African Republic, the capacity
of the United Nations to provide political guidance
during the electoral and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) processes should be
strengthened. Likewise, there should be an increase of
the regional and international support to the
Independent Electoral Commission to allow it to fulfil
its mandate. To that effect, international efforts and
assistance should be coordinated and provided in a
timely manner.
The progress made by the DDR Steering
Committee and the deployment of the 31 military
observers are commendable. These observers should be
deployed during the coming days to ensure the
completion of the disarmament and demobilization
process prior to the holding of the elections. In the
meantime, the reintegration programme for excombatants belonging to the various rebel movements
that have signed the peace accords and the
disarmament of other armed groups, ethnic militias,
self-defence and unconventional armed elements which
are not included in the process should be accelerated.
Those objectives would be at the top of my
priorities. I will continue to work closely with the
national stakeholders, the United Nations family,
international non-governmental organizations, the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), the Central African Economic and Monetary
Community, the African Union, representatives of the
international community accredited to Bangui, the
ECCAS Mission for the Consolidation of Peace, the
Central Africa Multinational Force, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan to achieve the
aforementioned goals.
The Security Council may wish to support the
aforementioned recommendations. With its blessing,
the international community would assist in providing
the necessary means to accelerate the DDR process.
That would encourage the implementation of the
recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
and pave the way for reconciliation with groups that
have not yet joined the process. It would also help

4

create conditions for free and fair elections and
promote economic assistance.
Let me now provide a brief update on the process
of transforming BONUCA to an integrated,
peacebuilding office: BINUCA. Based on the Council’s
decision of 7 April (see S/PRST/2009/5), and in view
of the budgetary cycle of the Fifth Committee of the
General Assembly, the Department of Political Affairs
and the Department of Field Support, in close
coordination with BONUCA, have been working hard
to ensure that an integrated office is in place on
1 January 2010. We have completed all substantive
interviews for the substantive posts of the new mission.
I am determined to have a functioning integrated office
by the time of my next report to the Council, early next
year. I count on the Council’s support during this
transition process, which, as members know, is not an
easy exercise. We are working hard to ensure the full
implementation of the mission’s mandate by taking a
harmonized approach and putting in place coordination
mechanisms for the whole United Nations system in
the Central African Republic. To achieve this, the
mission will need appropriate human and financial
resources and full support and cooperation from the
Peacebuilding Commission, other international and
regional efforts and other United Nations missions in
the region.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
overall political, security and socio-economic situation
in the Central African Republic remains fragile and
challenging. Only a clear course of action by the
international and regional actors will help the Central
African Republic to shift from conflict to being a postconflict country. A peaceful Central African Republic
would contribute to stability in Central Africa, as the
region is experiencing security challenges.
A combination of factors — good offices,
mediation, financial support and effective action —
would help to bring about a lasting peace and
sustainable socio-economic development in this
paradoxically mineral-resources-endowed but poor
country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office
in the Central African Republic for her briefing.
I call now on Ambassador Jan Grauls of Belgium,
Chairman of the country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission on the Central African
Republic.

09-64893

S/PV.6240

Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for kindly
inviting me to brief the Council as Chairman of the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on the Central African Republic. I
welcome the presence of Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Central African Republic, who in just a few months has
demonstrated that she is entirely equipped to carry out
the difficult task before her.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in the Central African Republic (S/2009/627),
which Ms. Zewde has just introduced, correctly
describes the situation in that country, including both
recent progress and the central challenges of the day.
The Central African Republic configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission had called for the
transformation of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic
(BONUCA) into the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
(BINUCA) and welcomed the 7 April 2009 presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/5), which formalizes that
transition. The integrated office will make it possible to
better support the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission in the Central African Republic. The
peacebuilding effort requires coordination and
consistency, and those are the two main focuses of the
mandate of the new United Nations presence in
Bangui.
Since the adoption in May of our Strategic
Framework for Peacebuilding in the Central African
Republic, I have visited the field twice, first in late
August, then more recently from 3 to 10 December,
along with a delegation from the Central African
Republic configuration comprising representatives of
China, France, Gabon, Japan, Poland, South Africa and
Belgium and of the International Organization of la
Francophonie. I think I can say that since the adoption
of the Strategic Framework — which to some extent is
the road map for our work — the first six-month report
is positive. There has been significant progress,
although the situation in the Central African Republic
continues to present enormous challenges.
Bearing in mind the situation in that country and
the recommendations of the inclusive political dialogue
held in Bangui in December 2008, we have initially
focused our attention on the security sector. The
Peacebuilding Commission has kept a watchful but
benevolent eye on the process that made it possible to

09-64893

finalize a document on the project for the disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
(DDR)
of
ex-combatants. The cost of the project is $27 million,
with financing provided through contributions not only
from the Peacebuilding Fund and some members of the
Peacebuilding Commission, including from the
European Union, but also and above all from
subregional organizations such as the Central African
Economic and Monetary Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States. I note that the
latter subregional organization has provided military
observers, who have already arrived in the Central
African Republic.
Thanks to these joint efforts of the Central
African Republic authorities and the international
community, the process is ready to get under way; it
awaits the formation of a body responsible for
coordinating the reintegration programme. The launch
of this DDR programme is of the greatest urgency,
because elections must be held before April 2010 and
because it is necessary to establish security throughout
the territory of the Central African Republic prior to
the elections.
In the broader area of security sector reform, the
round table held in Bangui in late October enabled the
Central African Republic authorities to adopt a national
strategy in that sphere. That was an important step
showing that national ownership by the Central African
authorities has become a reality at the technical and
political levels. In the months to come, we will have to
focus on the operationalization and financing of
security sector reform. In that context, it would seem
timely to organize a security sector reform pledging
conference during the first half of 2010 to mobilize
resources for the implementation of the national
strategy. The Commission believes that the time has
come to establish solid links between the DDR and
security sector reform.
The Peacebuilding Commission is working
simultaneously on other priorities of the Strategic
Framework. All are equally essential. In the area of
good governance and the rule of law, progress has been
made thanks to the joint efforts of the Government and
its international partners, such as the International
Organization of la Francophonie and the United
Nations Development Programme. The vital campaign
to combat corruption, one of the essential conditions
for socio-economic recovery, is one example of that.
Moreover, the adoption of the revised electoral
code and the establishment of the Independent

5

S/PV.6240

Electoral Commission are clear signals of the
Government’s resolve to hold elections next year
within the constitutional timetable. The Peacebuilding
Commission and its members have expressed their
support for the organization of those elections. In that
respect, some Commission members have already
announced contributions to support, in particular, the
work of the Independent Electoral Commission, the
members of which were appointed from the bodies that
took part in the inclusive political dialogue.
However, there are significant financial needs
that must still be met and many difficulties to be
overcome, such as the composition of electoral rolls
and the logistical organization of the ballot. The
Independent Electoral Commission still needs to set a
calendar for the elections as well as a detailed draft
budget. I call on the Central African Republic
Government to honour its own financing provided for
in the budgets for 2009 and 2010 and to give the
Independent Electoral Commission the means and
political space for a transparent composition of the
rolls.
I also call on the international community to
make contributions to the Trust Fund that the United
Nations Development Programme has just established
for the elections, and to provide technical assistance to
the Independent Electoral Commission. Finally, the
deployment of international electoral observer missions
before, during and after the elections should be
ensured.
The preparation for the development poles project
has made considerable progress and 2010 will finally
see the realization of that project, which falls under the
development pillar of our Strategic Framework. Those
poles will improve the living conditions of the people,
especially those who have suffered most in the conflict.
The European Commission, the author of the concept
and a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, has
already announced a substantial contribution. In this
area, too, considerable efforts will be needed to
mobilize the necessary resources for that project.
In the next six months, we must concentrate on a
restricted number of priority actions, such as the
effective launching of the DDR process, the
mobilization of resources for security sector reform in
the framework of the donors’ roundtable, the
organization of free and transparent elections in 2010,
and the genuine implementation of the development
poles project. Those priorities are closely linked, and it
is important above all to undertake the initial phases of

6

DDR before the holding of presidential and legislative
elections. A failure in DDR might compromise the
electoral process and even destabilize the country.
However, although the technical preparations for
DDR have been finalized with the arrival of military
observers from the Economic Community of Central
African States and their imminent deployment in the
field, it does not appear that all the necessary political
and security preconditions have been established. For
example, the recent clashes between the Convention
des patriotes pour la justice et la paix and the Central
African Armed Forces in Ndélé show that inter-ethnic
tensions persist in the north-eastern part of the country.
In the North-West, the ongoing roadblocks and
the activities of self-defence groups serve as pretexts
for the Armée populaire pour la restauration de la
démocratie (APRD) to not disarm. Additionally, the
kidnapping of two humanitarian workers near Birao
shows that the deployment of military observers is not
risk-free. I appeal to the Central African Republic
Government to redouble its efforts to promote dialogue
and mediation among the various ethnic and armed
groups in order to create an environment conducive to
the success of DDR, which should start, as scheduled,
before the end of the year. No new delays are
acceptable.
I would like to indicate finally that the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission takes very seriously the situation of
women and children, who are often the primary victims
of conflict, and makes every effort to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council on the fight against
sexual violence, the protection of children in armed
conflict, and the protection of civilians through the
priority areas of the Strategic Framework.
During our most recent visit, we were,
unfortunately, denied access to a centre for
demobilized child soldiers by the APRD, the armed
group led by Jean-Jacques Démafouth with which
those children were associated.
In all priority areas, considerable efforts are
called for on the part of all partners in peacebuilding in
the Central African Republic, with the assistance of the
international community. I call on all of those actors to
participate with conviction and the unanimous will to
change the country.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Grauls for his briefing.

09-64893

S/PV.6240

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): It is a pleasure for me to take the
floor before this body under your presidency, Sir, to
convey the viewpoint of the Government of the Central
African Republic on the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in my country (S/2009/627).
First, however, let me express my appreciation for the
mediation role that Burkina Faso has been playing in
the various crises in West Africa. We are all well aware
of the results of those efforts.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report, which will help the Council to
assess the role of the peacebuilding partners of the
Central African Republic.
I endorse the statements made earlier by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and by
the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission’s countryspecific configuration for the Central African Republic.
One year has passed since the holding of the
inclusive political dialogue that launched the process to
establish peace and stability in my country. Clearly,
meaningful progress has been made, but there have
also been delays. Some recommendations were
urgently required for the effective implementation of
the conclusions of that dialogue, including the
establishment of a national unity Government, the
establishment of the Steering Committee on
Disarmament, Demobilization And Reintegration
(DDR), the establishment of the Dialogue Follow-Up
Committee
for
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations arising from the dialogue, and the
holding of elections in 2010.
That vast programme can be implemented only
through priority actions agreed with outside partners,
including security sector reform, the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of excombatants, the establishment of good governance and
the rule of law, and the setting up of development poles
necessary to socio-economic development.
A country that truly wants to aspire to genuine
and lasting peace must be duty-bound to reject the
logic of war. Thus, the Government and the politicalmilitary parties have agreed to adopt as our top priority
the disarmament and demobilization of rebels. On
13 August 2009, the Central African Republic’s
independence day, the sensitization campaign for the
DDR programme was formally launched by President

09-64893

Bozizé, reflecting the Government’s political will to
put an end to that logic. Except for one single rebel
group, all of the others have decided to cooperate. A
tally of the exact number of soldiers has already begun
and pre-cantonment has also been announced.
On the initiative of the Government, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the DDR Steering Committee have signed a
memorandum of understanding that clears the way for
the deployment of military observers to monitor the
DDR process. With current funding, the launch of the
DDR programme should logically be under way before
the end of December 2009. However, DDR cannot take
place without security sector reform measures.
Here too, efforts are being undertaken to deploy a
defence and security force in the liberated areas, but
training is needed in order to restore trust between the
people and the security forces. We also need to provide
a context of peace and security in which all actors can
move freely. The relevant authorities are working to
that end.
The Central African Republic is currently
experiencing electoral fervour. The Government is
determined that this civic duty will be fulfilled by the
deadline set in the Constitution, even if the schedule is
tight. It is only a process: the electoral code has been
adopted; the Independent Electoral Commission has
been set up drawn from the six groups, as provided for
by the electoral code, and its President has been
elected. With total available funding of 331 million
CFA francs, the Commission could usefully work out a
time-bound programme. Furthermore, the technical
expertise is in place, and assistance from the United
Nations Development Programme poses no problems.
With the start of the disarmament and
demobilization process, the elections can be held on
schedule, yet it must be understood that the overall
programme is complex and requires a lot of time. To do
this, an enormous amount of awareness-raising and
support will be necessary for a successful outcome.
Ownership needs to remain national, as has been
repeatedly demonstrated. At the same time, the
Government has to be supported in its difficult and
very delicate mission. The challenges are enormous,
but the will is there. The problem of financing the
various programmes requires a response from the
international community. Gains already made need to
be preserved. We are grateful for the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal in his report for support for the
Commission and the electoral process and for his

7

S/PV.6240

participation in the round table on security sector
reform. The international community is duty-bound to
assist the Central African Republic, in a spirit of
solidarity.
Much positive progress has been made in the
economic sphere, which shows that the Government is
determined to carry out its programmes in a spirit of
good governance, which requires implementation of
the plan to modernize the justice system, fight
corruption and bring about administrative reform. All
of these measures will have positive effects on the
people of the Central African Republic, who ultimately
remain the beneficiaries of the peace dividends.
Reform in all sectors has at last enabled the
Central African Republic to attain the completion point
under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries initiative
and to benefit from external debt alleviation. The
Government intends to take advantage of this turn of
events to curb part of its internal debt.
The concerns of the Government do not relate
only to the reluctance of certain national rebel groups
that refuse to join the peace process despite the
mediation and reconciliation efforts under way; there is
also the presence of foreign armed groups that
undermine the process, while the security sector is
suffering a shortage of capacity to extend its authority
into remote rural regions. We therefore commend the
subregional efforts to put together a single
transboundary front against banditry and the illegal
circulation of small arms.
On 28 September, the Central African Republic
acceded to the Paris Principles on children associated
with armed conflict, thanks to UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. This is important because it
demonstrates the commitment of the Government to no
longer allow children to be used in armed groups. We
commend UNICEF and the Peacebuilding Fund for
their commitment and for having created a training
centre for these young people so that they can be
reintegrated into civilian life with income-generating
activities.

8

I take this opportunity to sincerely thank the
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on the Central African Republic for its
remarkable and committed efforts for peacebuilding in
Central Africa. The Peacebuilding Fund is also taking
concrete action that encourages sectors of the
population that has been subject to the repercussions of
conflict. The United Nations has always stood with my
country in times of serious crisis and continues to
support it even in a period of calm. We are grateful for
the work done together with other partners. I encourage
the establishment of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic
as a replacement for the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic, which
bequeaths nine years of attention on the Central
African Republic.
I must not conclude without paying tribute to
Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
who, through her work and her unequalled devotion in
a difficult context, has been able to bring her vast
experience to bear in building the trust of Central
Africans. I wish her every success.
We also would thank our bilateral and
multilateral partners for their contributions to the cause
of peace in the Central African Republic.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not
congratulate Gabon, whose mandate as a mediator in
the Central African crisis was extended during the most
recent summit of the Economic Community of Central
African States.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

09-64893
