A /68/PV.81

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-eighth session

81st plenary meeting

Wednesday, 9 April 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ashe  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Antigua and Barbuda)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 138 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (A/65/716/Add.8)
The President: I should like, in keeping with
established practice, to draw the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/68/716/Add.8, in which the
Secretary-General informs the President of the General
Assembly that, since the issuance of his communication
contained in document A/68/716/Add.7, Grenada has
made the payment necessary to reduce its arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in this document?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 132, 134, 139, 140 and 146.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Ken Siah of Singapore, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee that are
before the Assembly.
Mr. Siah (Singapore), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the honour to present to the General
Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee containing
recommendations on issues considered during the first

part of the resumed sixty-eighth session of the General
Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 3 to 28 March and
held eight plenary meetings and numerous rounds of
informal and informal-informal consultations.
On agenda item 139, “Human resources
management”, in paragraph 7 of its report, contained in
document A/68/690/Add.1, the Committee recommends
that the General Assembly adopt a draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 140, “Joint Inspection Unit”,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/68/819, the Committee recommends that the General
Assembly adopt a draft resolution, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 146, “Financing of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals”, in
paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/68/683/Add.1, the Committee recommends that the
General Assembly adopt a draft resolution, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 134, “Proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015”, in paragraph 7 of its
report contained in document A/68/689/Add.1, the
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
adopt the draft resolution on special subjects relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On the same agenda item, the Committee also
recommends the adoption of one statement of

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

14-29412 (E)

*1429412*

A/68/PV.81

programme budget implications. The relevant report
of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/68/820.
On agenda item 132, entitled “Review of the
efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly, in paragraph 10
of its report contained in document A/68/691/Add.1, the
adoption of two draft resolutions. Draft resolution I,
entitled “Procurement”, and draft resolution II, entitled
“Progress toward an accountability framework in the
United Nations Secretariat”, were both adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
In paragraph 11 of the same report, the Committee
recommends that the General Assembly adopt a draft
decision on questions deferred for future consideration,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
I thank delegations for their cooperation during
negotiations and assure them that the actions taken
during the 34th formal meeting of the Fifth Committee
are reflected in the reports before them.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records. May I remind members that,
under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401, the General
Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in
plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in
plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
May I remind delegations that, also in accordance
with decision 34/401, explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.

2/14

09/04/2014

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/691/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it two
draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 10 of its report and a draft decision
recommended in paragraph 11 of the same report.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions I and II and on the draft decision.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution I, entitled “Procurement”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 68/263).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Progress toward an accountability system in the United
Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 68/264).
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on the draft decision, entitled “Questions deferred for
future consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft decision without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 68/549 B).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 132.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/689/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision on
14-29412

09/04/2014

the draft resolution, entitled “Special subjects relating
to the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/247
B).
The President: I shall now give the floor to
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote or position.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): On behalf of the Royal
Government of Cambodia, I would like to express
Cambodia’s view on the subvention to the Extraordinary
Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), under
agenda item 134.
First of all, I would like to extend our sincere
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his appeal to the
international community in September 2013 to assist
Cambodia in a timely manner to resolve the financial
crisis of the ECCC.
Following the report of the Secretary-General
(A/68/532), entitled “Request for a subvention to the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia”,
dated 16 October 2013, a draft resolution was introduced
in the Fifth Committee based on the recommendation
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions.
The Royal Government of Cambodia is of the
view that investigations and trials of senior leaders
of the Khmer Rouge regime and those believed to be
most responsible for grave crimes are a key demand
of victims of human rights abuses. The prosecution of
such criminals can play a key role in restoring justice
and bringing dignity to the victims, help strengthen the
rule of law and send a strong signal that such crimes
will not be tolerated in human society.
The Royal Government of Cambodia notes the
efforts of the Group of 77, which has taken into
consideration the needs of the national component of
the ECCC.
In 2014, the Royal Government of Cambodia
provided its customary $1.7 million for the Court’s
running costs, plus an additional $1.1 million to cover
the salaries of ECCC national personnel, including
judicial officers, for the first quarter, for an aggregate
of $2.8 million, which represents more than 40 per cent
of the $6.4 million estimated budget for the national

A/68/PV.81

component. In total, since the establishment of the
ECCC in 2006, the Royal Government has provided
over $20 million, more than $10 million in cash and
$10 million in kind.
In the spirit of collaboration, the Royal Government
of Cambodia welcomes the Fifth Committee’s
endorsement of a subvention to the ECCC from United
Nations assessed contributions. According to the Joint
Statement by the Royal Government of Cambodia and
the United Nations High-level Delegation regarding the
Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia,
dated 28 January 2014, the United Nations High-level
Delegation agreed that Ambassador David Scheffer,
the Secretary-General’s Special Expert, would devote
maximum efforts, working with representatives of
the Royal Government of Cambodia, to mobilizing
further funds towards the 2014 budget of the national
component of the ECCC. The Royal Government
encourages all Member States to provide further
voluntary contributions to both the national and
international components of the ECCC. The Royal
Government of Cambodia welcomes the endorsement
of the new budget by the group of interested States and
strongly appeals to the donor community to provide the
financial support that the ECCC needs.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the Royal
Government of Cambodia remains firmly committed to
ending impunity for the atrocities that the Cambodian
people endured under the Khmer Rouge regime. We
reaffirm our continuing commitment to working closely
with the United Nations and all stakeholders to ensure
that the Extraordinary Chambers of in the Courts of
Cambodia successfully fulfil their mandate in a lasting
manner and achieve their goals.
Mr. Sánchez Azcuy (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would first like to say how pleased my delegation
is to see you presiding over our work once again,
Mr. President, and to ask you to convey our greetings
to the Secretary-General.
The following statement expresses the position of
Cuba’s delegation on the report of the Fifth Committee
on agenda item 134, “Proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015” (A/68/689/Add.1). Cuba
would like to make a statement on its position regarding
resolution 68/247 B, “Special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015”,
particularly section VII, on the Capital master plan.

14-294123/14

A/68/PV.81

Cuba deplores the adoption of paragraph 13 of the
resolution, whereby the Secretary-General is authorized
to use funds from the 2014-2015 Working Capital Fund
and the Special Account to cover the $155 million deficit
from the capital master plan. As we know, the deficit is
the result of an escalation of costs associated with the
capital master plan and of inadequate legislative action
on the part of Member States, which were not able to
resolve this issue at the appropriate time. Although
it is true that the paragraph contains a safeguard that
this is to be done on an exceptional basis and will not
set a precedent, the decision still nonetheless violates
paragraph 5 of resolution 68/250, “Working Capital
Fund for the biennium 2014-2015”, which specifies
what the Fund may be used for. The Fund totals only
$150 million, which is not enough to cover the deficit.
There is a precise procedure for using the Working
Capital Fund and the Special Account, which Member
States have confirmed at every budget biennium. In fact,
we have just done exactly that in the main session of the
Fifth Committee. This is the second time, however, that
the procedure has been violated during the Assembly’s
sixty-eighth session. It endangers the Organization’s
financial stability and its ability to meet unforeseen
expenses. Cuba considers that it is the responsibility
of Member States not to allow safeguards to become
established practice or to create negative precedents in
that regard.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote. The Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 134.
Agenda item 139 (continued)

09/04/2014

many important decisions to be taken this afternoon
following the latest round of discussions about the future
of our Organization. Those decisions will contribute to
further strengthening the global, effective, efficient
and focused United Nations that we have been building
together over the past several years.
I especially want to recognize the Assembly’s
adoption just now of my proposal for a career
development and mobility framework for staff
(resolution 68/265). I thank all representatives here,
and the many other officials who have contributed to
this accomplishment. I am grateful for the Assembly’s
constructive engagement and support, and would like
to congratulate Members on the visionary decision
they have made. Establishing a managed mobility
framework is a historic development for the United
Nations. Mobility will allow us to manage our most
precious resource — our staff — far more strategically
than we do today. As we implement the framework,
we can better deliver worldwide on the mandates the
Assembly entrusts to the United Nations.
Today’s result is part of a broader strategy for
building a modern and truly global Secretariat that
is more flexible and responsive to the many pressing
demands on the international agenda. To achieve
that, we have continued to modernize our business
practices over the past several years, including through
transformational initiatives such as Inspira, Umoja and
the International Public Sector Accounting Standards.
With respect to human resources reform, we have
continuously evolved, starting in 2009 with the General
Assembly decision on streamlining contracts and
harmonizing conditions of service.

The President: I now give the floor to the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

Today, with the adoption of a managed mobility
framework, the General Assembly has paved the way
for the United Nations and its staff to take a significant
step towards fulfilling our common vision of a truly
global, dynamic and adaptable workforce. With a
structured approach to mobility, we can be much more
strategic in deploying staff worldwide in order to fulfil
our mission globally. The framework will enable staff
to enjoy more rewarding careers as well-rounded and
multi-skilled individuals. In the process, they will
gain the ability to better meet the diverse needs of the
Organization. The framework will also enable us to
more effectively share the burden of service in the most
difficult duty stations.

The Secretary-General: Let me start by
expressing my appreciation to the Assembly for the

I would like to take this opportunity to thank
staff representatives for their contributions and input

Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/690/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 7 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, entitled “Mobility framework”.
The Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/265).

4/14

14-29412

09/04/2014

during the process leading to the proposal that has
now been approved. It has not always been easy, but
over time we worked hard together to devise a feasible
plan with tremendous potential for benefiting both
the Organization and its staff. I know there may be
concerns among some staff about the impact of this
new framework; that is only natural. But I am confident
that once it has been implemented, all staff will
recognize the benefits of mobility for building their
careers, broadening their horizons and gaining diverse
perspectives that will be a great asset throughout their
professional lives.
That is a big part of what the mobility initiative
is all about. The process that led to today’s success
was transparent, open and based on dialogue. We will
maintain that constructive approach as we prepare to
launch the new framework in 2016. Until then, we will
be in a transitional, preparatory period. As we move
forward, I will strive to make sure that the concerns and
wishes of Member States are fully addressed.
Today, the Assembly will take a number of other
important decisions that will strengthen our overall
transformational strategy. I will not review each of them
but let me highlight a few. I appreciate the key support
of the Assembly for my continued efforts to strengthen
accountability in the Organization and in particular
Member States’ encouragement with regard to resultsbased management and enterprise risk management.
I am fully committed to both those initiatives. I also
commend the Assembly’s decisions to add resources
to strengthen the very important human rights treaty
system. I thank the Assembly for recognizing the need
to fund the budget shortfalls in the capital master plan.
I look forward to Member States’ decision on a final
appropriation during the main part of the sixty-ninth
session.
At the same time, I recognize that there is still no
agreement on the proposed United Nations Partnerships
Facility and that important questions still have to be
addressed. We must acknowledge that partnership
is happening, is growing and is a fact. That is even
truer today than it was when I first called for adequate
United Nations capacity to engage in partnerships more
than two years ago. The goal of the proposal for the
Partnership Facility is to strengthen the United Nation’s
capacity to bring greater accountability, coherence,
efficiency and scale to United Nations partnership
activities.

A/68/PV.81

With fewer than 700 days left to accelerate
progress on the Millennium Development Goals and
with a post-2015 development agenda on the horizon,
it is imperative that we match our ambitions with
concrete ways to achieve them. Harnessing the strength
of the partnerships, including with private sector, civil
society and philanthropic organizations, will help the
United Nations to deliver on Member States’ priorities
and mandates. That is why I look forward to continuing
our discussions on that proposal and to achieving an
agreement that allows the United Nations to harness the
strengths of external partners and to take a coherent
and accountable approach to partnerships.
From my earliest days in office back in January
2007, I made a pledge to bring greater transparency,
accountability, efficiency and mobility to the United
Nations. Those goals are shared by Member States and
our staff, who serve each day with dedication, many
under difficult and dangerous conditions. I thank
Members for the progress that we have achieved so
far. The decisions that the Assembly has taken are
fundamental to the ability of the United Nations to
adapt to the changing global landscape. Let us take
the successes that we have achieved here as a sign of
our power to reach consensus on key issues, and let us
tackle the challenges ahead with even greater faith in
our collective ability to strengthen the United Nations.
I thank Members for their leadership and commitment.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union to make a statement following the adoption.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the States members
of the European Union. We are very glad to have the
Secretary-General with us today as we take a decision
on something that is also so important to him.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro
and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.
The States members of the European Union have
long been staunch supporters of human resources
management reform and the principle of managed

14-294125/14

A/68/PV.81

mobility. We fully support the aim of making the work
of the United Nations more effective and efficient by
implementing a modern human resources system and
by fostering an organizational culture that enables staff
at all levels to contribute to their greatest potential.
The mobility framework should be seen in that
overall context. We therefore welcome the agreement
on the Secretary-General’s refined managed mobility
framework. We believe that the new mobility framework
has an important contribution to make to improve the
ability of the Organization to deliver on its mandates by
enhancing the skills and experience of its staff, who are
the Organization’s greatest asset, as we have so often
affirmed. We also welcome the constructive engagement
of all partners and the thorough deliberations that we
have been able to have on that important issue. Now it
is time to implement the framework. We look forward
to realizing the opportunities that mobility will bring,
to the benefit of the Organization and all the staff.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 139.
Agenda item 140
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/819)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/266).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 140.
Agenda item 146 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/683/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution, entitled “Construction
of a new facility for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
6/14

09/04/2014

without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 68/267).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 146.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(g) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/68/91)
The President: Members will recall that at its
60th plenary meeting, on 5 December 2013, the
Assembly took note of the appointments of Denmark,
Japan, Mauritania, Qatar, the United Republic of
Tanzania and the United States of America as members
of the Committee on Conferences for a period of three
years, beginning on 1 January 2014.
Members will also recall that the Assembly took
note of the appointments of Jamaica as a member of
the Committee on Conferences for a term of office
beginning on 10 February 2014 and ending 31 December
2016 and Uruguay as a member of the Committee on
Conferences for a term of office beginning on 7 March
2014 and ending on 31 December 2015, at its 74th and
75th plenary meetings on 10 February and 7 March
2014, respectively.
Members will further recall that there remained
one vacant seat from the Latin American and Caribbean
States for a term beginning on the date of appointment
and ending on 31 December 2014.
On the recommendation of the Chair of the Latin
American and Caribbean States, I have appointed
Paraguay as a member of the Committee on Conferences
for a term of office beginning on 9 April 2014 and
ending on 31 December 2014.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of that
appointment?
It was so decided.

14-29412

09/04/2014

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (g) of agenda item 116?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
Draft resolution (A/68/L.37)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/68/820)
The President: Members will recall that under
agenda item 125, the Assembly adopted resolution
68/2 at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 20 September 2013.
Members will further recall that the Assembly held a
debate on agenda item 125, jointly with agenda items
14 and 118, at its 54th plenary meeting on 20 November
2013.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/68/L.37, entitled “Strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system”.
I now call on the facilitators of draft resolution
A/68/L.37.
Ms. Gunnarsdóttir (Iceland): I am making
this statement on behalf of the facilitators of the
intergovernmental process on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system, Iceland and Tunisia.
The Secretary-General has said,
“The United Nations human rights treaty body
system, which combines noble ideals with practical
measures to realize them, is one of the greatest
achievements in the history of the global struggle
for human rights. The treaty bodies stand at the
heart of the international human rights protection
system.” (A/66/860, p. 7)
With that in mind, it has been very clear to us from
the beginning how important it would be to successfully
conclude the process with consensus among all Member
States. We believe that by adopting draft resolution
A/68/L.37 before us, we will indeed be strengthening
and enhancing the system, as the draft resolution
carries significant changes and recommendations for
improving the treaty body system.
It offers recommendations on how to improve the
reporting process through such measures as lists of

A/68/PV.81

issues prior to reporting, common core documents,
interactive dialogue and concluding observations. It
strengthens the visibility and accessibility of the treaty
bodies through videoconferencing and webcasting and
other measures. It reinforces the importance of the
election process and the quality of the experts. It puts
in place efficiency measures that reduce the cost per
week of meeting time — for some treaty bodies, close
to half a million dollars, or an increased cost efficiency
of up to 45 per cent. It reinforces the importance of the
independence of the treaty bodies and its members. It
provides for an evidence-based, realistic and justifiable
allocation of meeting time for the treaty bodies and,
based on that model, allocates around 20 additional
weeks of meeting time, which is close to a 30 per
cent increase. Finally, the draft resolution provides
for a significantly strengthened capacity-building
component.
Those are measurable achievements.
Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): Allow me to continue on
behalf of the facilitators of the intergovernmental
process.
The discussions that took place among Member
States and other stakeholders during the process also
led to increased knowledge among Member States here
in New York of the complex human rights treaty body
system, and the dialogue among stakeholders has been
a healthy exercise in itself. Allow me in that context
to express the heartfelt appreciation of the facilitators
for the contributions of Member States to the process.
Although the negotiations were not easy, they clearly
demonstrated our common goal of strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system.
During the process, the facilitators also benefitted
from the expertise and experience of a number of treaty
body members and had the opportunity to meet with
most of the committees and chairpersons of the treaty
bodies on a number of occasions. Those interactions
have been invaluable, and we would like to thank our
interlocutors for sharing their valuable experience
with us. Similarly, the facilitators have had a number
of meetings with civil society and national human
rights institutions and benefitted from their perspective
on how to strengthen the treaty body system. We are
grateful for their contribution. We would also like to
mention the contribution and support provided to the
intergovernmental process by the High Commissioner

14-294127/14

A/68/PV.81

for Human Rights and her Office. We are thankful
for their tireless efforts in support of the treaty body
system.
Last but not least, I would like to pay tribute to my
predecessor, Ambassador Desra Percaya, Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, for his efforts and valuable
contribution to the present successful outcome.
It is clear that strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty bodies
is an ongoing process. It is our hope that through the
intergovernmental process the responsibility and
accountability of each of the stakeholders has been
strengthened through the draft resolution before us
(A/68/L.37). But our obligation towards the system does
not end there. After the draft resolution’s adoption, the
focus has to be on its implementation and, at the end of
the day, our success will be measured by its impact on
the ground.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/68/L.37, entitled
“Strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system”. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/68/L.37?
Draft resolution A/68/L.37 was adopted (resolution
68/268).
The President: I now call on those representatives
who wish to make statements following the adoption of
resolution 68/268.
I give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Armenia
and Georgia align themselves with this statement.
I am taking the floor in connection with the
adoption of resolution 68/268 on strengthening and
enhancing the effective functioning of the human rights
treaty body system.
Today marks an important and overdue step in
strengthening and enhancing the effective functioning
of the human rights treaty body system. We believe

8/14

09/04/2014

that the resolution adopted by the General Assembly
just now as a result of a long and thorough process
of discussions is of immediate and direct importance
to the international human rights protection system.
The human rights treaty bodies stand at the heart of
the system and are fundamental in the translation of
universal human rights norms into practical measures
for their realization for all rights holders. Therefore,
their sustainability, effectiveness and efficiency are key
to all efforts to promote and protect human rights.
It is for that reason that the European Union has
engaged actively, including through concrete proposals,
in the General Assembly’s discussions over the past
two and a half years. It has been our consistent position
that the outcome of that process must strengthen the
capacity of the treaty bodies to address the increased
number of ratifications and the reports and individual
communications submitted to them in a more timely
and effective manner, and place the treaty body system
on a sustainable footing. We have also underlined that it
must lead to a higher level of compliance by the States
parties with their reporting obligations and better
implementation of the concluding observations.
We note that the final text before us is a compromise
that aims to take into account the different views of all
delegations, but is based on a goal shared by all Member
States to address the urgent challenges faced by the
treaty bodies and on the confirmation of their unique
monitoring role, as outlined in the international human
rights treaties. It also reflects the shared understanding
that only a balanced solution that addresses cost
savings, efficiency, additional meeting time on the basis
of estimated burden of work and capacity-building can
provide a credible step towards a strengthened human
rights treaty body system. Moreover, only in that way
can it do justice to the extensive multi-stakeholder
consultations, led by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which provided the
basis for the Assembly’s deliberations.
Let me again underline the potential practical
contribution our decision today can make to enhancing
the human rights treaty body system. While we welcome
the adoption of resolution 68/268, we emphasize the
paramount importance of its implementation by all
stakeholders. We continued to encourage throughout
the discussions all steps by various stakeholders,
including the treaty bodies, to strengthen and enhance
their methods of work and trust that the resolution
adopted today will further facilitate those efforts. We

14-29412

09/04/2014

also take note of the invitation by the General Assembly
to the human rights treaty bodies and the Office of the
High Commissioner to continue to work to increase
coordination and predictability in the reporting process.
In that regard, I would emphasize a crucial
position of the European Union, expressed throughout
the process and relevant to the implementation of the
resolution just adopted — respect for the competences
and independence of various stakeholders, including
the treaty bodies, as set out in the human rights
treaties and reaffirmed by the General Assembly in the
resolution. It is with that key consideration in mind that
the European Union understands resolution 68/268.
We note the intense and in-depth General Assembly
discussions over its past three sessions, which helped
identify a consensus solution among all delegations. We
thank the co-facilitators — the Permanent Representative
of Iceland, Ambassador Gréta Gunnarsdóttir, and the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia, Ambassador
Mohamed Khiari — the Permanent Representative of
Indonesia, Ambassador Desra Percaya, and their teams
for their dedication, patience and tireless efforts in
reaching that goal. We also thank all delegations for
their close cooperation and engagement in that process.
We welcome the expertise provided by all stakeholders,
including the treaty body experts, and the support of
the High Commissioner and her Office in attaining the
outcome we have adopted today.
The human rights treaty bodies are a vital part of
our joint efforts to promote and protect human rights,
as underlined by the increasing and, in some cases,
near universal ratification of the international human
rights treaties. It is our strong belief that the adoption
of resolution 68/268 today will promote steps by all
stakeholders — treaty bodies, States parties, the Office
of the High Commissioner, national human rights
institutions and civil society — towards a stronger,
more efficient and effective treaty body system. We
will continue to pay close attention to the impact of
the resolution as it is implemented in the coming years,
with the expectation that what we are adopting today
will have a real and positive impact in promoting and
protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms for
all.
Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): I have the great pleasure
to speak on this pertinent issue on behalf of the States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia,

A/68/PV.81

the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam.
Allow me to express ASEAN’s utmost appreciation
and warmest congratulations to the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Iceland and Tunisia, in
diligently steering the consultations that have led to
the successful conclusion of the intergovernmental
process. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia, the previous co-facilitator,
for his unwavering efforts.
ASEAN actively and constructively participated
in the consultations in order to achieve a substantive,
meaningful and balanced document that would
strengthen the treaty body system. ASEAN appreciates
the concrete steps made by the co-facilitators in
addressing our concerns and including our proposals
in the text. During the negotiation process, ASEAN
highlighted five issues that are of key importance to us.
Allow me to reiterate ASEAN’s positions with regard
to the process.
First, on ensuring the quality and efficiency of
the system, ASEAN had given its strong support
to the proposals in resolution 68/268 towards that
end, including a simplified reporting procedure, the
submission of a common core document, word limits on
the number of questions and on States parties’ reports,
which was included in paragraph 15. We emphasize that
all measures to improve the quality and efficiency of the
system must be applied in an objective and non-biased
manner for all relevant stakeholders, including civil
society organizations.
Secondly, with respect to ensuring the financial
sustainability of the system, ASEAN had supported
the proposal for increased meeting time contained
in paragraph 26 and hopes that that will address the
problem of the persistent backlog. We encourage the
treaty body experts to continue to improve effectiveness
by considering at least 2.5 reports per week and,
where relevant, at least five reports under the optional
protocols. We emphasize that the additional margin
in paragraph 26 (c) should be allocated among the
Committees, on the basis of their expected workload
in addressing the backlog. Furthermore, while we are
in favour of cost-saving measures, we underscore the
importance of and need for summary records for the
dialogue of human rights treaty bodies with States
parties to be issued, as stated in paragraph 24. We

14-294129/14

A/68/PV.81

stress that webcasting shall not in any way replace the
issuance of such records.
Thirdly, in regard to increasing the capacitybuilding capabilities of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
ASEAN is supportive of the capacity-building proposals
contained in paragraphs 17 to 19, which we hope will
greatly benefit States parties in assisting them to fulfil
their treaty obligations. Such assistance should be
undertaken upon request, in consultation with and with
the consent of the State concerned and in accordance
with the principle of national ownership. Those
principles are reflected in the fifteenth preambular
paragraph and paragraphs 17 and 19.
ASEAN is of the view that those paragraphs should
always be considered together and should serve as
guideposts for the terms of reference relating to the work
of any potential capacity-building officer in OHCHR
regional offices to ensure adherence to that mandate.
Capacity-building activities, in the form of trilateral
cooperation with regional organizations, will contribute
to strengthening regional human rights bodies, such as
the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human
Rights and the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion
and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children,
when the same principles apply.
Fourthly, with regard to enhancing and
strengthening the communication and interaction
between treaty bodies and States parties, it is important
that the resolution recognizes States parties as key
stakeholders of the treaty body system and preserves
the principle of cooperation and genuine dialogue. In
that regard, we are of the view that the existing good
practice of sharing the list of questions with States
parties a few days before the dialogue between States
parties and treaty bodies should continue. We are
supportive of the inclusion of paragraph 39 on the
annual meetings of the Chairs of the treaty bodies
with States parties to all human rights treaties, held in
Geneva and New York, with a view to ensuring a forum
for an open and formal interactive dialogue. We believe
that to be an effective approach to increase interaction
and to improve the channels of communication between
both parties.
Fifthly, with respect to maintaining the
independence, professionalism and accountability
of members of the human rights treaty bodies, we
strongly believe that the independence, impartiality and
credibility of members of the treaty bodies are essential
10/14

09/04/2014

for the discharge of their mandates. ASEAN is therefore
pleased to note that the Chairs of the human rights treaty
bodies adopted the Addis Ababa guidelines in 2012.
However, ASEAN remains concerned that some treaty
bodies have not implemented those guidelines. We
encourage them to do so. We are pleased that paragraph
37 encourages the treaty bodies to seek the views of
States parties, the key stakeholders, in reviewing the
guidelines, which we believe will serve only to improve
them.
Furthermore, ASEAN underscores that it is
important that the composition of treaty bodies
give due consideration, among other issues, to
equitable
geographical
distribution,
balanced
gender representation, professional background and
representation of different legal systems. It is also
important that the members nominated to serve on
the treaty bodies serve in their personal capacity, be
of high moral character, integrity and acknowledged
impartiality and possess competence in the field of
human rights.
In the spirit of strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system, we look forward to the implementation of the
resolution and reaffirm ASEAN’s full support and
constructive role in that regard. We would be grateful
if this statement could be recorded in full in the official
records of the session.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Permanent Representatives
of Iceland and Tunisia as co-facilitators, and the
Permanent Representative of Indonesia and their teams
for their tireless efforts and perseverance, which have
allowed us to successfully conclude the process.
From the beginning of the inclusive consultations
process on strengthening the human rights treaty
body system, launched by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Geneva in 2009, and then continued
here at the General Assembly, Switzerland has always
actively engaged with other States in order to, first,
seek pragmatic solutions to improve the system’s
effectiveness and successfully to overcome the
challenges with regard to current and future capacity;
secondly, defend the independence and expertise of
members of the treaty bodies, which are at the heart
of the United Nations human rights protection system;
and thirdly, include the views of all stakeholders
concerned. These include States, of course, but also the
treaty bodies themselves, the High Commissioner for
14-29412

09/04/2014

Human Rights, national human rights institutions and
civil society.
Our assessment of the end of that long process
is that the outcome is positive. However, it is useful
to recall that resolution 68/268, which we have just
adopted, is only the beginning of the new process of its
implementation. The resolution is a solid foundation,
to which all actors concerned should be fully
committed in order to truly contribute to improving
the system’s effectiveness and efficiency. Two aspects
should be underscored in that regard. First, it is the
primary responsibility of treaty bodies themselves to
establish efficient working methods. Secondly, it is
our responsibility as States to show more discipline in
order to submit our reports in time and to improve our
cooperation with the treaty bodies.
In conclusion, the Assembly can rest assured that
Switzerland will continue to actively work for the
implementation of the resolution and, in general, for the
institutional and financial strengthening of the human
rights pillar within the United Nations.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I have the honour to speak on behalf of
the cross-regional group, which includes Belarus,
Bolivia, China, Cuba, Iran, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Syria,
Venezuela and my own country, the Russian Federation.
We decided to join the consensus on resolution
68/268, entitled “Strengthening and enhancing the
effective functioning of the human rights treaty body
system”. We would like to express our gratitude to the
co-facilitators — the Permanent Representatives of
Iceland and Tunisia — as well as Indonesia for their
leadership throughout the entire intergovernmental
process.
The functioning of the human rights treaty bodies
is one of the cornerstones of the universal international
system for the promotion and protection of human rights.
Its genuine improvement was one of the principle goals
of the cross-regional group throughout the negotiation
process, which lasted more than two years. Numerous
meetings in the context of the intergovernmental
process clearly indicated that the treaty body system
was in serious crisis and that the extent of the problems
in its functioning was deeper and more complex than it
seemed at the outset.
During the intergovernmental process, the crossregional group was engaged in a constructive dialogue
with other States on a broad range of issues related to

A/68/PV.81

the functioning of the treaty bodies. Despite the fact
that not all our proposals were reflected in the final
document, we believe the current resolution to be a
basis for further strengthening the treaty body system
and improving its functioning.
It is now crucial for all stakeholders, in particular
the treaty bodies themselves, to ensure the prompt and
full implementation of the resolution. For example,
States parties should prepare short and concise national
reports. The treaty bodies and their experts, as well as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, must demonstrate true impartiality,
objectivity and independence. We also hope that the
resolution’s various provisions on the consideration
of periodic reports and individual communications
will not be used for hollow or groundless requests for
additional funding and human resources.
At the same time, the United Nations system as a
whole should be able to ensure the effective functioning
of the treaty body system, bearing in mind the
fundamental principles of the United Nations, such as
multilingualism. We therefore expect that all requests
from States parties regarding the use of the six official
languages of the United Nations, as provided for in
the resolution, will be met accordingly and in a timely
manner.
During the in-depth intergovernmental process, a
decision was also reached on the financial aspects of
the functioning of the treaty body system. Bearing in
mind the resolution’s positions, in future we will not
support the practice whereby treaty bodies ask for
additional funding during Third Committee sessions.
The resolution stipulates that we have to examine
the state of the treaty body system within six years in
order to review the measures’ effectiveness. Until then,
we will continue to discuss various issues relating to
the system’s functioning at meetings and conferences
of the relevant States parties and other forums.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
has been a long-standing supporter of a strong and
independent treaty body system, and we consider the
human rights system one of the main pillars of the
United Nations. We have therefore participated actively
in the process of strengthening the treaty bodies that
has just reached a conclusion with the adoption of a
comprehensive reform package. We consider the text
to be a very significant achievement that will help
to safeguard the system at a time when it has been

14-2941211/14

A/68/PV.81

threatened with collapse, and will continue to guarantee
its effective functioning.
The adoption of resolution 68/268 today is a clear
reaffirmation of the importance that States continue
to attach to the work of the treaty bodies. I would
like to thank and congratulate the co-facilitators, the
Permanent Representatives of Iceland and Tunisia, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Indonesia,
for their outstanding leadership in conducting the
negotiations. We would also like to thank the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights for its
invaluable support in arriving at this far-reaching
decision.
The reforms we have just adopted will ensure the
proper working and functioning of the system at a time
of an ever-increasing number of treaty ratifications
and States’ reports. The reforms achieve a balance
between greater efficiency and sustainable funding for
the system. In that regard, we welcome the decision to
provide additional meeting time, as well as simplified
reporting procedures. We trust that the increased
capacity available within the Office of the High
Commissioner to assist States in meeting their reporting
obligations will make a significant contribution to
addressing the problem of non-reporting, which has
plagued the system for such a long time. We are also
pleased that the reforms stipulate that any savings
realized as a result of the measures laid down will be
allocated to the work of treaty bodies.
This reform could be a very important decision in
directing the system towards its core purpose — an
opportunity for national debate, a tool for regular policy
review and a platform for dialogue with individuals of
outstanding expertise and qualifications. Throughout
the process, we have underlined the importance of
respecting the independence of treaty bodies. We are
satisfied that the reform package has largely followed
that principle and has refrained from measures that
would have unduly interfered with the independence of
those expert bodies.
The Addis Ababa guidelines demonstrate the treaty
bodies’ ability to strengthen their own methods of work
and safeguard their independence. We trust that they
will continue their efforts in this regard, particularly
in order to maximize the efficiency and benefits of
the dialogues with States. We will continue to support
efforts aimed at improving the election procedures
and ensuring that the best-qualified individuals are
nominated and elected to serve on treaty bodies.
12/14

09/04/2014

Finally, we welcome the inclusion of a review clause
in the reform package. One lesson we have learned from
this process is that we definitely let too much time pass
before agreeing on the measures just adopted. We will
certainly have to continue monitoring developments in
the system and be ready to make adjustments as needed.
Mr. Ruidiaz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak at this meeting on behalf of the
delegations of Argentina, Colombia, Costa Rica, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico,
Panama, Peru, Uruguay and my own country, Chile. As
the group of like-minded Latin American countries, we
participated throughout the entire intergovernmental
process of strengthening and improving the efficient
functioning of the human rights treaty body system, the
final result of which was adopted today by the General
Assembly (resolution 68/258).
This has been a long, complex and sometimes
difficult process, directly affecting the effective
promotion and protection of human rights worldwide.
The treaty bodies, and their ability to effectively
monitor compliance with the major human rights
instruments, were dealing with a critical situation
that seriously undermined their capacity to fulfil
the functions assigned to them by States and thereby
threatened a fundamental component of the multilateral
system protecting human rights. We believe that today
the General Assembly has produced an effective
response to that challenge.
The like-minded Latin American countries
welcome the adoption of the resolution’s provisions,
which, while certainly reflecting the delicate balance
achieved between the various policy positions, also
form the basis for effective improvement of the treaty
bodies’ work, thanks to a happy meeting of minds,
of savings pursued and resources committed in a
constructive consensus whose ultimate goal is to better
protect the human rights with whose protection the
committees are entrusted.
The formula agreed on also respects the autonomy
and independence essential to the committees’ work,
according to their respective conventions, and ensures
their ability to work objectively and impartially,
without forgettng that it also includes the necessary
mechanisms for updating and evaluating proposed
measures in a system that, like everything, can be
improved, including a review of the committees’ status
and the measures’ effectiveness six years after this
adoption.
14-29412

09/04/2014

We owe the satisfactory result achieved to the many
people who have played a leading and nurturing role in
the process. In that regard, we would like to express our
special appreciation to the co-facilitators, Ambassador
Gréta Gunnarsdóttir of Iceland, Ambassador Desra
Percaya of Indonesia and Ambassador Mohamed
Khaled Khiari of Tunisia, and the experts who assisted
them — Messrs. Vardi, Arief, Nona, Diana. Amira
and Nur — for their tireless dedication, commitment,
intelligence and openness, which in February finally
enabled us to come up with the basic elements of an
agreement, a goal that to many seemed utopian.
The various players involved over the past three
years brought different perspectives and concerns to the
table, a reflection of the varied and multiple realities in
which they function and which must be familiar to the
committees themselves. In that regard, we would also
like to express our gratitude for the driving role played
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, Ms. Navi Pillay, who, even before the formal
start of the intergovernmental process, encouraged
reflection on how to improve the functioning of the
committees established pursuant to the human rights
treaties. She was concerned that we address the serious
situation the committees found themselves in and made
the decision to conduct broad consultations with all
the relevant actors whose functions qualified them to
participate in the discussion: States, the committees
and their experts, civil society, national human
rights institutions, academics and non-governmental
organizations, whose indispensable contributions
enriched the ideas and documents that were examined
during the debates of the intergovernmental process.
We would like to briefly summarize the main
elements in the resolution that our group championed
continuously and that encouraged us to believe that
it would contribute effectively to strengthening the
committees’ functioning in a realistic, comprehensive
and sustainable manner. Regarding practical measures
for improving efficiency, we would like to highlight
the additional working time allowed committees
and calculated on a sustainable basis, including the
allocation of sufficient financial and human resources
for the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and its
mission to carry out field visits; the push for simplified
reporting procedures; and the submission by States of
common core documents and updating them, among
other measures.

A/68/PV.81

Concerning measures to improve cooperation
between the various actors, we would like to cite the
resources allocated to essential capacity-building
for States and the role to be played by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and its
regional offices, and by United Nations country teams
and agencies, as well as the increased accessibility
measures, to cite only a few. Measures that will help
to improve the coordination and predictability of the
committees’ work include further efforts to harmonize
and align the committees’ working methods, their
dialogue with States and their formulation of concrete,
focused observations in their comments and general
feedback.
Finally, with regard to the measures to strengthen the
transparency and credibility of the system and respect
for its independence, such as the future webcasting
of public meetings and the use of videoconferencing
by delegations as an additional measure to facilitate
greater participation — which aim, through national
processes, to ensure the high moral and professional
qualities of the committees’ experts and strong
condemnation of any reprisals against those who
cooperate with the treaty bodies, and to recognize the
usefulness of the Addis Ababa guidelines as measures
for self-regulation — they all lead in the direction of
the principles of cooperation and genuine dialogue
that should govern the relationship between States and
the committees, both of which have an interest in the
promotion and protection of human rights.
The group of like-minded Latin American countries
understands that the approval of those decisions is in
no way the end of the road. We firmly believe that the
document adopted provides tools to help the committees
and States to better comply with their obligations. We
are aware that much remains to be done to substantially
increase the level of compliance with States’ legal
obligation to submit periodic reports, which must be
reviewed on time, and then to help them to implement
the recommendations. We also cannot ignore that the
obligation to produce multiple reports and their various
timelines increasingly represent a challenge for States,
not only for small States. As a result, we believe that
it would be good to have better coordination of the
system in general to ensure greater predictability of the
reporting cycles, organizing the process as a whole, as
indicated in the resolution, which should also lead to
greater efficiency in the use of resources.

14-2941213/14

A/68/PV.81

In conclusion, we want to reiterate our commitment
to the broad dissemination of the contents of the
resolution and ask that it be disseminated by all other
stakeholders, so that its content may be sufficiently
known, understood and internalized in the various
sectors of our societies that are involved in the
submission of periodic reports to the committees. We
firmly believe that this will lead to our fundamental
objective, which is an effective improvement on the
ground of the enjoyment of human rights by the millions
of men, women, girls and boys who are ultimately
deserving of the multilateral system to promote and
protect their human rights and of our efforts.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 125.
I give the floor to the delegation of Mexico.
Mrs. Colín Ortega (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, the delegation of Mexico would like
to associate itself with the statement made by the
representative of Chile on behalf of the group of
like-minded Latin American countries. I would like to
thank the Bureau of the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly, as well as the Secretariat and coordinators
who assisted us during this first resumed session, for
their work and commitment. I also appreciate the fact
that the Secretary-General was present at this meeting.
The issues discussed at the first resumed session of
the Fifth Committee made it possible to make progress
on aspects which are particularly important for my
delegation. Accountability is one of the central pillars of
effective and efficient management, which requires the
Secretariat’s attention and commitment. The promotion
of a culture of accountability, which is based on resultsbased management and the management of institutional
risks, will lead to a solid and transparent Organization.
The conclusion of the capital master plan, which
will make it possible to host the next session of the
General Assembly in the remodelled building, should
provide us with a number of lessons learned, which,
as a preventive measure, can be shared with similar
initiatives for the purpose avoiding increases in the
costs of construction programmes in the United Nations
system.
For its part, the approval of a full-time post for
the representative of the Secretary-General in the

14/14

09/04/2014

investment area of the Pension Fund will make it possible
to strengthen that important area to support those who
have worked with dedication to this Organization in
their retirement.
My delegation would also like to refer to the
initiative on the mobility of the Organization’s staff.
Resolution 68/265, which was adopted today, indicates
the willingness of Member States to support the
Secretary-General, but states that the General Assembly
needs to have information that can be provided only
when the International Public Sector Accounting
Standards and the Umoja platform are up and running
throughout the United Nations system. Mexico wishes
to recognize the representatives who made it possible to
achieve a balanced agreement on that area, which is so
relevant to our Organization.
With the adoption of the revised of managed
mobility framework, United Nations officials and
staff will have a suitable framework for the SecretaryGeneral to develop a dynamic and flexible work force
that is capable of meeting the global challenges of the
twenty-first century, and for the staff to be trained and
to develop themselves professionally to better contribute
to the purposes and principles of our Organization.
Mexico understands that the United Nations mobility
policy will be aimed at adequately addressing all issues
related to the professional lives of its employees.
My delegation sincerely hopes that the matters
deferred to the second resumed session and to the sixtyninth session of the General Assembly will be presented
by the Secretariat with the items requested by Member
States during the deliberations of the Fifth Committee
during the main session and the first resumed session in
order to be able to decisively approve them to facilitate
the compliance with the mandates agreed by the
principal organs of the United Nations.
Finally, we wish to highlight your leadership,
Mr. President, which was essential in moving the
agreements in the Committee forward, which will
make it possible for our Organization to efficiently and
effectively address the challenges we face in today’s
world.
The President: Before concluding, let me quickly
acknowledge the hard work and dedication of the
Chair of the Fifth Committee and his bureau and the
Secretariat, which supported the work of the Committee.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

14-29412
