S/2009/261

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 May 2009
Original: English

Letter dated 20 May 2009 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1867 (2009) of
26 February 2009 on the situation in Timor-Leste. By that resolution, the Security
Council underscored that the concept of operations and rules of engagement for the
military liaison group and the police component of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) need to be regularly updated as necessary and be
fully in line with the provisions of the resolution. In the same resolution, the
Council also requested me to report to it and to troop- and police-contributing
countries within 90 days of the adoption of the resolution.
As the Security Council did not make any changes to the roles and tasks of the
military liaison group, no adjustments were required to the military concept of
operations. The concept of operations of the police component, however, has been
carefully reviewed by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNMIT to
meet the requirements of the mandate of the Mission, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1867 (2009).
The resolution supports the gradual resumption of policing responsibility by
the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) through a phased approach, while
emphasizing that PNTL must meet the criteria mutually agreed by the Government
of Timor-Leste and UNMIT. To ensure that the process is jointly owned and
implemented, Prime Minister Kay Rala Xanana Gusmão and my Special
Representative concluded an agreement on 13 May 2009 that provides a basic
framework for the resumption process and the respective roles and responsibilities
of PNTL and UNMIT police, in accordance with the agreement concluded on
1 December 2006 entitled “Arrangement on the Restoration and Maintenance of
Public Security in Timor-Leste and Assistance to the Reform, Restructuring and
Rebuilding of the Timorese National Police and the Ministry of the Interior”
supplementing the agreement between the United Nations and Timor-Leste on the
status of UNMIT and further to paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 1867
(2009) and paragraph 21 of my report on UNMIT dated 9 February 2009
(S/2009/72).
In line with this agreement, a revised concept of operations for the police
component of UNMIT is being prepared and is close to being finalized. It provides
clear strategic objectives as well as the necessary operational guidance for the
smooth implementation of the gradual resumption of policing responsibility by
PNTL. It also clearly sets out the gradual change in the roles and responsibilities of

09-34519 (E) 210509

*0934519*

S/2009/261

PNTL and the UNMIT police whereby the latter will assume an increasing role in
monitoring, advising and providing operational support to PNTL.
The rules of engagement for the police component did not require any
revisions at this time, as the UNMIT police will continue to have significant
responsibilities for interim law enforcement until PNTL has been fully reconstituted.
In close consultation with UNMIT, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will continue to review, on a regular basis, the concept of operations and
the rules of engagement to ensure that they adequately reflect the evolving situation
as the resumption process progresses in order to enable UNMIT to carry out its
mandate in the most effective manner. The Department will keep Security Council
members, as well as troop- and police-contributing countries, informed.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

09-34519
