A /69/PV.48

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

48th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 11 November 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 123
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations

(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe

Report of the Secretary-General (A/69/228)

(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States

Notes by the Secretary-General (A/69/164
and A/69/171)

(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Economic Cooperation Organization

(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Asian-African Legal Consultative Organization
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/69/L.14)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative
Draft resolution A/69/L.8
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/69/L.13)

Draft resolution (A/69/L.11)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Latin American and Caribbean Economic System
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/69/L.9)
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
Draft resolution (A/69/L.16)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-61840 (E)

*1461840*

A/69/PV.48

(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe
(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/69/L.15)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
Draft resolution (A/69/L.12)
(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Southern African Development Community
(y) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States
Draft resolution (A/69/L.10)
The President: Before we proceed, I would like to
inform members that with regard to sub-items (k) and (v)
of agenda item 123, entitled respectively “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Economic
Cooperation Organization” and “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission
for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
Organization”, the consideration of draft resolutions
A/69/L.11 and A/69/L.15 is postponed to a later date to
allow their sponsors to conduct further consultations.
Statement by the President
Regional and subregional organizations have
been important actors in their respective regions for
many years. As is clearly recognized and articulated
in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as in several General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, regional cooperation is an
important aspect of the work of the United Nations. The
Secretary-General’s report (A/69/228) illustrates how
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations now plays a critical
role in virtually every area of the Organization’s
mandate. In particular, the report highlights the depth

2/30

11/11/2014

of cooperation achieved between the United Nations
and its regional partners across the full range of
mandate areas, from humanitarian assistance and the
maintenance of international peace and security to
development and the protection of human rights.
The challenges facing the United Nations in today’s
world are indeed complex and multidimensional,
and the Organization cannot deal successfully with
most of them alone. Furthermore, there is increasing
involvement by non-State actors in international
affairs. In these changing times, the unique role that
regional and subregional organizations have to play in
addressing some of the world’s most persistent problems
is as important as ever. Those organizations are diverse,
with distinct approaches, structures and priorities. The
international community at large stands to benefit a
great deal from increased interaction and coordination
between such organizations and the United Nations
in the implementation of their respective mandates.
Strengthening those partnerships is strategic for
promoting the principles of comparative advantages,
complementarity and burden-sharing.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations already has
a proven track record of tangible results. In that
context, the General Assembly has taken proactive
steps to enhance such partnerships through a number
of initiatives. To date, some 25 different regional and
subregional organizations have established formal
cooperative relationships with the United Nations. I am
convinced of the critical importance of strengthening
our strategic partnership with those organizations,
which is why it is one of my key priorities for this
General Assembly session. Indeed, I am heartened
to note that support for such cooperation has gained
momentum and relevance in recent times.
As we formulate the post-2015 development
agenda, regional and subregional organizations are
uniquely placed to contribute to and support the
work of the United Nations in that process. In the
area of peace and security, regional and subregional
organizations are distinctly positioned to understand
the root causes and dynamics of issues in their regions,
while often possessing a greater depth of knowledge
of the parties involved. That expertise is critical to
conflict prevention, mediation, the peaceful settlement
of disputes and peacebuilding efforts. The specialized
knowledge that regional and subregional organizations
can bring to the forefront also has an instrumental

14-61840

11/11/2014

A/69/PV.48

role in the provision of humanitarian assistance, the
promotion of development and the advancement of
critical infrastructure.

into account the specifics of each region, the mandates
and objectives of the organizations involved and the
interests of Member States.

There are many examples of successful cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations that we can
draw on, including several from my own home continent
of Africa. For Africa, partnerships with the United
Nations in the area of peace and security are some of
the most visible. Collaborative efforts to promote peace
and security in the Sudan, Somalia, Mali and the Central
African Republic have already yielded some positive
results. Recently the United Nations, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States
undertook a joint mission in response to the situation
in Burkina Faso. The benefits of such cooperation
are further illustrated by the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, and the same is true of the
formulation of the African Union’s Agenda 2063, which
is expected to chart Africa’s 50-year strategic vision
and action plan for socioeconomic transformation.

We must take the following important steps: first,
work for closer cooperation between the Secretariat
and regional organizations to explore ways to establish
more responsive partnerships; secondly, enhance
consultations between the organs of the United Nations
and regional organizations; and thirdly, effectively
and systematically address the issue of predictable,
sustainable and flexible funding through United
Nations assessed contributions for peace-support
operations undertaken by regional organizations
such the African Union, with the authorization of the
Security Council. Beyond their cooperation with the
United Nations, regional and subregional actors could
also greatly benefit from enhanced partnership and the
sharing of experiences among themselves.

Beyond Africa, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations has forged a strong partnership with the United
Nations, thanks to the active commitment of both
partners, especially in the context of comprehensive
partnerships. The Caribbean Community and the
United Nations are also working on a strategy for
future coordination efforts, taking up a number of
shared thematic priorities, including climate change
and transnational organized crime. The United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation have also
adopted a matrix on joint activities that will serve as a
guide for effective cooperation over the next biennium.
Those experiences, along with many other examples,
can provide useful lessons on how more predictable and
mutually reinforcing partnerships can be established
going forward. In my view, those lessons include, first,
respect for regional ownership and priority-setting,
secondly, the flexible and innovative application of the
principle of subsidiarity, thirdly, mutual respect and
adherence to the principle of comparative advantage,
and fourthly, a division of labour underpinned by
complementarity.
It is essential that the United Nations continue
to strengthen its partnerships with regional and
subregional actors to foster the implementation of the
Organization’s mandates and the overall objectives
enshrined in the Charter. Those efforts should take

With so many success stories to draw on, this is an
opportune time to explore ways to further harness the
benefits of strengthening United Nations partnerships
with regional and subregional organizations. In that
context, I am pleased to inform the Assembly that in
May 2015 I will convene a high-level thematic debate
on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations.
I urge all members to participate in that event, which
will be an opportunity to examine past successes while
laying the foundations for fruitful cooperative efforts
in the future.
I now give the floor to Mr. Randy Bell, Director
of the International Data Centre Division of the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization to present the
report of the Preparatory Commission.
Mr. Bell (Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization):
I am honoured to address the Assembly under the agenda
sub-item “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”. I am also
pleased to speak today on behalf of the Executive
Secretary, Mr. Lassina Zerbo, who is currently engaged
with the Integrated Field Exercise 2014 (IFE14), which
is under way in Jordan. When the IFE14 is complete,
it will represent the largest and most comprehensive
on-site inspection exercise we have ever conducted. I

14-618403/30

A/69/PV.48

will address that important activity in further detail
later.
The United Nations has worked tirelessly to
maintain international peace and security through
collective action. Reducing the threat of weapons of
mass destruction through multilateral non-proliferation
and disarmament measures, such as the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT), has been a crucial
part of these efforts. Active and sustained cooperation
among States and between States and international
organizations is vital to success in advancing these
objectives.
Since the CTBT was opened for signature in 1996, the
United Nations has consistently supported its effective
implementation and its steady progress towards entry
into force. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s leadership
on the CTBT has been instrumental in strengthening
the cooperative security structures that promote
international peace and stability and has reinforced the
Treaty as a rallying point for nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation. The draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commission
(A/69/L.15) is an embodiment of the importance of
such cooperation. It is a necessity if we are to realize
the longstanding international objective of a world free
from the threat of nuclear weapons.
I represent the organization whose mission is to
bring an end to nuclear test explosions once and for all,
by anyone, anywhere — a goal that has been on the
international agenda for more than six decades. During
the Cold War, strategic competition among the nuclear
Powers drove scientists and technicians to develop
smaller and more destructive weapons, to be delivered
by bombers and all types of missiles, some of which
carried multiple warheads. The development of those
sophisticated weapons systems necessitated extensive
nuclear testing programmes to validate the designs of
the warheads and delivery vehicles. Between 1945 and
1990, more than 2,000 nuclear tests were carried out, at
a rate of nearly 500 per decade. However, the conclusion
of the CTBT and the steadily reinforced global norm
against nuclear testing have all but completely relegated
that dangerous legacy of the Cold War to the annals of
history.
However, the CTBT has yet to enter into force.
The good news is that the Treaty is working. The
verification system has the proven capability to detect
nuclear explosions at a fraction of the yield of the first

4/30

11/11/2014

nuclear weapon test in the desert near Alamogordo
in July 1945. The international community forcefully
condemns any violation of this norm today, as has been
the case with each of the announced nuclear tests by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea — the only
State to conduct a nuclear test in this millennium.
With 183 signatory States and 163 ratifying States,
the CTBT is one of the most adhered-to instruments in
its field. Nearly 90 per cent of the Treaty’s verification
system is complete, giving it a truly global reach.
Nonetheless, the eight remaining annex 2 States must
ratify the Treaty for its entry into force. Without a
legally binding and effectively verifiable test ban in
place, the international community has no insurance
against a return to an era of unrestrained nuclear
testing, which would have disastrous implications for
regional stability and international peace and security.
The final chapter on nuclear testing must be
brought to a close through the codification of the
Treaty into international law. We have to draw that
irrevocable line in the sand. History teaches us that
voluntary moratoriums are inadequate. Between 1958
and 1961, the United States and the Soviet Union
adhered to a voluntary moratorium on nuclear-weapon
tests. A breakdown in test-ban negotiations and rising
geopolitical tensions resulted in the two super-Powers
carrying out more nuclear tests in 1961 than in the
whole of the previous decade.
Without the CTBT in force, there is no firm legal
barrier preventing the resumption of unrestrained
nuclear testing that could potentially trigger a new arms
race, which would inevitably involve more players than
during the Cold War. That would dramatically increase
tensions and instability in the international system.
We must not allow that to happen. As an organization,
we are doing everything we can to prevent such an
outcome. As outlined in the Preparatory Commission’s
midterm strategy 2014-2017, we are focused on two
overarching missions: establishing a credible and
trustworthy verification system and providing support
and preparation for the Treaty’s entry into force.
I am pleased to report that, in the two years since
the previous Executive Secretary addressed the General
Assembly (see A/67/PV.40), there has been substantial
progress in the development of the Treaty’s verification
system. The Commission has come within sight of
fulfilling its mandate. The commitment and hard work
by a relatively small but determined group of people

14-61840

11/11/2014

has resulted in bringing the CTBT verification system
close to full readiness. To date, there are 278 certified
stations in the international monitoring system (IMS)
and another 40 installed or under construction, bringing
the verification system close to 90 per cent complete.
Importantly, we have also exceeded 90 per cent data
availability in the first half of 2014.
The International Data Centre (IDC) — the
division that I head — continuously processes and
analyses the data registered at monitoring stations.
These data are shared with 1,300 institutions in 120
countries in an all-inclusive, democratic, transparent
and non-discriminatory manner, thereby fostering trust
in and credibility of the system and its data. Alongside
the steady instalment and certification of IMS stations,
the IDC has continued to strengthen its capabilities,
resulting in lower detection thresholds for events
worldwide.
Member States have made enormous investments
in the system. Not only have member States invested
nearly $1 billion, they have also collectively invested
the time, energy and intellect of thousands of their
scientists and experts. It is imperative that those
investments be protected. Moreover, as more stations
come online and the volume of data increases, it is
critical that the international community continue to
recognize the importance of sustaining the IMS and
IDC operations in order to improve the provision of
data, products and services.
Maintaining readiness to provide a timely response
to suspicious events directly supports the overall
objective of achieving the Treaty’s entry into force. In
other words, continuing to demonstrate the effective
and efficient detection capabilities of the verification
system shows the added value that the Treaty provides
to ratifying States as well as to those considering its
ratification.
That has been demonstrated by the performance of
the system in detecting the nuclear tests announced by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In 2006,
the identified test-area error ellipse was approximately
880 square kilometres, whereas in 2013 the increased
accuracy of our system allowed us to narrow the test
area down to only 181 square kilometres, well within
the 1,000 square kilometres that the Treaty mandates
for an on-site inspection. In addition, analysis of xenon
gases detected by the IMS noble gas station in Japan
55 days after the 2013 nuclear test announced by the

A/69/PV.48

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea was consistent
with a late release of gas from that test site. Even with a
comparatively small estimated yield, the 2013 event was
detected by 94 IMS seismic stations and two infrasound
stations. Eighty-eight of those stations were used in
determining the event location. The more stations that
are used in locating, the smaller the size of the error
ellipse, and that results in an increased probability of a
successful on-site inspection.
As previously mentioned, consistent progress has
also been made in the area of on-site inspection, which
is the CTBT’s ultimate verification measure. We are
well under way to meeting our strategic goal to achieve
on-site inspection readiness at entry into force.
The second fully fledged on-site inspection
simulation, the Integrated Field Exercise 2014, is under
way on the shores of the Dead Sea in Jordan as I speak.
This exercise is unprecedented in a number of ways.
Almost 150 tons of equipment was shipped to Jordan,
and more than 200 experts have travelled from all
over the globe to take part in the event. An exercise of
such scope can be carried out only through concerted
efforts from across the entire organization. I also wish
to highlight that this enormous undertaking would
not have been possible without the critical support of
Jordan, the voluntary contributions by Member States
of equipment and expertise and the Member States’
decision to make available more than $10 million for
the exercise.
When the IMS is combined with an effective
on-site inspection regime, no potential violator would
be confident that a nuclear test could go undetected.
We have proven that the Treaty is verifiable through an
international monitoring system that is unique, reliable
and efficient. And we have built a deterrent that gives
States peace of mind.
In order to ensure that the verification regime
remains current, we must also strive to identify key
scientific and technological developments that could
affect its future operations. We have sought to strengthen
our relationship with the broader scientific community
through the Science and Technology Conferences that
are organized for scientists and experts from a broad
range of disciplines related to nuclear test monitoring.
The conferences attract participants from national
agencies involved in the CTBTO’s work, as well as those
from independent academic and research institutions.
Members of the diplomatic community, international

14-618405/30

A/69/PV.48

media and civil society are also actively participating.
Four such conferences have been held to date in Vienna,
and the next will take place in June 2015.
We recognize the true value of the investment with
which we were entrusted. As an organization operating
at the cutting edge of scientific and technological
knowledge, we are determined to share that knowledge
with our member States. This unique verification
system offers a host of opportunities for scientific
research. Whether it is in the area of tsunami warning,
aviation safety, climate monitoring or marine-life
research, the Treaty’s monitoring technologies provide
obvious benefits. We see this investment as a platform
for scientific knowledge and capacity development.
I would like to stress that this scientific use of IMS
data is not merely altruistic; it helps us do our monitoring
mission better. When scientists and technologists make
use of IMS data for other purposes, they discover better
ways to remove noise and interference from our data so
that those involved in nuclear test monitoring can look
deeper into the data and detect ever smaller events.
The Commission is also providing assistance on the
legislative issues arising from the Treaty and is working
closely with member States to set up their national
data centres. Through the provision of the necessary
training, technical infrastructure and equipment, we
ensure that member States enjoy the benefits of this
unique organization. Such capacity-building enhances
the scientific and technical capabilities of member
States, and that has a spillover effect into other areas
of development.
Another key focus of our organization is
empowering the next generation of CTBT experts to
ensure the Treaty’s verifiability well into the twentyfirst century and beyond. That is the predominant vision
behind the Commission’s integrated capacity-building
activities, which promote active engagement with
current and next-generation CTBT experts, particularly
in the developing world and among women. That vision
is committed to applying science for peace.
The Executive Secretary has been holding
extensive consultations over the last few months with
senior officials from nearly all States that have not yet
ratified or signed the Treaty, including all but one of
the annex 2 States. He has found greater engagement
with regard to the establishment and operation of the
verification system, and greater political commitment.
In addition, we have seen steady progress in the Treaty’s

6/30

11/11/2014

universalization. Brunei-Darussalam, Chad, GuineaBissau, Iraq, Niue and, more recently, the Republic
of the Congo have all ratified since the last time this
agenda item was addressed in the General Assembly.
Several other countries, including Angola and Yemen,
are close to completing their ratification processes.
On behalf of the Executive Secretary, I would like to
commend them for their commitment to the vision of
a nuclear-test-free world. Nonetheless, the longer it
takes for the Treaty to enter into force, the longer it
remains in legal limbo and the more difficult it will
become to sustain the momentum so many have fought
hard to achieve. The more time that passes without
sustained progress on entry into force, the greater the
likelihood that States will be less inclined to honour
their commitments to the Treaty or to the organization.
For that reason, the Executive Secretary has
established a group of eminent persons, which is
identifying and seizing opportunities to advance the
Treaty’s entry into force, thus complementing the
article XIV process, currently co-chaired by Indonesia
and Hungary. The group is leveraging the wealth and
experience of its members to advise on ways to promote
the Treaty in the remaining annex 2 States. The group
is also utilizing regional understanding and expertise
to facilitate dialogue among leaders in the various
regions and to advance the message of the CTBTO in
international conferences and other events.
The value of the CTBT verification regime has
become more and more evident. The human and security
benefits of the test ban continue to be appreciated. A
growing number of countries, institutions and people
are demonstrating leadership in promoting the Treaty’s
entry into force. The CTBT is edging closer towards
universality.
Let us together strengthen our resolve and build
on recent achievements. The goodwill and momentum
generated in recent years need to be met with equally
good action on the part of Member States — the
stakeholders and owners of this process. The vision of a
test-free world certainly deserves our full determination,
commitment and combined strengths in the pursuit of
our final and noble goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.8.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): Austria is honoured to
address the General Assembly in its capacity as current

14-61840

11/11/2014

Chair of the Central European Initiative, and it is a
pleasure to introduce the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central European
Initiative (CEI) (A/69/L.8) on behalf of the 18 member
States. Since December 2011, when the Initiative
obtained observer status in the General Assembly
pursuant to the adoption of resolution 66/111, this is the
second time that the Initiative addresses the General
Assembly. We are eager to continue our work leading
to a dynamic and substantive partnership between the
United Nations and the Central European Initiative.
Regional cooperation has to be seen in a global
context, since regional aspects are crucial elements
for international efforts on a global scale. The need for
more cooperation, more synergies, more interaction
among those involved in the endeavour to strengthen
regional cooperation is obvious. Therefore, in January,
the Austrian presidency of the CEI organized a meeting
of some 20 international and regional organizations in
Vienna to sound out more synergies and cooperation.
Let me underline what the CEI is doing in the context
of enhanced regional cooperation.
In carrying out its mission and objectives, the
CEI promotes initiatives and programmes aimed at
fostering cohesion and integration among the countries
of its region by serving as a forum for political dialogue
and a platform for exchanging best practices, capacitybuilding and cross-border cooperation. That unique
working methodology, which is a combination of
multilateral diplomacy and project management, has
made the CEI, which is celebrating its twenty-fifth
birthday this year, a champion of regional cooperation.
In most cases, that has been done in partnership with
others.
Cooperation between the CEI and United
Nations specialized entities over the past years has
been substantive and widespread and has covered
various areas. For example, the CEI cooperates with
the Economic Commission for Europe in the area of
enterprise and sustainable development, with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
in the area of agriculture and with the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
in the field of culture. The CEI has a memorandum
of understanding and other types of agreements with
some of those organizations, which has led to the
implementation of several joint projects, as well as
common events and other activities.

A/69/PV.48

It is worth pointing out that the CEI also strives
to cooperate with the most important European
organizations and institutions, such as the European
Union, the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, the Council of Europe
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
Last but not least, the CEI also cooperates with
all major regional organizations and forums operating
within and beyond the Initiative’s region, such as the
Adriatic and Ionian Initiative, the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization, the Council of the Baltic
Sea States, the Regional Cooperation Council and the
South-East European Cooperation Process.
We firmly believe that we should further explore
ways to enhance cooperation with regional organizations
active in the various parts of the world. The fact that
the majority of the most important regional initiatives
are present here today provides us with a unique
opportunity to work on a truly strategic partnership
between us and the United Nations in pursuit of world
peace, security, development and democracy.
In conclusion, I would like to use this opportunity
to sincerely thank the CEI member States for their
engagement, and all the other countries that are
supporting draft resolution A/69/L.8. I would like
to convey to the General Assembly our joint plea to
adapt by consensus the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central European
Initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belarus to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.10.
Mr. Dapkiunas (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): As
Chairman of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) for 2014, the Belarusian delegation has the honour
of introducing the draft resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States” (A/69/L.10).
The CIS, established in 1991, brings together 11
States parties. The Commonwealth seeks to develop
mutually advantageous cooperation between the States
parties in the political, economic, humanitarian, cultural,
environmental and other fields. In accordance with
resolution 48/237, in March 1994 the Commonwealth
was granted observer status in the General Assembly.

14-618407/30

A/69/PV.48

Cooperation between the CIS and the various United
Nations bodies is progressively developing. The CIS
Executive Committee supports working contacts with
a number of specialized agencies of the United Nations
system, in particular with the United Nations Economic
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization. We have established treaty relations with
the executive bodies of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, the Economic Commission
for Europe, the United Nations Office at Geneva and
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. As of
July 2013, we have a focal point for cooperation with
the Security Council in our CIS Executive Committee,
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
1540 (2004). And that list is far from exhaustive.
In recent years we have accumulated solid
experience in multilevel cooperation between the
United Nations and the CIS to deal with common
challenges of a social, economic and humanitarian
nature. In order to strengthen the practical component
of that cooperation and upgrade its effectiveness, it is
vital to have a systemic foundation for such cooperation,
which will help develop and deepen the ties of the CIS
with the United Nations specialized agencies. That,
in fact, is the purpose of the draft resolution that we
have submitted on cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States.
In particular, the draft resolution urges the specialized
agencies and other organizations, programmes and
funds of the United Nations system, as well as the
international financial institutions, to develop their
cooperation with the CIS.
Belarus is convinced that efforts to develop the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, including the CIS,
should seek objectively to achieve the fullest and most
effective resolution possible of the broadest range of
issues, exchange best practices in various sectors and
implement them in practice.
The delegation of Belarus would like to thank
interested States for participating in the work on the
text of the draft resolution. We have tried to take into
account their comments and suggestions as much as
possible.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.9.

8/30

11/11/2014

Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): In my
capacity as Chair of the Arab Group for the month of
November, I am extremely honoured to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.9, which pertains to cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States. I am doing so on behalf of the following
countries: Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt,
Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco,
Mauritania, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, Tunisia, the United
Arab Emirates and Yemen..
The draft resolution that is being introduced today
concerns an important topic, itself enshrined in Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, which
encourages the Organization to cooperate with regional
organizations, particularly on joint matters relating to
international peace and security. The draft resolution
takes account of the recommendations resulting from
the meeting between the United Nations and the League
of Arab States held in Geneva from 17 to 19 June. In the
wake of the recent events and the rapid global changes
and crises taking place around the world, we must
strengthen our cooperation and our reach, and work to
bring the efforts of the two organizations closer.
Through the draft resolution, the General Assembly
invites the United Nations and its agencies, along with
the countries of the Arab League, to strengthen their
cooperation in order to achieve their common goals. In
that context, in the draft resolution the Assembly also
requests that the United Nations and the League of Arab
States review their existing coordination mechanisms
and introduce new recommendations and suggestions,
with the goal of strengthening and accelerating their
implementation. It also requests an acceleration of the
review of the 1989 cooperation agreement between
the two organizations, in order to adapt it to current
developments and challenges.
I therefore call on the General Assembly to adopt
draft resolution A/69/L.9 unanimously and without a
vote.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolutions A/69/L.12 and A/69/L.13.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): I have the honour to speak today on
three sub-items on today’s agenda: 123 (l), entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Eurasian Economic Community”, 123 (g), entitled

14-61840

11/11/2014

“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization”, and 123 (w),
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”.
In my national capacity, I would like touch on the
issue of cooperation between the United Nations and
the Eurasian Economic Community (EURASEC).
Over the past few years, EURASEC has collaborated
actively with the United Nations on a wide range of
issues, including trade, transport, communications,
energy, tourism, environmental protection, disaster
emergency management, migration, education and
much more. We are pleased with the results of that work,
which has been carried out in full accord with United
Nations priorities for sustainable development and has
contributed in many ways to establishing an extensive
architecture of multilateral cooperation in Eurasia.
Through their complementary roles, EURASEC
and the United Nations have helped to find the best
possible solutions to problems facing the countries of
the region, based on the individual countries’ specific
characteristics, thereby contributing to international
practical experience in responding to current social and
economic challenges.
In the 14 years of its existence, EURASEC has
become a capable, dynamically evolving and effective
organization with a developed legal and institutional
framework that fully reflects its relevance and
maturity. The mechanisms that it has created provided
reliable support to its members during the recent global
economic crisis. The Community has accomplished
much and has now achieved the important goal of
bringing Eurasian integration to a new level with
the establishment, starting on 1 January 2015, of the
Eurasian Economic Union. With that, according to the
decision of the Heads of its member States, EURASEC
will cease its activities, while issues relating to the
future development of economic integration will be
turned over to the jurisdiction of the constituent bodies
of the Eurasian Economic Union.
The Eurasian Economic Union is being created as
an international organization for regional economic
integration and with an international legal identity. It
is consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and other universally
recognized standards of international law, including
the rules of the World Trade Organization. Within the
Union, the four freedoms — the freedom of movement

A/69/PV.48

of goods, services, capital and the workforce — will
be observed, with a coordinated, coherent and unified
policy on the key branches of the economy.
The Eurasian Economic Union currently includes
Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, but membership is
open to any State sharing its goals and principles. At the
beginning of October, the Republic of Armenia signed
an agreement to join. An action plan for membership in
the Union for the Kyrgyz Republic has been approved.
In addition, the Eurasian Economic Union’s agreement
provides for a mechanism whereby interested countries
can receive observer State status in the Union, and
many countries and regional organizations have already
expressed interest in cooperating with it.
We believe that the goals and objectives that the
Eurasian Economic Union has set itself not only resonate
with its member States, but also reflect global trends
in development. The Eurasian integration process is
reaching a new level, and there is much more to be done
to enable its economic union to function at full strength
in order for its member States and partners to feel its
real impact. We firmly believe that, as the Eurasian
Economic Union develops, its potential and experience
will be sought out by the international community,
particularly in the context of formulating a new agenda
for post-2015 development, which will become the new
system of coordinates for defining the likely specific
parameters for practical cooperation between the Union
and the United Nations.
I now have the honour to speak on behalf of the
member States of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO): the Republic of Armenia, the
Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan.
It is generally recognized that the activity of
regional organizations is an integral feature of modern
international relations. Their effective work on the
ground is an important component in ensuring security
and the development of trading and humanitarian
ties between nations. The Collective Security Treaty
Organization makes a substantial contribution to those
processes.
Today, the CSTO is a multifaceted structure capable
of reliably responding to the wide range of challenges
and threats that its member States may encounter. It also
has the capacity to conduct peacekeeping operations,
including under United Nations auspices. The CSTO

14-618409/30

A/69/PV.48

carries out regular anti-drug activities. Within the
framework of its ongoing regional anti-drug campaign
– Operation Kanal, designed to fight Afghan opiate
smuggling – the organization combats the flow of
narcotic products to both European and Asian countries,
as well as the activities of organized criminal groups.
The aim of the CSTO is to strengthen peace and
international and regional security in accordance with
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international legal norms. It is those elements that
are reflected in draft resolution A/69/L.13. We are
grateful to all the delegations that have participated
constructively in agreeing on that document. Its
adoption should give a new impetus to the development
of mutually beneficial cooperation between the two
organizations.
I now turn to my third statement.
I would first like to welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recent report on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
(A/69/228), which enables us to take a look at the
latest trends in that important area of United Nations
activities.
Today, on behalf of the members of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization — the People’s Republic
of China, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic, the Russian Federation, the Republic of
Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan — I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.12,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. The draft
resolution is based on resolutions 64/183, adopted on
18 December 2009; 65/124, adopted on 13 December
2010; and 67/15, adopted on 19 November 2012.
In the past few years, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO) has become a cornerstone of
regional security in all its dimensions. Its activities
are aimed at promoting mutual trust and encouraging
cooperation in the areas of the economy, education,
energy, the environment, information security and
other fields. Our member States make a significant
contribution to the maintenance of international peace
and security. The SCO promotes effective counterterrorism cooperation, including through its regional
counter-terrorism bodies and the fight against drug
trafficking and other types of transnational crime.
We are also making a significant contribution to
stabilization efforts in neighbouring Afghanistan. The

10/30

11/11/2014

draft resolution before the Assembly is the outcome
of informal consultations convened by the Russian
Federation in its capacity as the current Chair of the
SCO. We would like to thank all the delegations that
participated and seek to work constructively to further
strengthen the existing ties between the United Nations
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.14.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): On behalf of the member
States of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization (BSEC), I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.14, submitted under sub-item
(d) of agenda item 123 and entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization”. Allow me, at the outset, to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation for the
valuable support and positive spirit evidenced by all
countries sponsoring the draft resolution.
The Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization,
with a lifespan of almost 23 years, is the most
inclusive and institutionally mature regional economic
organization in the wider Black Sea area. It seeks to
promote enhanced cooperation among its member
States in many areas and to ensure peace and stability
in the Black Sea region. In recent years, the wider
Black Sea area has attracted considerable attention as
an energy and transport hub between Europe and Asia.
Hence, the activity of BSEC has increased, which is
testimony to the importance of regional initiatives,
joint projects and enhanced coalitions as important
assets in addressing regional challenges and achieving
sustainable development.
Under the current Greek chairmanship, which
runs from 1 July until 31 December 2014, the BSEC
also seeks to enhance its support-building capabilities
and economic cooperation with other regional and
international organizations, while at the same time
advancing the emergence of the organization as the
appropriate forum for cooperation through concrete
project implementation in the Black Sea region. In
that respect, the BSEC reaffirms its commitment to
strengthening its cooperation with the United Nations
and the specialized agencies in fields of work that are
of common interest to both organizations.
That cooperation will be instrumental in bringing
the wider Black Sea area closer to its neighbours and

14-61840

11/11/2014

the world, and will encourage concrete efforts, common
initiatives and the implementation of joint projects.
To that effect, priority areas already existing within
BSEC — such as the environment, transport, energy,
institutional reform, good governance, trade, economic
development, agriculture and the fight against
organized crime — constitute the necessary basis for
developing additional joint projects in the region.
In conclusion, I would like to express the sincere
hope that this year’s draft resolution will be adopted
without a vote, as has been the case in past years. I also
express my conviction that, once adopted, it will further
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and the BSEC, thus contributing to the promotion of
the principles and objectives of the United Nations
and the purposes and goals of the Black Sea Economic
Cooperation Organization.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia to introduce draft resolution
A/69/L.15.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Malaysia, as Chair of
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), has
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.15,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization.”
The objective of the draft resolution is to ensure
that the important Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty (CTBT) issue remains on the agenda of the
General Assembly. That is particularly necessary in the
light of the crucial work being carried out by the CTBT
verification regime in the fields of nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation.
My delegation would like to thank Mr. Randy
Bell, Director of the CTBTO International Data
Centre (IDC), for the comprehensive and informative
briefing that he made earlier in relation to the report
on the work of the CTBTO Preparatory Commission
(see A/69/164). We would also like to express our
appreciation to the previous Executive Secretary of the
CTBTO Preparatory Commission, Mr. Tibor Tóth, for
his good work. Malaysia takes note of the report of the
Secretary-General on cooperation between the United
Nations and the CTBTO Preparatory Commission (see
A/69/228).

A/69/PV.48

The CTBT is one of the most important multilateral
instruments needed for the advancement of international
peace and security, as it establishes an international
norm on nuclear testing in all environments, whether
for military or civilian purposes. The Preparatory
Commission therefore plays a vital role in strengthening
the CTBT verification regime in preparation for the
Treaty’s entry into force and in promoting the Treaty’s
universality.
A key element of the CTBT verification regime is the
Vienna-based International Data Centre, which collects
and processes monitoring data from the International
Monitoring System (IMS). At present, around 300
stations worldwide transmit information to the IDC,
providing the IMS with a truly global reach. In addition
to enhancing the detection of nuclear explosions, that
flow of data will also benefit disaster mitigation and
scientific research. That illustrates how the work of
the CTBTO Preparatory Commission has spillover
benefits, and my delegation calls for the international
community to continue to support that infrastructure.
On the universality of the CTBT, my delegation
believes that positive developments on that track would
provide much-needed momentum towards a successful
outcome of the upcoming 2015 Review Conference of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
In that regard, we welcome the Republic of the Congo
as the one hundred and sixty-third State to ratify the
CTBT, bringing the total number of State signatories
to 183. We continue to urge countries, especially those
listed in annex 2, to sign and ratify the Treaty at the
earliest opportunity to ensure its entry into force.
In the light of the important work carried out by the
CTBTO Preparatory Commission, Malaysia reaffirms
our appreciation and full support to the Commission’s
Executive Secretary, Mr. Lassina Zerbo, and the efforts
of the Provisional Technical Secretariat.
In that connection, Malaysia is pleased to submit
draft resolution A/69/L.15 for the consideration of
the General Assembly. We would like to invite all
delegations to demonstrate their support by sponsoring
the draft resolution. They can do so by approaching
Secretariat officials in the Hall or at the General
Assembly Affairs Branch office in the Secretariat
Building. As in previous years, we hope that the draft
resolution will continue to enjoy the consensus and
support of all Member States.

14-6184011/30

A/69/PV.48

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands to introduce draft
resolution A/69/L.16.
Mr. Beenen (Netherlands): I have the honour to
take the floor to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.16,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. The Netherlands, which is host country to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), does so on behalf of approximately nearly 40
sponsors. The aim of the biennial draft resolution is
to highlight the importance of continued cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW.
The OPCW contributes to international peace and
security by verifying the destruction of chemical weapon
stockpiles, by working, through industry inspections, to
prevent the re-emergence of chemical weapons and by
promoting the peaceful use of chemistry for activities
not prohibited by the Chemical Weapons Convention
through, inter alia, international cooperation and
assistance. For the past year, the United Nations and the
OPCW have been cooperating effectively with regard
to the elimination of the chemical weapons programme
of the Syrian Arab Republic.
At present, 190 States are party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention and thus are members of the
OPCW. There is good hope that further steps towards
universalization will be taken in the near future. The
OPCW is preparing to commemorate, on 22 April 2015,
the one hundredth anniversary of the first large-scale
use of chemical weapons, at Ypres, Belgium.
The draft resolution makes reference to those
events, in addition to taking note of the annual reports of
the OPCW. It is our hope that, as on previous occasions,
the draft resolution will be adopted by consensus, as
it is a factual and rather technical text. That might not
be the case, as we were informed this morning. We are
confident that the draft text in front of the Assembly,
which is general in nature and factual, commands the
largest possible support from the General Assembly,
and we look forward to the Assembly’s support for the
text as it is.
Mr. Boubacar (Mauritania) (spoke in Arabic):
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(A/69/228).
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union is founded on the Charter of the

12/30

11/11/2014

United Nations, in particular Chapter VIII, which
focuses on cooperation with regional organizations.
The partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union is not new. In recent years, it has grown
and improved in various areas, including in the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, mediation, electoral assistance
and institution-building, which have greatly enhanced
the cooperation between the two organizations. I would
like to reaffirm the need to continue that cooperation
through the provision of resources, exchanges of
experience and the strengthening of human capacities
in the African Union.
The positive impact of the partnership between
the two organizations, as exemplified in the support
for peace and stability on the African continent, is a
clear indication of the usefulness and effectiveness
of that cooperation. Positive relations between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and the continued consultations
between the two bodies are also a clear expression of the
intention of both organizations to promote institutional
cooperation between them.
As we are discussing cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, I would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that strengthening the
relationship between the African Union and the United
Nations is now more urgent than ever, considering
the great challenges facing the African continent. In
addition to security and development challenges, the
African Union is now prey to the scourge of a ghastly
epidemic that has taken many lives and that requires the
international community to shoulder its responsibility
side by side with Africa. The Ebola epidemic is
an international threat that Africa cannot confront
alone. Therefore, the international community must
stand together with Africa by providing material and
equipment support in order to contain the epidemic.
We value and appreciate the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral in creating the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response as a provisional step aimed
at providing assistance to confront the Ebola epidemic,
and we emphasize the importance of cooperation
between United Nations agencies and the affected
countries. We call upon the international community
to provide all the forms of support necessary for those
States.
The African Group highly values the various forms
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, especially concerning the maintenance

14-61840

11/11/2014

of peace and the settlement of conflict, in addition to
social and economic cooperation. We also reaffirm
that there are various opportunities to strengthen and
deepen that cooperation, and we expect there to be
more next year when the post-2015 development agenda
is adopted. The adoption of the new agenda will be a
new opportunity to deepen all forms of cooperation,
especially in the economic field, between the two
organizations. In that context, the African Group
reaffirms the need for a strategic approach and vision,
because the difficult conditions throughout the world
make it important and necessary to build relations
between the two organizations on the basis of clearly
defined principles and priorities and the flexible and
creative implementation of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, including consultations before
decision-making and the sharing of responsibilities.
The nature of international challenges today require
greater cooperation between the United Nations and
other international bodies and between it and regional
organizations in dealing with the security, economic and
development dimensions of various regional conflicts.
The regional nature of current conflicts has increased
the importance of regional organizations, given their
knowledge of the specific details of the conflicts and
crises.
Along with the productive cooperation between the
two organizations, we reiterate that African needs and
interests should be taken into consideration, because
they cannot be separated from the comprehensive
reform of the Security Council. That would end the
historical harm inflicted upon Africa in terms of the
membership and structure of the Security Council. The
African Group will return to the General Assembly
with regard to the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and Africa before the end
of this session.
We look forward to having this debate as a
contribution to the promotion of the ongoing partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union,
because that partnership plays a crucial role in the
success of our joint efforts to promote international
peace and security and to fulfil the legitimate aspirations
of all nations to security and sustainable development.
Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): The
collaboration between the United Nations and regional
organizations has grown in importance in recent years.
With growing demand for support before, during and

A/69/PV.48

after conflicts and with parallel increasing pressure
on budgets, strong partnerships and a well-thought-out
division of labour among various actors have become
ever more necessary.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) is the world’s largest regional security
organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations and one of the main partners of the
United Nations. Based on Switzerland’s experience as
Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE, I would like to make
some remarks on the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OSCE. Switzerland has made the
strengthening of this cooperation one of its priorities
during its chairmanship. The Secretary-General of the
United Nations has also placed similar emphasis on this
important partnership.
The United Nations and the OSCE are connected
through a long-standing and successful record of
cooperation, which includes regular exchanges at
all levels in numerous areas. The statement made by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon before the OSCE
Permanent Council on 4 November, at the invitation of
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office Didier Burkhalter, is but
the most recent evidence thereof.
The two organizations have been cooperating
closely on regional issues for several years now.
Throughout South-East Europe, OSCE field operations
coordinate their activities with United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes. In Kosovo, where the
OSCE Mission is part of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, the OSCE has
taken over the monitoring of and provision of support
to non-majority mechanisms at the municipal level,
thereby contributing to early-warning and conflictprevention efforts on the ground.
Cooperation between the OSCE and the United
Nations is also necessary and useful for all actors
in Ukraine. The daily reports from the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission are complemented by
comprehensive monthly reports from the United
Nations Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine.
Furthermore, the United Nations has provided
operational support to OSCE mediation efforts by
putting at its disposal members of the Standby Team
of Mediation Experts. The United Nations also has
the lead on humanitarian issues, while the OSCE has
taken on new tasks in the area of ceasefire-monitoring.

14-6184013/30

A/69/PV.48

The two organizations’ activities thus complement and
reinforce each other.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the OSCE extends to thematic areas. This includes
the strategic partnership between the OSCE and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
in the area of organized crime and counter-terrorism,
in the framework of which the OSCE supports the
implementation of United Nations anti-terrorism
instruments. Thanks that that partnership, the
ratification rate in the OSCE region has increased from
65 per cent in 2001 to almost 85 per cent this year. The
OSCE also collaborates closely with UNODC in the field
of combating corruption and money-laundering. Joint
workshops and training sessions are being conducted
in the OSCE region for public officials and civil-society
and private-sector representatives, in order to raise
awareness of and facilitate the implementation of the
United Nations Convention against Corruption.
Another important area is mediation. In order to
strengthen cooperation with the United Nations, the
OSCE Conflict Prevention Centre completed a work
plan with the United Nations Mediation Support Unit
in June. In addition, regular exchanges take place at
the strategic and operational level. That partnership
combines the international and global expertise of
the United Nations with the OSCE’s in-depth local
and regional knowledge. This represents a valuable
combination of the two organizations’ strengths
and clearly illustrates the tremendous potential of
partnerships under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Based on Switzerland’s experience in its
Chairmanship of the OSCE, we are convinced that it is
in the interest of both the United Nations and the OSCE
to further nurture and strengthen the cooperation
between the two organizations. The United Nations
peace operations review announced by the SecretaryGeneral will focus, inter alia, on partnerships. That
review will provide an opportunity to reflect on the role
of regional organizations such as the OSCE.
Furthermore, the OSCE has long-standing
experience in several areas covered by the post-2015
agenda and could therefore provide input to current
discussions and contribute to the implementation of a
number of initiatives, including in the area of disaster
risk reduction and water. The current Swiss OSCE
Chairmanship and the incoming Serbian Chairmanship

14/30

11/11/2014

have both put the topic of water on the list of priorities
of the OSCE agenda this year and next year. Various
events have been held throughout the year on the
topic of water diplomacy, best practices in the field
of water management and water cooperation. Next
year the incoming Chairmanship will dedicate its
Economic and Environmental Forum process cycle
to water governance. The United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe has been closely associated
with most meetings.
The promotion of peaceful and inclusive societies
is another area in which the OSCE has long-standing
implementation experience. Mechanisms such as
the High Commissioner on National Minorities are
instruments to strengthen human rights and could
thus play an important role in the implementation of
the goal of peaceful and inclusive societies. These
instruments could also provide a basis for a discussion
on the Secretary-General’s Human Rights Up Front
initiative, which addresses a shared priority of both
organizations. An exchange of information between
the United Nations and the OSCE on these issues and
other topics of general interest would therefore be most
welcome.
Switzerland will remain committed to strong
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE.
Mrs. Borges (Timor-Leste): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries (CPLP), whose member States are Angola,
Brazil, Cabo Verde, Equatorial Guinea, GuineaBissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe
and my own country, Timor-Leste. I wish to remind
members of the General Assembly of the relevance of
the Portuguese language in international affairs, as it
unifies 240 million people in nine countries and on
four continents, and to highlight the CPLP’s political
commitment to promoting the use of Portuguese in
international and regional organizations, including
in the United Nations and its agencies, funds and
programmes.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the cooperation between the United Nations and the
CPLP (see A/69/228), which reflects the positive effects
of the joint actions that have materialized over the past
two years. Resolution 67/252, sponsored by 75 Member
States and adopted by the Assembly at its sixty-seventh
session, in 2013, noted with appreciation that this
dynamism also reflected the strengthened partnerships

14-61840

11/11/2014

among the member States of the Community and the
United Nations, including its agencies.
The United Nations system continued to be an
important partner, actively pursuing its cooperative
ties with our Community through concerted political
and diplomatic actions. Similarly, that cooperation is
expressly visible in several vital areas that contribute
greatly to the development of our countries, particularly
in the sectors of human rights, health, education, science
and culture, food and agriculture, public administration,
and science and technology, among others.
One example of such partnerships is the support
provided by the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for the establishment of common measures to
prevent and combat corruption by civil-servant agents
in international commercial transactions. as well as a
declaration and action plan on trafficking persons in
the Community. Another example is the Portuguese
Unit of United Nations Radio, which continues to play a
fundamental role in facilitating daily coverage of issues
of concern to the United Nations and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
welcomes the establishment earlier this year of a
legitimate Government in Guinea-Bissau and notes
with satisfaction the positive steps already taken by
the democratically elected authorities there, remaining
mindful of the considerable challenges that still
lie ahead. As part of its political coordination, the
Community and its member States are deeply involved
in coordinating efforts with the United Nations and
other international partners to support the priorities set
by the Government, with a view to promoting stability,
respect for human rights, democratic institutions and
the rule of law, and social and economic development. In
that regard, we recall Security Council resolution 2157
(2014) and the importance of convening an international
pledging conference on the recovery of Guinea-Bissau,
to which the CPLP remains fully committed, as well
as the need to renew and strengthen the mandate of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
In that regard, the relaunching of the International
Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau is an essential
instrument for the effective coordination of international
assistance in the country. The International Contact
Group would also have the role of assisting with
the organization of the pledging conference and of

A/69/PV.48

supporting the security sector reform and national
reconciliation efforts. The Contact Group is currently
co-chaired by the CPLP and the Economic Community
of West African States and will hold its tenth meeting
in New York on 18 November.
The Community also welcomes the appointment
of the former President of Sao Tome and Principe,
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Guinea-Bissau. We acknowledge
and congratulate the former Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. José Ramos-Horta, for
his achievements in Guinea-Bissau and welcome his
appointment to chair the High-Level Independent
Panel on Peace Operations, which will examine both
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
In July of this year, Timor-Leste hosted the CPLP
Heads of State and Government Summit in Dili under
the theme “CPLP and Globalization”, where the leaders,
inter alia, recognized the need for a strategy on economic
and entrepreneurial cooperation and reiterated their
commitment to reinforcing the human right to adequate
food in national and community policies. At the Summit,
we were also pleased to welcome Equatorial Guinea as
our ninth member, and Turkey, Georgia, Namibia and
Japan as associate members. I would like to take this
opportunity to inform the Assembly of the intention of
the CPLP member States to submit, during the current
session of the General Assembly, a draft resolution
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the CPLP”, for which we again respectfully seek the
Assembly’s support, which we were able to secure at
the sixty-seventh session.
I wish to conclude by reiterating the determination
of the CPLP to strengthen its partnership with the United
Nations in the pursuit of common objectives, including
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals, as well as our commitment to continuing to play
a positive role in shaping the post-2015 development
agenda of the United Nations under the framework
reached at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to express our
appreciation to you, Sir, for convening today’s joint
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on this agenda item (A/69/228).

14-6184015/30

A/69/PV.48

While my delegation aligns itself with the statement
made by the representative of Mauritania, who spoke
on behalf of the Group of African States, I now wish to
make a statement on behalf of Ethiopia in my national
capacity.
The cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations has become
increasingly critical in the maintenance of international
peace and security. I would like to take this opportunity
to commend you, Mr. President, for making this issue
one of the priorities of your presidency and to welcome
your intention to convene a high-level thematic debate
on strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the second
quarter of 2015.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
regional arrangements is obviously governed by Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, but the nature,
scale and scope of that cooperation has evolved over the
past decades. The ever-changing international peace
and security environment in particular has made that
cooperation absolutely imperative in addressing the new
and complex challenges that we face — the emergence
of new conflicts and relapses in post-conflict countries,
the threat of terrorism and extremism, the spread of
small arms and light weapons, and the danger posed by
pandemics like Ebola, among many other challenges.
Regional organizations no doubt have the
comparative advantage of geographic proximity in
addressing some of those challenges. They could
therefore play, and are actually playing, a meaningful
role in that regard. We are pleased to note that the
United Nations has recognized that fact, showing
thereby a greater willingness and commitment to work
with regional organizations and coordinating efforts
with them in the advancement of international peace
and security. That is indeed a step in the right direction,
and we fully support it.
We are encouraged to note that the cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
its constituent bodies has been further intensified in
recent years on a wide range of issues related to the
maintenance of international peace and security. In
that context, we welcome the regular interaction and
dialogue between the Security Council and the African
Peace and Security Council. We hope that cooperation
will be further enhanced and strengthened through the
adoption of an innovative and flexible approach and the

16/30

11/11/2014

effective utilization of comparative advantages in the
advancement of common objectives.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in the area of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding has also expanded and deepened in
recent years. We hope that the comprehensive review of
peacekeeping and the peacebuilding architecture will
take into account the views and concerns of the African
Union, which is playing an increasingly important role
in those areas, in collaboration with the United Nations.
I would like to take this opportunity to commend
the Secretary-General for his commitment to
strengthening the relations and dialogue between
the United Nations and subregional organizations in
Africa in order to ensure a coherent and coordinated
approach, not only to peace and security but also to
development in the continent. In that connection, we
express satisfaction with his visit to the Horn of Africa
subregion, leading a high-level delegation composed of
the President of the World Bank and senior officials of
the African Union, the European Union and the African
Development Bank, as part of his trip to various
regions of the continent. We also welcome the outcome
of his dialogue with the Council of Ministers of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the announcement of the Horn of Africa Initiative.
Finally, we strongly believe that the cooperation
and partnership between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations have become so
much more vital than ever before, and we have full
confidence that greater efforts will be deployed in that
regard. Strengthening regional organizations such as
the African Union and subregional organizations such
as IGAD must be part of those efforts. Global and
regional challenges have become more complex and
more daunting. We must all rise to the occasion.
Mr. Lupan (Republic of Moldova): We welcome
and support the adoption of draft resolution A/69/L.14,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”, to
be adopted today by the General Assembly. Promoting
multilateral economic cooperation and sustainable
development is our concrete contribution to peace,
stability and prosperity in the Black Sea region, thus
preserving the principles proclaimed in the Charter of
the United Nations.
There is a shared understanding of the importance
of interaction between the Black Sea Economic

14-61840

11/11/2014

Cooperation Organization (BSEC) and the United
Nations and its agencies. We consider it a valuable
opportunity for cooperation, with the potential of
contributing further to the economic and political
stability of the Black Sea region.
In the first half of 2015, the Republic of Moldova
will take over the Chairmanship-in-Office of the BSEC.
In that context, the Republic of Moldova will continue to
be firmly engaged in contributing to the strengthening
of the dialogue between the BSEC and the United
Nations and its agencies. In practical terms, there are
vast possibilities for valuable interaction between the
two organizations in the fields of the development of
economic cooperation and trade in the BSEC area,
sustainable energy, transport, entrepreneurship, health,
environment and other areas already agreed upon in
the BSEC, as mentioned by our colleague currently
chairing the BSEC.
During our chairmanship, we will endeavour to
hold consultations with both the BSEC secretariat
and United Nations agencies in order to initiate joint
programmes pertaining to the fields of common interest
to both organizations.
Mr. Mnatsakanyan (Armenia): At the outset, we
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on the
ongoing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations (A/69/228). The report
provides a good overview of the depth of cooperation
and mutually reinforcing activities of the United Nations
and its regional partners embracing the full mandate of
the United Nations, on the one hand, and the respective
mandated areas of competence at the regional and
subregional levels, including, most important, peace,
security, development and human rights.
No country can be effective in pursuing its
national agenda without engaging with others. That
is particularly obvious for countries with modest
capacities. The regional and subregional levels of
cooperation provide an effective platform for pursuing
specific common objectives for countries bound by
common security goals, common values or simply by
geographic proximity. In the context of the present
debate, cooperation at the global level, here in the
United Nations and elsewhere, provides a critical forum
for interregional engagement.
As
a
member
of
numerous
regional
organizations — including the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the

A/69/PV.48

Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), the
Council of Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
Organization — Armenia benefits greatly from the
institutional strength and effectiveness of the European
regional and subregional landscape of cooperation,
including in the fields of political dialogue, security,
human rights, democratic transformation and the
strengthening of the rule of law, trade and economy,
culture and youth.
In our national context, the peaceful resolution
of conflicts on the basis of the norms and principles
of international law without exception is of special
significance, given the ongoing negotiations for the
peaceful settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict
within the internationally supported format of the
OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship. That format is
by far the most effective regional arrangement for that
particular case for several reasons, not least of which is
its capacity to sustain focus on a compromise solution
and to defuse tensions and escalation. Consolidated
support for those negotiations from the international
community, including the United Nations and its
Secretary-General, is critical in deflecting attempts to
pursue mediation shopping and lopsided, often highly
biased, definitions of the causes and consequences of
the conflict. Armenia welcomed the statement by the
Secretary-General in August in support of the OSCE
Minsk Group Co-Chairs, which urged respect for the
ceasefire agreement and commitment to immediate
de-escalation and continuing dialogue in the pursuit of
a rapid and peaceful political solution in the light of the
surge in tensions at that time.
As a member of the CSTO, Armenia will
continue to deliver on its commitment to forge
stronger cooperation with the United Nations so as to
contribute to international peace and to United Nations
peacekeeping capacities. As a troop-contributing State,
Armenia has gathered considerable national experience
from its engagements in NATO-led peacekeeping
operations in Afghanistan, Kosovo and, previously,
in Iraq. Armenia will soon acquire experience in a
United Nations-led operation in Lebanon. Armenia
has been investing its experience in strengthening the
preparedness for peacekeeping within the CSTO. In that
context, we welcome the expanding cooperation of the
United Nations with the CSTO, including between their
respective secretariats. We also thank all partners who

14-6184017/30

A/69/PV.48

11/11/2014

will support the draft resolution on United NationsCSTO cooperation (A/69/L.13).

Mauritania and Morocco, on behalf of the African and
Arab Groups, respectively.

Armenia is a proud member of the Council of
Europe, the oldest European organization based on
common values of democracy, human rights and the
rule of law. For us, the Council of Europe has been a
principal body in assisting Armenia in the reform process
aimed at consolidating national legal foundations and
establishing sustainable democratic institutions. That
cooperation successfully continues to this date in the
form of legal advice and the practical implementation
of specific action plans. Such cooperation is of course
complemented by cooperation with other relevant
organizations, specifically the OSCE and the United
Nations. The European Union is a principal contributor
to the implementation of our reform agenda.

The success of the efforts of the United Nations
would not have been possible without the direct support
of regional stakeholders and the regional organizations
that represent them. Synergy and coherence among
international, regional and subregional organizations
are a prerequisite for the success of peace and security
efforts.

The existing resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Council of Europe (resolution
67/83) outlines the broad scope of the mutually
reinforcing mandates of both organizations. It also
serves a useful guide for augmenting the benefits
for member States, benefiting from the respective
expertise of the two organizations. At the same time,
Armenia is sensitive to situations where actions by the
two organizations may result in duplication and undue
competition in delivering assistance to beneficiaries.
Armenia attaches equally high importance to
its work within all other regional and subregional
organizations of which it is a member or with which
it has close cooperation. Any intergovernmental
organization is an aggregate of its member States, able
and willing to pursue a political dialogue and common
goals for the benefit of their national and common
interests. The present international agenda, with its
proliferating threats, disagreements and conflicts, calls
for particularly concerted efforts to redouble work
towards common solutions and sustainable dialogue.
Smaller States are particularly vulnerable and
sensitive to situations in which disagreements at the
regional and global level risk leading to the emergence
of dividing lines. Armenia is not an exception to such
vulnerabilities and sensitivities. Cooperation and
dialogue among States, from the subregional to the
regional and global levels, have been and remain the
modus operandi for the sustainability of peace, security
and cooperation. This agenda item is as relevant as ever.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): I would like to associate my
statement with those delivered by the representatives of

18/30

Full regional, subregional and national participation
in Security Council peace and security efforts is
necessary so as to provide a sufficient level of ownership
and familiarity to regional parties to conflicts. The
engagement of the relevant regional organizations is
crucial for the success of United Nations peace efforts
in the various stages of conflicts, including early
warning, conflict prevention and mediation, as well as
post-conflict peacebuilding.
There is a need to expand African capacity to
achieve United Nations goals. That could be achieved
through greater streamlining and coordination between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU), in
accordance with the Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union, which was signed
in 2006 by the United Nations and the AU. There is an
urgent need to fully operationalize the AU Peace and
Security Architecture, especially the Continental Early
Warning System.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States is also indispensable. The
establishment of the mission of the Joint Special
Representative for Syria is an example of the potential
for cooperation between the two organizations that
should extend to conflict prevention and resolution.
Such cooperation can also help to find lasting solutions
to the two major chronic problems of the region that
negatively impact regional and international peace and
security, namely, the Palestinian question and the issue
of nuclear weapons in the Middle East.
When it comes to peacekeeping, a shared role for
the United Nations and regional organizations is both
desirable and achievable. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur stands out as
the most prominent example of cooperation between
the United Nations and a regional organization in the
field of peacekeeping. We should have more hybrid
operations with a predominantly African character.
The Prodi panel’s 2008 report on African Union-United

14-61840

11/11/2014

Nations cooperation (see A/63/666) recommended the
establishment of a multi-donor trust fund to support
peacekeeping in Africa based on African ownership.
Five years on, that recommendation has yet to be
implemented. That call remains valid — indeed, it is
more valid today than ever.
Mr. Mbalati (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his report on cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
(A/69/228). Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations has long been
central to the work of the United Nations. That derives
from the fundamental understanding that the United
Nations would have limited success in implementing its
mandate without close cooperation with regional and
other organizations. Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and other organizations should be
based on the principle of subsidiarity and on the firm
foundation of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, as reaffirmed by numerous resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council.
My delegation welcomes the report of the SecretaryGeneral. We concur with the Secretary-General that
relationships between the United Nations and regional
and other organizations have deepened and expanded the
activities of the Organization, from peace and security
and human rights to economic and social affairs,
development and humanitarian issues. In that regard,
my delegation underscores the importance of the United
Nations continuing to strengthen its partnerships with
regional and subregional organizations as a means to
implement its mandate.
My delegation notes with appreciation the improved
cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union (AU). We are pleased that the United NationsAfrican Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security
has continued to meet twice a year. Such interaction
should be encouraged so that both organizations can
develop a common and deeper understanding of the
root causes of conflict in Africa and develop common
solutions to our particular security challenges. We
believe that the cooperation between the United Nations
and AU should draw on the comparative strengths and
advantages of each organization, as is illustrated in the
AU’s ability to mobilize quickly into conflict areas in
order to create stability and pave the way for longerterm United Nations missions.

A/69/PV.48

As part of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), South Africa has noted the recent
interactive dialogue, held in Namibia in July between
the United Nations and SADC, which was convened
with a view to sharing regional good practices with
respect to conflict prevention and mediation. Such
interactions are to be encouraged and will go a long
way towards strengthening the partnership between the
United Nations and SADC, especially in strengthening
subregional capacities in the areas of electoral support
and conflict prevention and mediation.
The Secretary-General’s report significantly
points out that regional and subregional organizations
are distinct and are often confronted with different
challenges, where a one-size-fits-all approach to such
cooperation would not be conducive to success. A case
in point is the SADC-International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region decision on the establishment of a
Force Intervention Brigade under the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to neutralize all negative forces.
The results are evident, as there is relative stability and
the lives of the population in eastern Congo have greatly
improved. We acknowledge that such arrangements are
exceptional rather than the norm.
Despite all of the positive developments I have
mentioned, we have seen no such approach in the
Middle East. There has been swift international
reaction to some situations, while such cooperation is
lacking with respect to others, and as a result, there has
not been significant movement towards resolving those
conflicts.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Arab League on the Middle East peace process has been
most disappointing. The Arab League has consistently
played a significant role in seeking a resolution to the
conflict, including through the adoption of the Arab
Peace Initiative. Unfortunately, the Security Council
has yet to provide effective and meaningful support to
the League’s efforts.
My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General’s
recommendations that the United Nations should
develop context-specific approaches to cooperation
with its regional and subregional partners, taking into
account the diversity and priorities of each region, and
should explore ways in which cooperation can be better
articulated at the strategic and technical levels.

14-6184019/30

A/69/PV.48

The President: I now give the floor to the Observer
of the League of Arab States.
Mr. Fathalla (League of Arab States) (spoke in
Arabic): As this is the first time that I take the floor
during this session, I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, upon your election to preside over the General
Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his leadership in
guiding the work of the Organization and to recognize
my colleagues from the Arab States.
The League of Arab States was established in 1945,
and its cooperation with the United Nations has been
regulated by an agreement signed between the two
organizations in 1989. Since then, our cooperation has
taken on various forms, adapting to each change that
has occurred. The two organizations must take into
account, in their cooperation, the range of changes
that take place, such as those in the Middle East since
2010. We must take into account the many problems
resulting from those changes, particularly in the area
of humanitarian assistance. Those changes require
that we adapt our methods of cooperation between
the two organizations to suit the task, whether it be
humanitarian assistance, assistance to refugees or
assistance to victims of war, conflict and natural
disasters. The efforts of both organizations must also
deal with peacebuilding and capacity-building in the
civilian sector and civil institutions. After war and
crises, countries pass through sensitive stages in the
post-conflict phase, and if the assistance provided to
them is not adapted to the situation, they risk relapsing
into conflict.
We addressed this agenda item most recently two
years ago. I will give the Assembly a brief overview of
some of the projects and types of cooperation in which
the two organizations engage.
In a sectoral cooperation meeting held in Cairo on
11 and 12 June 2013, the League of Arab States and
the United Nations addressed building cooperation
in order to reinforce post-conflict civilian capacities.
That meeting included the participation of Sarah Cliffe,
United Nations Special Adviser and Assistant SecretaryGeneral of Civilian Capacities. The Arab League,
working with the United Nations, has decided to deal
with the issue in the framework of a comprehensive and
integrated vision. It has therefore established three key
approaches that are complementary and parallel.

20/30

11/11/2014

The first approach has to do with strengthening
the relations between the two organizations in order
to exchange experience and information and to
determine needs and establish frameworks that will
allow for complementarity in the provision of services
to countries in the region. The second approach is to
interact with countries in the region to help them build
their own capacities and identify their needs so that they
will be able to fulfil their role in conflict prevention
in the region. The third approach is one that we would
like to implement in cooperation with civil society
organizations that are active in the areas of security and
environmental development. It aims to strengthen civil
society during the post-conflict phase and strengthen
the primacy of the rule of law and accountability, as
well as to take measures that will prevent a resumption
of conflicts.
In the past couple of years, the Secretariat’s
Department of Political Affairs, together with the
United Nations Development Programme, has helped
strengthen cooperation with the League of Arab States
through training sessions in the context of the Building
Resources in Democracy, Governance and Elections
programme. We have also received advice on the
establishment of electoral databases for the League of
Arab States. In that context, the Department of Political
Affairs is now implementing a project aimed at assisting
the League of Arab States in capacity-building in the
areas of conflict prevention, arbitration and mediation.
Those issues were debated during the twelfth meeting
between the two organizations, held in Geneva in June.
It would be useful to note that part of the meeting
on cooperation was dedicated to the assessment of
projects that have been conducted in the context of our
cooperation. Those projects resulted from our eleventh
meeting, which was held in Vienna in 2012.
Another part of the meeting on cooperation was
dedicated to thinking about how the shared work
would be handled by four committees — the political,
economic, environmental, and cultural and social
committees. Many general decisions were prepared
during the meeting and many recommendations were
adopted at the general meeting in 2014. Those efforts
led to a new model for cooperation — one that serves
as a reference for the shared projects and activities in
all areas for the next few years.
It would be difficult to cite here all the decisions
adopted and activities and recommendations put
forth in the most recent conference on cooperation,

14-61840

11/11/2014

but I would like to say that, in addition to the
recommendations adopted on maintaining international
peace and security — including the situation in the
Middle East with regard to the Palestinian cause and
security in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Libya, Yemen, the
Sudan and Somalia — recommendations were also
made with regard to the areas of intellectual property,
the protection of heritage, women’s rights, climate
change programmes, scientific research policy, post2015 development programmes, the rights of disabled
persons and programmes on the quality of education.
We also decided to appoint a special coordinator for all
Arab organizations and the United Nations to improve
communication among the various bodies. Moreover,
we agreed to appoint two coordinators for each of the
four committees in order to ensure follow-up to the
agreements commonly reached.
The Office for Disarmament Affairs participated
in three consultative meetings with the League of
Arab States and member States regarding the Helsinki
conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. A number of member States of the League
of Arab States participated in regional workshops,
including in Pretoria in 2012, Addis Ababa in 2013 and
Astana in 2014. In June 2013, the League of Arab States
secretariat and the Office for Disarmament Affairs held
a two-day joint conference on small arms and light
weapons.
The League of Arab States is preparing to enter
the second stage of its implementation of the Crisis
Response Centre and the Early Warning System, a
project that was established in cooperation with the
European Union and the United Nations Development
Programme. We would like to note the ongoing
productive cooperation between the League and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
during the second stage of the project. I also underscore
the importance of establishing an Arab mechanism for
humanitarian affairs.
We firmly believe in the role of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) in providing protection,
assistance and essential services to Palestine refugees
until we have a just and lasting solution to that issue.
We also have concerns with regard to the difficulties
encountered by UNRWA on account of the increased
demand for its services and the deteriorating social,
economic and humanitarian conditions in the region.

A/69/PV.48

Those difficulties make UNRWA’s task in the five
regions it serves more difficult.
In response to that situation, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States co-chaired a special meeting of
a group of supporters of UNRWA at the sixty-eighth
session of the General Assembly, which focused on the
consolidation of the contributions of Arab countries
to the UNRWA regular budget. I would also note that
the League’s Secretary-General hosts an annual highlevel strategic meeting of directors of education and
other officials and civil society representatives from
UNRWA host States. During those meetings we talk
about services for Palestinian refugees to mitigate
their suffering and to allow them to have a sustainable
subsistence.
With regard to the protection of children in the
Arab world, the League of Arab States and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict met on 22 September on the margins
of a high-level meeting during the sixty-ninth session
of the General Assembly and signed an agreement
on children who are victims of armed conflicts. The
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations also signed a
cooperation agreement. This is an important stage for
preparing the Arab world to help those children so that
they can live in conditions of peace, given the difficult
conditions that we have seen in our part of the world for
several years.
In May 2013, the secretariat of the League of Arab
States, UN-Women and the Arab Labour Council
worked together on a strategy for peace and security.
An important stage of their work was educating
officials and all stakeholders regarding international
and regional decisions, with a view to helping them
implement the adopted texts and to encouraging them
to renew their commitments in that area.
At the beginning of this year, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the League also held a conference on the
protection of human rights and the strengthening of
those rights in the region. Subjects under consideration
included the ongoing cooperation between the Office
of the Commissioner and the secretariat with regard
to technical advice, working methods and the Arab
Human Rights Tribunal, established by a decision of
the Arab Summit in Doha in March 2013.

14-6184021/30

A/69/PV.48

I have noted just a number of aspects of the
cooperation between our two organizations in
the past two years. That cooperation is solid and
supported. It involves a number of projects in various
areas — combating drug trafficking, crime, corruption,
terrorism and human trafficking. We also cooperate in
the legal, political, economic, social and cultural areas.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the Moroccan
Ambassador, Omar Hilale, who presented draft
resolution A/69/L.9. I join others in the request that the
draft resolution be adopted by consensus.
The President: In accordance with General
Assembly resolution 54/5 of 8 October 1999, I now give
the floor to Mr. Victor Tvircun, Secretary General of the
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation.
Mr. Tvircun (Organization of the Black Sea
Economic Cooperation): I am very pleased and
deeply honoured to address the General Assembly os
the representative of the Organization of the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation (BSEC). I wish to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for the invitation and
for his extensive report on the cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
including BSEC (A/69/228). We highly appreciate
that cooperation, and we want to see it enhanced in all
areas of common interest. We are also very glad that
draft resolution A/69/L.14, introduced for adoption
by the General Assembly, both testifies to increased
interaction between our two organizations and provides
useful guidelines for our future common endeavours.
In recent months, our region has been the focus of
international attention, as we have been experiencing
an international crisis, the most significant one in
decades. In the BSEC we hope for a swift normalization
of the situation, and we stay focused on our work, in
the firm belief that our efforts will help enhance what
is positive, dynamic and constructive in the wider
Black Sea region. Promoting multilateral economic
cooperation in accordance with the Charter of the
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
is our concrete contribution to peace, stability and
prosperity, and we consider that in the current situation,
the BSEC’s practical, results-oriented approach has
gained in importance.
We intend to continue in the same mode, with
the valuable and necessary support of all BSEC
member States in order to increase the efficiency
and effectiveness of our organization and to produce

22/30

11/11/2014

tangible results for the benefit of all of the peoples
in our region. In that context, I should like to briefly
inform the General Assembly of some of the BSCE’s
main priorities in the current period.
Our first priority is to accelerate the implementation
of the “BSEC Economic Agenda: Towards an Enhanced
BSEC Partnership”, a strategic document endorsed by
the member States in 2012, reflecting their commitment
to enhancing the economic mission of the BSEC. In that
context, our priority objectives in strategic regional
cooperation fall into various fields of activity, including
transport, institutional renewal and good governance,
trade and economic development, banking and finance,
environmental protection, sustainable development,
and energy, including renewable energy and energy
efficiency.
Our second priority is to proceed with the
activation of a Project Management Unit within the
BSEC Permanent International Secretariat. That
mature initiative is gradually taking shape and will help
improve the organization’s position in the elaboration
of projects, competition for funding and cooperation
with partner organizations in joint activities. Through
the activity of the Project Management Unit, utilizing
human resources already available in the BSEC, we aim
to help in the formulation and elaboration of project
proposals in the areas mentioned and, after endorsement
by our member States, to support their development
and implementation, also through securing funding
from third parties.
A third priority on our agenda is to consolidate
the activities of the BSEC working groups, which
form the core of BSEC functions. Within the same
framework, we aim to increase cooperation with the
BSEC-related bodies, as a necessary step for enhancing
the effectiveness and visibility of our organization. It
must be remembered that the BSEC is a multifaceted
organization that also includes a Parliamentary
Assembly and the BSEC Business Council, the Black
Sea Trade and Development Bank and the International
Centre for Black Sea Studies. It is also through the
activities of its related bodies that the BSEC proves
its usefulness, resilience in the changing political
landscape and ability to promote regional economic
cooperation.
The next objective is to increase cooperation and
coordination with similar regional organizations,
such as the Central European Initiative, the Danube

14-61840

11/11/2014

Commission, the Union for the Mediterranean, the
Baltic Sea Parliamentary Conference and others.
Another objective involves increasing the effectiveness
and efficiency of the BSEC Permanent International
Secretariat. This year marked the twentieth anniversary
since the March 1994 creation of the secretariat as
an institution aimed at furthering the principles and
objectives of the BSEC and providing support to the
organization’s activities.
The BSEC is committed to promoting fruitful
cooperation with the United Nations and its specialized
agencies, in particular to developing practical and
results-oriented projects in areas of common interest.
In that regard, we are very pleased with the increasing
cooperation between BSEC and the following
organizations: the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe (UNECE), the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the International
Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and the World Wildlife Fund. We are similarly
pleased with our working contacts with the World
Health Organization, the World Bank and the World
Tourism Organization, which are aimed at promoting
sustainable development in the Black Sea region.
In that context, we are also very satisfied with
the results of the Black Sea Trade and Investment
Promotion Programme, the first partnership project
between BSEC and UNDP, launched in 2006 with the
support of Greece and Turkey. It is a good example of
concrete cooperation between two organizations. The
relocation of the UNDP Regional Centre to Istanbul
will provide more opportunities for interaction and
enhanced cooperation.
In the field of transport, BSEC is undertaking
measures to improve the road transport of goods, in
close cooperation with the International Road Transport
Union and UNECE. In that context, I want to refer in
particular to the introduction of the International Vehicle
Weight Certificate project, which will significantly
decrease waiting times at the borders of the countries
involved and facilitate the bilateral and transit transport
of goods. With reference to those documents, I would
like to extend special congratulations to the Republic
of Moldova, the first country among the BSEC member
States to introduce that certificate.

A/69/PV.48

Our cooperation with UNECE is particularly well
developed within the framework of the Cooperation
Agreement signed between the two organizations
in 2001. We continue our activities aimed at fully
implementing the 2002 Cooperation Agreement
between BSEC and UNEP and the 1997 Relationship
Agreement between UNIDO and BSEC. We are also
pleased that cooperation between BSEC and the
UNIDO International Centre for Hydrogen Energy
Technologies has been established, with an emphasis
on energy and environment.
In combatting crime, we continue our fruitful
cooperation with UNODC, following the elaboration
and adoption of the 2008 BSEC Regional Action Plan
for Strengthening the Criminal Justice Response to
Trafficking in Persons in the Black Sea Region, within
the framework of a joint BSEC-UNODC project.
This year, we were also able to open a new era
of cooperation with the United Nations specialized
agencies, finalizing the framework for our cooperation
with the World Tourism Organization and signing the
relevant memorandum on the sidelines of the BSEC
Meeting of Ministers of Tourism, organized by the
Hellenic Chairmanship-in-Office on 23 October 2014.
BSEC also became a member of the Group of
Friends of the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations
in 2009. That enabled it to contribute to realizing the
Alliance’s objectives through the promotion of projects
designed to build bridges among diverse cultures and
communities and to foster cross-cultural exchange
and cooperation. In the emerging world landscape,
international organizations, and regional organizations
in particular, are playing an important role. Each have
their own specificities, which are determined by their
respective regions and membership.
I want to take this opportunity to re-emphasize the
importance of our cooperation with the European Union
and to pledge our readiness to take concrete steps for
the development of a mutually beneficial partnership.
I would also like to invite the specialized agencies and
other organizations and programmes of the United
Nations system to strengthen their cooperation with the
Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation
in order to continue programmes and create synergies
aimed at preparing and implementing joint projects.
Before I conclude, I would like to express my thanks
and pay a well-deserved tribute to the Hellenic Republic
for its guidance and support as Chairperson-in-Office

14-6184023/30

A/69/PV.48

of BSEC during the past six months and for preparing
the draft resolution in document A/69/L.14 that this
Assembly is about to adopt. I would also like to express
my deep gratitude to all BSEC member States and to
the other United Nations Member States who have
co-sponsored the draft resolution.
The President: We heave heard the last speaker on
the debate on agenda item 123 and its sub-items (a) to
(y).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/69/L.8, A/69/L. 9, A/69/L.10, A/69/L.12, A/69/L.13,
A/69/L.14 and A/69/L.16.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in explanation
of vote before the vote, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to ten minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Pavlichenko (Ukraine): Before the General
Assembly proceeds to the adoption of draft resolution
A/69/L.10, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Commonwealth of Independent States”,
I would like to make the following statement.
Right from the outset, it has to be stressed that
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) has
demonstrated its complete reluctance and failure to
take appropriate and political measures in response
to the aggression against Ukraine being carried out
by a leading member of that regional organization,
an aggression that has resulted in the occupation of
part of our territory. CIS keeps pretending that no
conflict is being waged by the Russian Federation
against a neighbouring State in brutal violation of
both the Charter of the United Nations and the CIS
Charter. For that reason, we cannot consider CIS as
being able to advance appropriately and effectively the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations in the region, particularly in the context of
Chapter VIII. We would also like to point out that
Ukraine does not coordinate its foreign policy with
that regional organization. Contrary to the language in
the explanatory memorandum accompanying the draft
resolution, which is contained in document A/69/141,
Ukraine is not a member State of the CIS, as we did not
sign and ratify the CIS Charter.
Ukraine did not sign the decision of the Council of
Heads of States of the Commonwealth of Independent
States, adopted on 24 December 1993 in Ashgabat,
concerning certain measures to ensure international

24/30

11/11/2014

recognition of the Commonwealth of Independent
States and its statutory bodies with regard to granting
observer status for the Commonwealth in the General
Assembly. In not signing, Ukraine acted on the basis
of the declaration of 20 December 1991 of Ukraine’s
Verkhovna Rada, its parliament, concerning the
conclusion of the agreement on the Commonwealth of
Independent States, which stated that Ukraine declined
to grant the Commonwealth the status of a subject of
international law.
The delegation of Ukraine would like to draw
attention to the fact that the basic documents of the
Commonwealth of Independent States — that is, the
Agreement on the establishment of the Commonwealth
of Independent States, the Alma-Ata Protocol and
the Charter of the Commonwealth of Independent
States — do not endow the Commonwealth with a status
possessing the features of a subject of international
law. The Commonwealth of Independent States is
a special international interregional formation that
not only lacks a definite status but in fact includes a
military and political alliance established on the basis
of the Collective Security Treaty, signed in Tashkent on
15 May 1992, which binds only some members of the
Commonwealth.
Under those circumstances, Ukraine will abstain
from voting on draft resolution A/69/L.10, specifically
based on the understanding that the Commonwealth of
Independent States, in its cooperation with the United
Nations, legally represents only those countries in
the Commonwealth that have signed and ratified the
Charter of the Commonwealth of Independent States of
22 January 1993.
Taking all of those facts into account, Ukraine
considers that the adoption of draft resolution A/69/L.10
should not be interpreted as recognition of the
Commonwealth as a regional arrangement as defined in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, i.e.
one that can be considered responsible for dealing with
matters relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security, particularly regarding enforcement
action under the authority of the Security Council.
Mr. Ibrahim (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): My delegation would like to speak in
explanation of vote before the vote on draft resolution
A/69/L.16, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons”.

14-61840

11/11/2014

My country, Syria, is a full member of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We attend its meetings and take part in its
discussions, just as other member States do. Since
becoming a member of the OPCW, Syria has abided by
all the rules and requirements governing membership
and by the resolutions of its Executive Council. It has
fulfilled all its obligations before the scheduled deadline
and has cooperated with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Mission for the Elimination of the Chemical Weapons
Programme of the Syrian Arab Republic and with
the OPCW’s team. It has cooperated and coordinated
in every way, despite the fact that the environment
in which it was operating was not ideal, as we are all
aware. The successful and total elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme would not have been
possible without the constructive cooperation of the
Syrian Government.
The preparation of draft resolution A/69/L.16 was
carried out selectively. It is typical of the technical
resolutions that we have voted on regularly in previous
years, except that it now contains a paragraph that was
drafted without consulting us, as would be necessary
and legitimate. That raises questions and doubts
about the intentions of the drafters and sponsors in
targeting Syria and addressing this subject politically
in the General Assembly, as the discussion in the draft
resolution is supposed to be limited exclusively to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Since the draft resolution is supposed to be a purely
technical one, not directed at any particular country,
doing so sets a precedent and intentionally targets my
country, which my Government rejects.
All draft resolutions relating to regional
cooperation are supposed to be free of any mention of
specific States, and the mention of my country in draft
resolution A/69/L.16 raises the question of why my
country, which has cooperated with the international
community to an unprecedented extent, has been thus
targeted. My country therefore reiterates its request that
the politicization of this topic be stopped. There are no
more chemical weapons programmes in my country.
The subject is now over and done with. Syria continues
to cooperate constructively with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and we therefore
see absolutely no reason for the inclusion of paragraph
2 in the draft resolution, since it reflects the subjective
and political targeting of our country and the continued

A/69/PV.48

pursuit of certain countries’ well-known practices. The
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic will accordingly
abstain from voting on draft resolution A/69/L.16.
Mr. Robatjazi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to explain my delegation’s position before the vote
on draft resolution A/69/L.16, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons”.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, as the main victim
of the use of chemical weapons in recent history,
attaches great importance to the full implementation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention. In that context,
Iran has always supported and contributed to the
effective work of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and will continue to do so.
Based on that principled position, my delegation
will vote in favour of draft resolution A/69/L.16 as a
whole. However, my delegation would like to express
its strong dissatisfaction with the fact that the draft
resolution’s sponsor has totally ignored and overlooked
established practice and traditional working methods in
preparing this year’s version of the draft resolution. The
draft was prepared and circulated without conducting
any transparent, inclusive consultations. Moreover, the
draft resolution, which was circulated only a few days
ago, contains some substantive references regarding
ongoing developments in the implementation of the
Convention in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Given the lack of sufficient time for the
consideration by the relevant authorities in our capital
of the draft resolution’s new and substantive provisions,
we requested, in a spirit of goodwill, that the sponsor
of the draft resolution postpone action on it in order to
enable concerned delegations to consult their capitals
and get appropriate instructions. We regret that the
sponsor has ignored that request and has decided
to proceed to take action on the draft resolution. My
delegation is therefore not in a position to vote in favour
of paragraph 2 of the draft resolution, which includes
new, substantive provisions. We call on the sponsor
to review and change its approach to drafting and
introducing this draft resolution next year and to refrain
from turning a resolution that has long been adopted by
consensus into a substantive and controversial text.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote.

14-6184025/30

A/69/PV.48

We shall now proceed to the vote on draft resolutions
A/69/L.8, A/69/L.9, A/69/L.10, A/69/L.12, A/69/L.13,
A/69/L.14 and A/69/L.16.
Draft resolution A/69/L.8 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central European
Initiative”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
Georgia has become a sponsor of A/69/L.8.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.8?
Draft resolution A/69/L.8 was adopted (resolution
69/8).
The President: Draft resolution A/69/L.9 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/69/L.9, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the League of Arab States”, I wish
to put on the record the following statement of financial
implications on behalf of the Secretary-General in
accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedures of
the General Assembly.
In paragraph 7 of draft resolution A/69/L.9, the
General Assembly would reaffirm the importance of
holding the thirteenth general meeting on cooperation
between the representatives of the secretariats of the
United Nations system and the General Secretariat of the
League of Arab States during 2016, for which the dates
and venue will be agreed upon in due course between
the two secretariats. Pursuant to the request contained
in paragraph 7, the thirteenth general meeting between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States is to
be held in 2016. It is understood that all issues related
to the meeting, including the date, format, organization
and scope, are yet to be determined.
Accordingly, in the absence of the modalities for the
meeting, it is not possible at the present time to estimate

26/30

11/11/2014

the potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation. Upon the decision on the
modalities, format and organization of the meeting,
the Secretary-General would submit the relevant costs
of such requirements in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedures of the General Assembly.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution A/69/L.9
would not give rise to any financial implications under
the programme budget.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.9?
Draft resolution A/69/L.9 was adopted (resolution
69/9).
The President: Draft resolution A/69/L.10 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States”. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.10?
Draft resolution A/69/L.10 was adopted (resolution
69/10).
The President: Draft resolution A/69/L.12 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization”. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.12?
Draft resolution A/69/L.12 was adopted (resolution
69/11).
The President: Draft resolution A/69/L.13 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/69/L.13?
Draft resolution A/69/L.13 was adopted (resolution
69/12).
The President: Draft resolution A/69/L.14 is
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft

14-61840

11/11/2014

resolution A/69/L.14: Germany, Hungary, Montenegro
and Spain.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.14?
Draft resolution A/69/L.14 was adopted (resolution
69/13).
The President: We now turn to draft resolution
A/69/L.16, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/69/L.16: Albania, Andorra, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Hungary, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
The President: A recorded vote has been requested
on paragraph 2 of draft resolution A/69/L.16 and on
draft resolution A/69/L.16 as a whole. I shall first put
to the vote paragraph 2 of draft resolution A/69/L.16.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada,
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,

A/69/PV.48

Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Netherlands, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Bahamas, Belarus, Cameroon, Egypt, Guyana, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Libya, Syrian Arab Republic
Operative paragraph 2 was retained by 93 votes to
none, with 8 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegations of Egypt, Guyana,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Libya and
the Philippines informed the Secretariat that they
had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/69/L.16 as a whole,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Libya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea,

14-6184027/30

A/69/PV.48

Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Guyana
Draft resolution A/69/L.16 was adopted by 108
votes to none, with 1 abstention (resolution 69/14).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Cambodia,
Guyana, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
and the Philippines informed the Secretariat that
they had intended to vote in favour.]
The President: Before giving the floor to the
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolutions
just adopted, I would like to remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Jakubonė (Lithuania): Lithuania would like
to make a statement in explanation of its position after
the adoption of resolution 69/12 on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO).
Time and again, we have seen the important role
that regional organizations can play in promoting
conflict resolution, peace negotiations and mediation,
and other matters of international peace and security.
The European Union, the Organization for Security
and Co-operation in Europe, the African Union, the
Economic Community of Western African States,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and many others have been working closely with the
United Nations for years now. We therefore welcome
the adoption of resolutions on United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations and support
the development of United Nations relations with them.
At the same time, we would like to underline
that the promotion of United Nations purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and respect for international legal norms and
internationally accepted principles of behaviour must

28/30

11/11/2014

lie at the core of United Nations partnerships with
regional organizations. Those principles and norms have
been repeatedly violated by one member of the CSTO,
which annexed a part of its neighbour and continues to
finance and support illegal military activities against
that neighbouring State. Such behaviour runs counter
to everything for which United Nations cooperation
with regional organizations stands.
We reiterate our profound concern over Russia’s
attempt to redraw the borders of twenty-first-century
Europe and therefore note our strong unease with the
text adopted today with regard to the United Nations
cooperation with the CSTO. We call on Russia to
cease its hostile actions against Ukraine and to abide
by international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, including respect for the sovereignty, unity,
independence and territorial integrity of its neighbours.
Russia cannot have any claims on a peacekeeping or
peacebuilding role in the region, since its actions are
the core cause of the conflict in Ukraine.
We urge CSTO members to call on Russia to return
to the internationally accepted norms of behaviour
and to put an end to its attacks on the territory of a
neighbouring State.
Mr. Ceylan (Turkey): Turkey is committed to the
ultimate goal of the total elimination of all weapons
of mass destruction. It fulfils its commitments under
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons
and on their Destruction as the sole international legally
binding instrument that bans an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction. Turkey pursues effective
cooperation with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Turkey is also convinced that enhanced cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW is an
important tool for addressing various disarmament
and non-proliferation challenges. Based on that
understanding, we co-sponsored resolution 67/8,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons,” which was adopted by consensus in 2012.
However, the very worrisome developments that have
been taking place in Syria — namely, the systematic and
persistent use of chemical weapons against civilians by
regime forces — since the General Assembly adopted
that resolution oblige us to view the issue from a
different perspective.

14-61840

11/11/2014

From Turkey’s standpoint, greater focus on
cooperation between the United Nations and the OPCW
with respect to Syria has become all the more crucial and
must be more rigorous and effective in order to prevent
the continued use of chemical weapons and compel the
regime to fully comply with its obligations. More has to
be done in Syria pertaining to United Nations-OPCW
cooperation. We therefore believe that resolution 69/14
should have made clearer reference to those pending
issues, which would have certainly secured Turkey’s
sponsorship once again. We nonetheless supported the
resolution, bearing in mind that effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW will
advance disarmament and non-proliferation goals in
the field of chemical weapons. It is incumbent on all
Member States to enhance such cooperation. However,
we deem it necessary to make the following remarks.
First, the resolution makes no reference to the
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria, which must
be seen as the most pressing issue within the context of
United Nations-OPCW cooperation. According to our
information, as recently as 5 November regime forces
in Jobar conducted another chlorine attack against
civilians, causing death and injuries.
Although the resolution mentions the Mission to
Investigate Allegations of the Use of Chemical Weapons
in the Syrian Arab Republic, which was dispatched to
look into the attacks that took place in Quetta in August
2013, and Joint Mission of the OPCW and the United
Nations for the Elimination of the Chemical Weapons
Programme of the Syrian Arab Republic, it does not refer
to the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission, whose mandate is
still active and whose second report contains important
findings and conclusions about the persistent chemical
weapons threat in Syria. Given the explicit mandate of
the OPCW to inform the relevant United Nations organs
on non-compliance cases in Syria under the provisions
of resolution 2118 (2013), Turkey is convinced that the
transmission of that report to the Security Council
would be an important sign of cooperation between the
United Nations and the OPCW.
Last but not least, the resolution, while mentioning
that the OPCW-United Nations Joint Mission ended
on 30 September 2014, does not make any reference
to the remaining Syrian chemical-weapon production
facilities and the issue of the inaccurate and incomplete
declarations made by the regime with regard to the
dismantlement of its chemical-weapons programme.
Turkey therefore firmly believes that until those gaps,

A/69/PV.48

discrepancies and inconsistencies are thoroughly
addressed in a credible manner, which is incumbent on
the regime, no one can say that United Nations-OPCW
cooperation has achieved its ultimate goal in Syria. We
should not forget that every delay and every loophole in
the destruction of Syria’s remaining chemical-weapons
capabilities give the regime a free hand to further
increase its brutal oppression against its own people.
The Syrian regime’s remaining chemical-weapon
capabilities and the use of chemical agents against
civilians constitute flagrant violations of international
law and continue to undermine international peace
and security. As such, they will continue to occupy the
international security agenda, and the Syrian case will
remain open.
Mr. Agasandyan (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to the delegation of the
Netherlands for the preparation of resolution 69/14,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons”.
Based on the spirit of cooperation and constructive
interaction, we supported the consensus adoption of the
document. However, we would like to emphasize that
such general and technical resolutions should not contain
references to any specific country issues. Otherwise,
we would need to put in the text other measures, just as
important, to investigate cases of the use of chemical
weapons. In our view, it would have been much more
effective to talk about the facts surrounding the award
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) of the Nobel Prize in December
2013. We regret that our request was ignored.
With respect to cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW on the so-called Syrian dossier,
we would like to note that this investigation was
initiated by Damascus itself, which provided maximum
cooperation to the international experts’ mission. If
there had been an issue, this would have been objectively
reflected in the draft resolution.
Ms. Xiao Yue (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation voted in favour of resolution 69/14,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). China appreciates the effective cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW. At the same
time, we believe that the OPCW should have played a

14-6184029/30

A/69/PV.48

leading role in the destruction of chemical weapons in
Syria.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic, who wishes to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. May I remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited to
10 minutes for the first intervention and to five minutes
for the second intervention and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ibrahim (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Apparently the representative of Turkey and of
the Turkish regime is quite used to violating the general
procedures of the General Assembly. As a sponsor of
resolution 69/14, he should not be allowed to speak in
explanation of vote after the voting.
Apparently he also has knowledge about locations
involving the use of chemical weapons against
members of the Syrian army and civilians in Syria, but
he intentionally overlooks the fact that his Government
and regime provide terrorist organizations, including
the Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, with various forms of weapons, including
chemical weapons. Since the incident involving the use
of sarin gas against Syrian civilians in Khan al-Assal

30/30

11/11/2014

in 2013, this has been confirmed by the presence of
terrorist elements possessing two litres of Sarin gas
in Turkish territory, which were overlooked by the
authorities in Ankara, even with cooperation by these
authorities.
The Turkish representative overlooks all reports
about the use of terrorist organizations in Syria and in
Iraq of chemical weapons. This policy of overlooking
those facts is an indication of the policy of cooperation
and partnership between the Turkish regime and those
terrorist organizations, which use Turkish territory for
their activities.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to clarify
for the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic that
Turkey was not a sponsor of resolution 69/14.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (d), (f), (g), (o), (q), (w) and (y) of agenda
item 123?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

14-61840
