V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of tite Second Committee

38/161. Process of preparation of the Environmental
Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond
The General Assembly,
Recalling the importance it has attached at previous sessions to the development of the Environmental Perspecti ve to the Year 2000 and Beyond,
Recal/ing also its request to the Governing Council of
the United Nations Environment Programme at its eleventh session to make concrete recommendations to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1983, on the modalities for preparing the Environmental Perspective, 62
1. Notes with satisfaction decision 11/3 of the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on the process ofpreparation ofthe Environmen1al Perspective to the Year 2000 and Beyond, adopted on
23 May 1983; 63
2. Welcomes the desire of the Governing Council to
develop the Environmental Perspective and transmit it to
the General Assembly for adoption, benefiting in carrying
out that function from its consideration of the relevant
proposals made by a special commission;
3. Approves the decision of the Governing Council to
establish, in arder to assist ít in fulfilling its mandate in
regard to the Environmental Perspective and to report to it
in that respect, an intergovernmental inter-sessional preparatory committee to articulate to the special commission
at an early stage in its work the Governing Council's
expectations regarding the matters which it hopes will,
ínter alia, receive consideration by the commission and, in
this connection:
(a) Notes that the commission, at a preliminary stage
in the formulation of its conclusions on matters within the
mandate and purview ofthe United Nations Environment
Programme, should make them known to the committee
with a view to giving consideration to any views of the
committee thereon;
(b) Notes from paragraph 41 of the report of the Governing Councíl on its eleventh session 64 that the cost of
the intergovernmental inter-sessional preparatory committee will not result in any net increase in the regular budget
ofthe United Nations;
4. Also welcomes the intention of a number of Governmen1s to support the preparation of the Environmental
Perspective by facilítating the establishment of the sp~cial
commission, through the provision of voluntary contnbutions for its financing;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme and with Governments, and after such
other appropriate consultations as they deem necessary, _to
appoint the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the special
commission, who will subsequently select the members of
that commission and accordingly establish the special
commission, which should co-operate closely with the
intergovernmental inter-sessional preparatory comm~ttee;
the Chairman and Vice-Chairman should have expenence
of policy-making at the highest level, dem~nstrated interest in environmental and developmental 1ssues and the
capacity to attract attention to the work of the com11:ission, and should represent both developed and developmg
countries;
6. Expresses its view that the Chairman and t~e ViceChairman, in selecting the members of the spec1al com62 Resol ution 37/2 l 9.
.
.
.
63 See Official Records of the General AssembJ¡,, Th1rty-e1ghth Sesswn,
Supplement No. 15 (A/38/25}, annex.

131

mission, should take fully into account the need for appropriate geographical distribution and regional balance in
membership and the importance of ensuring that at least
half ofthe members ofthe commission are from the developing countries, as well as the need to consultas appropriate with representatives of Governments, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, industry, the
scientific community and others concerned with the environment;
7. Requests the Executive Director to establish an
interim special account under the financial regulations of
the U nited Natío ns to which voluntary contributions
would be credited and from which disbursements would
be made for the purposes of the establishment of the special commission, custody over and responsibility for the
account to be transferred to that commission, in accordance with its procedures, upon its establishment;
8. Suggests that the special commission, when established, should focus mainly on the following terms of reference for its work:
(a) To propose long-term environmental strategies for
achieving sustainable development to the year 2000 and
beyond;
(b) To recommend ways in which concem for the environment may be translated into greater co-operation
among developing countries and between countries at different stages of economic and social development and lead
to the achievement of common and mutually supportive
objectives, which take account of the interrelationships
between people, resources, environment and development;
(e) To consider ways and means by which the international community can deal more effectively wifüenvironmental concerns, in the light of the other recommendations in its report;
(d) To help to define shared perceptions of long-term
environmental issues and ofthe appropriate etforts needed
to deal successfully with the problems of protecting and
enhancing the environment, a long-term agenda for action
during the coming decades, and aspirational goals for the
world community, taking into account the relevant resolutions of the session of a special character of the Goveming
Council in 1982; 65
9. Further suggests that, in fulfilling its terms of reference, the special commission should:
(a) Maintain an exchange of views with the scientific
community, environmentalists and all other sections of
public opinion, particularly youth, e:oncerned with tl_le
environment, and those concemed with the relat10nsh1p
between development and environment;
(b) Receive the views of Governments, principally
through tlle Governing Council a~d its intergovemmental
inter-sessional preparatory comm1ttee, and through contacts with national leaders, opinion makers and concemed
intemational figures;
(e) Maintain links with other inter~overnmental bod_ies
within and outside the United Nat1ons system, while,
however, usíng the Admínistrativ~ Commítt~e on Coordinatíon and the designated offic1als for env1ronmental
matters as the channels of communication with t~~ Uni~ed
Nations system; the willingness of the Adm1mstrat1ve
Committee on Co-ordination to assist should be communicated to the commission;
(d) Take account ofthe scope of environ~ental i~sues
as defined by the United Nations system-wide medmm64 Jbld. Supp/ernenl No. 25 (A/38/25).

65 Jbld.: Thirty-seventh Session, Supplemenl No. 25 (A/37/25), part one,

annex l.

132

General Assembly-Thlrty-eighth Session

term environment programme 66 and as reflected in the
efforts ofthe United Nations system, including the United
Nations Environment Programme, in the field ofthe environment;
(e) Make ful] use of relevant existing reports and material;
l O. Considers that the special commission should
make available a report on environment and the global
problématique to the year 2000 and beyond, including proposed strategies for sustainable development, within a
period of two years from its establishment;
11. Decides that, on matters within the mandate and
purview of the United Nations Environment Programme,
the report of the special commission should in the first
instance be considered by the Governing Council of the
Programme, for transmission to the General Assembly
together with its comments and for use as basic material in
tbe preparation, for adoption by the Assembly, of the
Environmental Perspective;
12. Further decides that, on those matters which are
under consideration or review by the General Assembly
itself, the Assembly will consider the relevant aspects of
tbe report of the special commission;
13. Recognizes that the specíal commission may in
addition address its report, after consideration by the Goveming Council or the intergovemmental inter-sessional
preparatory committee, to other forums, intergovemmental and non-govemmental, orto Governments, individuals
and the general public, as it sees fit, it being understood
that the report of the commission will not be binding on
Govemments.

102nd plenary meeting
19 December 1983
38/162. Remnants of war

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 3435 (XXX) of 9 December

1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General n
and the study annexed thereto conceming the problem of
remnants of war;
2. Regrets that no concrete measures have been taken
to solve the problem of remnants of war despite the various resolutions and decisions adopted thereon by the General Assembly and the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme;
3. Reiterates its support of the just demands of the
developing countries affected by the implantation ofmines
and the presence of other remnants of war in their territories for full compensation from the States responsible for
those remnants;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, to continue to seek the víews of
States on the recommendations contained in section VIII
of the study annexed to his report;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General to intensify his
efforts to urge the States concerned to conduct bilateral
consultations immediately, with the aim of concluding, as
soon as possible, agreements for the solution of this problem, it being understood that the legitimate right of the
affected developing countries to full compensation for
damages dueto them shall be ensured;
6. Calls upon ali States to co-operate with the Secretary-General in carrying out the tasks requested of him in
paragraphs 4 and 5 above, so as to enable him, in cooperation with the Executíve Director of the United
Natíons Environment Programme, to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a report on tne
results of his consultations and endeavours with the States
con cerned.

102nd plenary meeting
19 December 1983
38/163. Study on financing the Plan of Action to
Combat Desertification

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/172 of 19 December 1977,

1975, 35/71 of5 December 1980, 36/188 of 17 December
1981 and 37/215 of 20 December 1982 concerning the
problem of remnants of war,
Recalling also decisions 80 (IV) of 9 April 1976, 67 101
(V) of 25 May 1977, 68 9/5 of 25 May 1981 69 and 10/8 of
28 May 1982 70 of the Goveming Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme,
Recalling further resolution 32 adopted by the Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August
1976, 71 and resolution 26/11-P adopted by the Eleventh
Islamic Conference of Foreign Ministers, held at
Islamabad from 17 to 22 May 1980, 72
Con.vinced that the responsibility for the removal of the
remnants of war should be borne by the countries that
planted them,
Recognizing that the presence of the material remnants
of war, particularly mines, in the territories of developing
countries seriously impedes their development efforts and
causes loss of life and property,

33/89 of 15 December 1978, 34/184 of 18 December
1979, 36/191 of 17 December 1981 and 37/220 of 20
December 1982, dealing with the implementation and
financing of the Plan of Action to Comhat Desertification, 74
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General 75
on fmancing the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification,
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Notes that again very few replies were received from
Govemments in response to paragraph 3 of General
Assembly resolution 37/220, thus not permitting the Sec•
retary-General to prepare, in co-operation with the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment Programme, the report requested in paragraph 5 of that
resolution;
3. Requests again ali Member States that have not yet
provided their comments to the Secretary-General on the
feasibilíty studies and concrete recommendations f?r the
implementation ofthe additional measures offinancmg, as

66 UNEP/GC. 1017 and Corr. l.
67 See Oflicilil Records of the General Assembly, ThirtY-firs1 Session, Supplement Ño. 2J (A/31/25), annex l.
6B Tbid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/32/25), annex l.
69 !bid., Thirty-sixth Session, S11ppleme111 No. 25 (A/36/25 and Corr. l),
annex l.
70 !bid., Thirty-sevemh Ses.sían. Supplement No. 2J (A/37/25), part two,
annex.

71 See A/31/ l 97, annex IV, sect. B.
72See A/35/419-S/!4l29, annex l.
73 A/38/38 3.
14 Report of the United Nations Conference on Desertif¡carfon, Nairobi, 29
August-9 Seplember 1977 (A/CONF.14/36), chap. J.
75 A/38/403.
