28

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

1205 (XII). Report of the Trusteeship Council
covering the period from 15 August 1956
to 12 July 1957
The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Trusteeship Council covering- the period from 15 August 1956 to 12
July 1957, 23

1. Takes note of the report of the Trusteeship
Council;
2. Recommends that the Trusteeship Council, in its
future deliberations, take into account the comments
and suggestions made in the course of the discussion of
the report at the twelfth session of the General Assembly.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1206 (XII). Economic advancement of Somaliland under Italian administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 855 (IX) of 14 December
1954, in which it requested the Trusteeship Council,
on the basis of the conclusions of the United Nations
Visiting Mission to Trust Territories in East Africa,
1954, and the report of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, to endeavour to decide on practical measures for financing the economic
development plans for Somaliland under Italian administration,
Having examined with interest the report of the
Mission of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, 24 and the observations thereon of
the Administering Authority, the Government of Somalia and the United Nations Advisory Council for the
Trust Territory of Somaliland under Italian Administration,
Having taken note of the statement of the Administering Authority that the Territory would require, after
1960, external financial assistance, excluding technical
assistance, amounting to about $4 million to $5 million
.annually,
Having considered the various possibilities suggested
by the Trusteeship Council of furnishing technical and
financial assistance to Somaliland under Italian Administration after 1960, and noting the conclusion of the
Council, with which the Administering Authority is in
agreement, ~hat it is premature to make any specific
recommendation as to the amount of external assistance which might be required after 1960,
1. N ates from the report of the Trusteeship Counci123 that the Administering Authority, in consultation
with the Government of Somalia, will continue to assess
all requirements for a viable, independent Somalia,
explore all possible ways of meeting the requirements
indicated by these assessments and submit a report
thereon to the Council at its twenty-second session ;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to continue its
study of this question, in consultation with the Administering Authority and the Government of Somalia,
and, in particular, to explore further the possibilities
suggested by the Council and to report thereon for the
00

Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
Supplement No. 4 (A/3595 and Corr.1).
"'Official 1Records of the Trusteeship Council, Twrntieth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 4, document T /1296.

consideration of the General Assembly at its thirteenth
session.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1207 (XII). Attainment of self-government or
independence by Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Considering that, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 76 b of the Charter of the United Nations,
one of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System is the progressive development of the
inhabitants of Trust Territories towards self-government or independence,
Recalling that the General Assembly, in its resolution
558 (VI) of 18 January 1952, invited the Administering Authority of each Trust Territory, inter alia, to
estimate the period of time in which the Trust Territories concerned would attain self-government or independence,
Recalling also that the General Assembly, in its
resolution 1064 (XI) of 26 February 1957, recommended that the Administering Authorities concerned
take the necessary measures to ensure that the Trust
Territories of Tanganyika, the Cameroons under British administration, the Cameroons under French administration, Togoland under French administration and
Ruandi-Urundi achieve self-government or independence at an early date, and further invited the Administering Authorities concerned to estimate the period of
time required for the attainment of self-government or
independence by all Trust Territories, in conformity
with General Assembly resolution 558 (VI),
Having examined part III of the report of the
Trusteeship Council, 23
Noting with satisfaction that the Trusteeship Council
has recommended that the Administering Authorities
indicate such successive intermediate targets and dates
in the political, economic, social and educational development of the Trust Territories as will create the
pre-conditions for their attainment of self-government
or independence,
Noting ·with disappointment that the Administering
Authorities concerned have not yet submitted the
estimates of the periods of time required by the Trust
Territories for the attainment of the final objective of
trusteeship, namely, self-government or independence,
Conscious of the importance of estimating the time
required for the attainment by Trust Territories of selfgovernment or independence,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 558 (VI) of 18 January
1952 and 1064 (XI) of 26 February 1957, and once
again invites the Administering Authorities to implement the terms of those resolutions;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to report to the
General Assembly, at its thirteenth session, on the
progress made in implementing the present resolution.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1208 (XII). Rural economic development of the
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 438 (V) of 2 December 1950,
recommending that the Trusteeship Council consider

Re11olutio1U1 adopted on the reporu of dae Fourth Committee

the prevailing policies, laws and practices which, in the
Trust Territories, relate to land, land utilization and
the alienation of land, taking into account the present
and future needs of the indigenous inhabitants from
the standpoint of the basic objectives of the International Trusteeship System and the future economic
requirements of the Territories, as well as the social
and economic consequences of the transfer of land to
non-indigenous inhabitants,

Having noted the actions of the Trusteeship Council
in this field, both through its regular procedures for
the examination of conditions in the Trust Territories
and through the establishment of the Committee on
Rural Economic Development of the Trust Territories,
Bearing in mind the technical difficulties that the
Committee has encountered in the various aspects of the
study entrusted to it,
Noting with regret that the Committee has not yet
been able to carry out the aforementioned study,
Considering that the questions of land tenure, land
utilization and land alienation call for analysis and
opinion of a technical and expert nature, and recalling
in this connexion General Assembly resolution 561
(VI) of 18 January 1952,
Considering that, in the meantime, it would be appropriate for the Trusteeship Council, with the assistance of the Committee, to continue to devote particular
attention to the question of the alienation of land in
the Trust Territories,
1. Decides, in order to facilitate the eventual study
by the General Assembly of problems of land tenure,
land utilization and land alienation in the Trust Territories, to invite the appropriate specialized agencies,
particularly the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations and the International Labour Organisation to submit to the Trusteeship Council their
observations and suggestions concerning these problems;
2. Recommends to the Trusteeship Council that it
ensure, through the Committee on Rural Economic Development of the Trust Territories or by such other
means as it deems appropriate, the early submission
of its study of the prevailing policies, laws and practices relating to land tenure, land utilization and land
alienation in Trust Territories, taking into account the
present and future needs of the indigenous inhabitants
from the standpoint of the basic objectives of the
International Trusteeship System and the future economic requirements of the Territories, as well as the
social and economic consequences of the transfer of
land to non-indigenous inhabitants ;
3. Requests the Trusteeship Council to include the
results of this study in its next report to the General
Assembly.
729th plenary meetino,
13 December 1957.
1209 (XII). Offers by Member States of study
and training facilities for inhabitants of
Trust Territories

The General Assembly,
Ha·uino examined chapter V, section D, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council28 and the
report of the Secretary-General on offers hy Member

29

States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories 21'.>,
Recalling that, in its resolutions 753 (VIII) of 9
December 1953 and 1063 (XI) of 26 February 1957,
the General Assembly recommended that . th~ Administering Authorities of the Trust Territones take
all such measures as would ensure the greatest possible use by inhabitants of the Trust Territories of the
scholarships and training facilities offered by Member
States,
Noting that the major part of the scholarships offered
by Member States remains unutilized,
1. Takes note of chapter V, section D, of part I
of the report of the Trusteeship Council and of the
report of the Secretary-General on offers by Member
States of study and training facilities for inhabitants
of Trust Territories;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 1063 (XI) of_ ~6 F~bruary 1957 and once again invites the Admmistermg
Authorities to take all necessary measures to ensure
that scholarships and training facilities offered by Member States may be utilized by inhabita~ts of the Trust
Territories and to render every assistance to those
persons who have applied for, or have been granted,
scholarships or fellowships;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to give such assistance as is possible and as may be sought by the
Members concerned a~d by the applicants, within the
framework of the procedures laid down by the Trusteeship Council;
4. Requests the Secretary-G~neral to !nclude! in ~is
future reports to the Trusteeship Council, deta~led mformation concerning the actual use of scholarships and
training facilities offered by Member Sta~es . for the
education of inhabitants of the Trust Terntones;
5. Requests the Trusteeship Cou!1cil !o resum~,
at its sessions held in 1958, the considerat10n of thts
question and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its thirteenth session.
.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1210 (XII). Effects of the European EconomJc
Community on the development of certatn
Trust Territories
The General Assembly,
H avinq examined the report of the Trusteeship
Council,28
Having observed that the .Treaty . establishing t~e
European ~co1;omic Commumty :provide~ that certam
Trust Terntones are to be associated with the Community,
Believing that this association may have significant
effects on the development of such Territories,
1. Invites the Administering Authorities concerned
to submit information to the Trusteeship Council on
the association of the Trust Territories under their
administration with the European Economic Community and on the possible effects of the Treaty establishing the Community on the development of those
Territories;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council !O incJude in
its report to the General Assembly, at its thirteenth
.. Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session,
A11nexes, agenda item 13, document A/3718.
