S/PV.7555

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7555th meeting

Tuesday, 10 November 2015, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rycroft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mohamed Mohamed
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Ibrahim
Mrs. Schwalger
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Suárez Moreno

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2015/841)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-35732 (E)
*1535732*

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 5 November 2015 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2015/841)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and
Serbia to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/841, which contains the text of
a letter dated 5 November 2015 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the forty-eighth report of the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As we have a number of participants in this meeting
on this important issue, I encourage speakers to make
concise interventions. To that end, let me take this
opportunity to remind speakers that the presidency will
use the flashing lights on the collars of the microphones
to prompt speakers to bring their remarks to a close.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: I should like to express my pleasure
that good people such as Ambassador Rycroft — who
was present in Dayton 20 years ago — remain engaged
in our common effort to take Bosnia and Herzegovina
from war to lasting peace.
On 21 November, we will mark the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords, the peace
treaty that brought Europe’s most brutal war since the

2/23

10/11/2015

Second World War, to an end. As a seemingly endless
column of migrants and refugees makes it way through
the Western Balkans, we are reminded of the human
tragedy of war and of just how priceless peace is. The
peace that Dayton brought was hard won, and it must
never be taken for granted, but instead cherished and
consolidated.
Anniversaries provide us with an opportunity to
reflect on what has been achieved and to take stock
of what remains to be done. So allow me to briefly
recap what was achieved, primarily during the first
10 years after the war, when Bosnia and Herzegovina
was the shining star of post-conflict peacebuilding and
reintegration. Freedom of movement was established; a
million refugees reclaimed their homes, for the first time
ever after such a brutal conflict; the State Government
was reinforced; the economy was stabilized; and the
State judiciary was established. Three armies and
three Ministries of Defence that had fought each other
were brought together under State control and a single
Ministry of Defence; a single intelligence service was
created to the highest European standards; a unified
customs service was created and is working effectively;
a single currency and a single indirect taxation system
were established, which underpin the State’s finances;
and free, generally fair and peaceful elections had
become the norm.
In 2005, Bosnia and Herzegovina stood as perhaps
the best example of what the wider international
community can achieve when it is united in its
commitment to a peace effort. There may be a need to
do this again elsewhere in the world, and it is worth
remembering how successful we were in Bosnia and
Herzegovina when we were truly united and committed.
However, over the past 10 years, the country
has not been moving in the right direction. This has
been a disappointment not only for the international
community, but most of all for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. As we enter the third decade of the
peace process, we need to raise our expectations and
once again see concrete results and positive momentum.
I believe that major progress will be possible in the
next 10 years if we see two basic ingredients: first,
the political will to deliver substantial reforms to take
the country forward, and secondly, an unwavering
commitment to fully respect the Peace Agreement.
This will not be easy, but it is absolutely necessary
because the problems Bosnia and Herzegovina faces
today are deep-rooted and systemic, reflecting
15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the complex bureaucracy, the weaknesses in the
economy and, to be frank, the vested interests some
political leaders and State-run enterprises have in
a dysfunctional status quo. What is necessary is to
implement a programme of serious political, social
and economic reforms that will improve functionality,
attract investment and create jobs. If this is done, the
international community — through the International
Monetary Fund, the World Bank and others — stands
ready to provide generous assistance to help the country
get through a challenging period.
The period since my last briefing (see S/PV.7440)
has seen some decidedly positive developments,
as members will have seen from my latest report
(S/2015/841, annex), as well as some serious difficulties,
including those highlighted in the special report I
submitted on 4 September. First, let me stress the
positives, of which there have been several.
A written commitment with the European Union
(EU) was signed and adopted by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities in February, opening the way
for the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the EU to enter into force on 1 June. State and Entity
authorities adopted ambitious and coordinated reform
agendas in the social and economic spheres, which was
a major step forward. Under the astute guidance of
EU Special Representative Ambassador Lars-Gunnar
Wigemark, we have also seen some more concrete
initial results to implement the reform agenda, the most
notable of which was the adoption of a new labour law
by the Federation authorities. A border treaty has been
signed with Montenegro, which is an achievement of
genuine regional significance. I very much hope that
similar treaties can finally be signed with Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s other neighbours. And just last week,
we saw a long-awaited joint session in Sarajevo of the
Governments of the Republic of Serbia, under Prime
Minister Vučić, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, under
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Zvizdić.
This was a first common between the two Governments
of Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Given these positive developments, reflecting a
genuine commitment to getting the country back on
track, it is difficult to understand how, in parallel, we
have seen some politicians determined to challenge the
Peace Agreement and destabilize the situation in the
country. In my last statement to the Security Council,
I raised my concern about the adoption by the ruling
party of the Republika Srpska of a declaration that

S/PV.7555

threatened to hold an independence referendum in 2018.
While it is only a party document that has no official
value, I am nevertheless concerned by its threat to hold
an independence referendum by a specified time. As
I have made clear repeatedly, the Peace Agreement
does not grant the Entities the right to secede, and any
attempt to change the Peace Agreement requires the
agreement of all three parties.
Since then we have been confronted with a more
immediate and official challenge to the Peace Agreement
and the long-term progress we are all so eager see. I
am referring to the decision by the Republika Srpska
Parliament in July to organize a referendum on whether
the Republika Srpska authorities need to respect
the authority and decisions of the country’s central
judicial institutions, as well as decisions taken by High
Representatives to implement the Peace Agreement.
The 28 members of the European Council said clearly
in their 12 October conclusions that:
“The holding of such a referendum would
challenge the cohesion, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It would also
risk undermining the efforts to improve the socioeconomic situation of all Bosnia and Herzegovina
citizens and to make further progress in EU
integration.”
The decision of the Republika Srpska National
Assembly has yet to be published and to enter into
force. There is still an opportunity to rectify this breach
of the Peace Agreement, and I expect the Republika
Srpska authorities to step back from the brink and put
the referendum aside.
So where does the reform effort in Bosnia and
Herzegovina stand right now, just over a year after the
latest general elections? The fairest description is to
say that that this is the end of the beginning. The next
few months will be critical because they will reveal
whether the authorities are committed to delivering on
their own reform agendas. Some of the reforms will be
difficult, but they will deliver new opportunities for the
country and its people. The challenge for Bosnia and
Herzegovina is not just one of what needs to be done;
it is also a challenge of how things are done. Twenty
years after Dayton, there is no denying the fact that
the country all too often suffers from division. This
is why it is so important that the country get back to
advancing reforms in a way that fosters reconciliation
and reintegration.

15-357323/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina desperately needs to come
together and to work for a common purpose. In this
respect, I would like to commend some of the gesture
politics displayed by the State Presidency and Council
of Ministers, which have been so warmly welcomed by
ordinary people. This is the positive leadership citizens
want to see and we need to see much more of it. In
this regard, I would like to commend the unprecedented
moves made by Serbian Prime Minister Aleksandar
Vučić in pursuit of genuine regional and ethnic
reconciliation. Indeed, tomorrow Prime Minister Vučić
will, in a welcome development, visit Srebrenica for the
second time this year.
Twenty years after our mission to bring lasting
peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina began, there is no
doubt we have come a very long way. Huge progress
has been made. However, we can conclude with equal
certainty that we have not yet completed the job. The
future for Bosnia and Herzegovina is the European
Union — not because 1 say so, but because this is
what the democratically elected authorities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have consistently set out as their
primary objective. Unlike what some suggested the
last time I was here, this has not been forced on the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is a choice they
have made themselves. To the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, my message is this — a sincere and
genuine offer is on the table from the European Union
that provides a chance for a secure, prosperous and
dignified life for current and future generations. This
offer of the European Union must be seized with both
hands.
For international policymakers, I would highlight
two things we need to do in order to ensure success
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first is to continue to
assist the country in maintaining and accelerating the
positive momentum that the initiative of Minister for
Foreign Affairs Steinmeier of Germany and Secretary
of State Hammond of the United Kingdom — which
is now an EU initiative — has been helping the local
authorities to build in recent months. That momentum
has to be maintained. The second is that we must stand
up together to real challenges to the peace agreement,
such as the referendum initiative. The drawing of
borders in Bosnia and Herzegovina is behind us. No
matter how hard some may try, division and secession
are failed strategies that were defeated 20 years ago.
The twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace
Agreement should remind the international community

4/23

10/11/2015

and the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina of just how
far the country has come, and how much more can
be achieved if we reinvigorate our commitment to a
peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the interest of all of its peoples, its neighbours and the
whole of Europe.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/847, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the Russian Federation.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2247 (2015).
I now give the floor to members of the Security
Council.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for presenting his fourteenth briefing
and the forty-eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/841, annex) covering the period from 21 April
to 21 October 2015.
It is especially alarming that the report, like
those before it, refers to the threat that the historic
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, signed in 1995, may be called into
question. Indeed, on 15 July, the Republika Srpska
threatened to organize a unilateral referendum in
2018 on possible independence. That impulse towards
secession, even if theoretical, seriously undermines
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which ended the tragic
events which Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced.
The territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
can in no way be questioned, in keeping with the
aforementioned Agreement.
Furthermore, we note with regret that insufficient
efforts have been made to achieve the “5+2” agenda — the
15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

five objectives and two conditions set for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative on the ground.
There can be no question of considering a withdrawal by
the United Nations, NATO or the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR), all of them synonymous
with restored peace and stability. The isolated attacks
that have claimed a number of lives in April at the police
station in Zvornik and the ethnically based incidents
during the ceremony commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide are signs that
the path to lasting peace and reconciliation between the
communities remains long and difficult. The assistance
of the international community is therefore needed.
We recall that the Srebrenica massacre of 1995,
which claimed over 8,000 lives, qualifies as genocide
under international law. We firmly condemn denial of
that genocide by the leader of the Republika Srpska.
Statements referring to the atrocities in Srebrenica as
something other than genocide offend the memory of
the victims of all genocides. The deliberate refusal of
Republika Srpska partisans to cooperate with the High
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina — including,
inter alia, by blocking his access to its archives — is
also part and parcel of genocide denial.
We urge all the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to cooperate fully with the Residual
Mechanism of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia to accelerate the process
of bringing the accused to trial by national tribunals.
We also urge them to cooperate fully with the High
Representative, in keeping with article IX of the
General Framework Agreement, by granting him access
to the information and official documents he needs to
discharge his mandate.
The issue of refugees and displaced individuals is a
central element of the comprehensive implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. Despite
the obligation incumbent on the authorities to create
at all levels the economic, social and other conditions
conducive to the harmonious return and reintegration
of refugees without ethnic distinction, the latter are
experiencing great difficulties in returning to their
pre-war homes.
The decrease in the budget of the Office of the High
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina by 44 per
cent and of its staff by 51 per cent has had an impact
on its ability to discharge its mission successfully.
However, as we have already indicated, the conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High

S/PV.7555

Representative do not seem to be present. We therefore
call on all people of good will to lend their support to
the activities of the High Representative.
In conclusion, Chad underscores the need for
respect for the historic Dayton Agreement and all of
its provisions, including the essential role played by
the Office of the High Representative, NATO, and
EUFOR Operation Althea in guaranteeing security and
preventing a return to the starting point.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish to
thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing. Bosnia
and Herzegovina has maintained stability and achieved
positive progress in economic development and the rule
of law, which China welcomes. Bosnia and Herzegovina
is an important Balkan country. Maintaining peace and
stability, promoting economic and social development
and ensuring the harmonious coexistence of all ethnic
groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina are in the common
interests of the countries of the region and the entire
international community.
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of
the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The
international community should seize this opportunity
to encourage the various ethnic groups in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to continue to consolidate their
achievements in nation-building and to comprehensively
implement the Dayton Peace Agreement so as to achieve
greater progress in nation-building, allowing all ethnic
groups to enjoy the peace dividend. China welcomes the
efforts of the High Representative Inzko in advancing
the Bosnian political process. We hope that he will act
in accordance with his mandate and continue to play
a positive role in promoting the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.
China has always respected the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and believes that it should
independently choose its own development path and
foreign policy. The international community should
respect and support the choices made by the Government
and people of Bosnia and Herzegovina for their own
State, and make a commitment to promoting the
country’s national unity and achievement of economic
and social sustainable development, as well as lasting
peace and stability.
China welcomes the adoption of resolution
2247 (2015), extending the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation

15-357325/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Althea. We hope that EUFOR will continue to
cooperate closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
play a constructive role in maintaining the peace and
security of the country. China is ready to work with the
rest of the international community to continue to make
a real contribution to the realization of lasting peace,
stability and development in the country.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): We wish to thank High
Representative Inzko for his briefing, and in particular
for introducing the forty-eighth report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/2015/841, annex). We have studied the
report carefully.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2247 (2015), renewing the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea for one
year.
Nigeria is concerned about the challenges to the
General Framework Agreement for Peace. Threats
of secession and the dissolution of the country by
political leaders are in contradistinction to the spirit of
the Dayton Peace Accords. We urge public figures to
refrain from inflammatory rhetoric that could threaten
the peace and security of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We reiterate our position that the Constitution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina does not allow for secession
by any Entity. All Entities must therefore pursue their
legitimate interests exclusively within the framework
of the united and indivisible Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The decision of the National Assembly of the
Republika Srpska to hold a referendum on the validity
of the decisions of the Constitutional Court of Bosnia
and Herzegovina represents a major challenge to the
integrity of the country’s judicial system and, indeed,
to the rule of law. The planned referendum is clearly not
in consonance with the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and we support the High Representative’s
call for justice to be set aside.
On a more positive note, the signing of the
cooperation agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Serbia on 4 November is a significant development.
We note that the focus of the agreement is on matters
of sustainable development, the location of missing
persons and the protection of cultural heritage. That,
in our view signals, the commitment of both parties to
improve their bilateral relations. We encourage them to
implement the agreement in good faith.

6/23

10/11/2015

The entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June and the adoption of
the new Federation Labour Law in July are notable and
milestone achievements. We expect that they will serve
to engender an improvement in the performance of State
institutions going forward We urge all stakeholders to
build on the existing framework for peace to consolidate
stability in the country.
We note that only limited progress has been
recorded in the outstanding five objectives and two
conditions pertaining to the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. The authorities must
demonstrate greater commitment to the reform process
in order to facilitate its full implementation. We also
urge the authorities of the Republika Srpska to work
towards the fulfilment of their obligations to provide
the High Representative with timely access to official
information, institutions and documents required to
accomplish his mandate.
Nigeria shares the concern of High Representative
Inzko over the challenges to the peace and security
of Bosnia and Herzegovina linked to the increased
interethnic tensions among Bosniaks, Croats and
Serbs. We believe that the trend can be curbed through
determined efforts to promote reconciliation. Political
and community leaders have a significant role to play
in that regard. On the return of refugees and displaced
persons to their pre-war homes, we note efforts made so
far in their resettlement and education. An environment
conducive to their sustained return is critical to the full
implementation of the return strategy adopted in 2012.
Twenty years after the Dayton Peace Accords,
the international community’s support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains crucial. This support is needed
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
reconstruction of a civil society, the attainment of
economic progress and the return of refugees. We
encourage all stakeholders to remain engaged in
building a peaceful, stable and united country. We
pay tribute to High Representative Inzko for his astute
leadership, and support his call for the adequate funding
and staffing of his Office.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank the High
Representative for his briefing today, which continues
to be a useful way for the Council to stay abreast of
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As noted by others, this year marks the twentieth
anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Today, it

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

is appropriate that we celebrate their success in keeping
the peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the past two
decades, while also acknowledging the unfinished
business that remains in their implementation.
Since the High Representative last briefed the
Council (see S/PV.7440), the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina have taken the important step of adopting
the Reform Agenda. That was a significant move
towards delivering on the commitment made by Bosnia’s
leadership to carry out necessary reforms aimed at
supporting national institutions, strengthening the rule
of law and improving the socioeconomic conditions of
the entire population of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
With those goals in mind, efforts must now focus
on converting a shared aspiration into shared action.
The adoption of the Federation Labour Law is one
example of concrete progress that should be built upon.
We wish the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina well
in the undertaking and welcome the European Union
(EU) support to Bosnia and Herzegovina in moving the
Reform Agenda forward.
Reconciliation remains a work in progress. We note
with concern episodes of violence that have taken place
this year, including some with an ethnic dimension. We
welcome the steps taken by leaders both within Bosnia
and Herzegovina and in the region to address those
developments. We also support the presence of the EUled stabilization mission as a means of contributing to
a stable security environment, and are pleased that the
Council has acted today unanimously to reauthorize
that mission.
In addition to the presence of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force, the Office of the High
Representative retains responsibility for civilian aspects
of the Dayton Peace Accords. We encourage further
efforts to make progress on the five objectives and
two conditions set by the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, which remain prerequisites
for the Office closure.
As detailed by the High Representative, referenda
have been proposed that challenge the authority of
Federation Bosnia and Herzegovina judiciary and the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina itself. Such moves are provocative and
divisive. They undermine reconciliation efforts and
distract from advancing on the Reform Agenda. We
hope that such proposals can be left behind as Bosnia
and Herzegovina moves forward in a greater spirit of

S/PV.7555

unity and inclusiveness. We believe that this is the best
route to stability, peace and prosperity.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, for presenting the forty-eighth
report on the implementation of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace on Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2015/841, annex). The High Representative referred
to the remarkable progress achieved during the first
10 years of the implementation of the Agreement.
However, according to the report presented today, the
initial impetus has waned, and the challenges facing
the country seem enormous indeed.
Angola reaffirms its strong support for the
unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and for the General Framework
Agreement. However, we are particularly concerned at
the decision taken by the Republika Srpska National
Assembly to hold a referendum on jurisdiction and on
the High Representative’s authority. Also of concern
is the threat by the Republika Srpska ruling party to
hold an independence referendum in 2018 if certain
demands of the entity are not met, as well as statements
by several high officials calling for the secession and
dissolution of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those acts
undermine the cohesion of that multi-ethnic society
and hinder national reconciliation.
The decisions and subsequent actions taken and
the official statements made by the Republika Srpska
authorities constitute a violation of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and a threat to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Bosnia and
Herzegovina pursuant to the General Framework Peace
Agreement.
We call on the political leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to refrain from the use of divisive rhetoric
and to make efforts to advance national reconciliation
and the integration of all ethnic communities.
Security incidents such as the one that took place
during the period under review have the potential to
negatively impact the overall political situation in
the country and become a serious challenge to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement. We regret
that only limited progress was made by the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina towards meeting the
benchmarks for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative, the escalation of verbal attacks and

15-357327/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the denial of access to the official information and
documentation required for the fulfilment of his
mandate. The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in particular the leaders of Republika Srpska, must
cooperate fully with the High Representative and abide
by his authority.
Regarding the positive aspects of the situation,
we welcome the entry into force of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the European Union leading to the
adoption of the Master Plan for Integration into the
European Union and the adoption, in July 2015, of the
Reform Agenda, including the new Federation Labour
Law. It is our hope that these concrete steps will set
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the path towards integration
into the European Union and contribute to making it a
united, sovereign, multi-ethnic, stable, prosperous and
developed country.
The reports on the participation of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina armed forces in international peace
operations and the country’s commitment to participate
in peacekeeping missions in various countries
demonstrates its ability and determination to fully
integrate into the international community.
The visit paid by His Holiness Pope Francis to the
country was of particular relevance. It is our hope that
his message of healing and reconciliation will resonate
positively in the hearts and minds of the peoples of the
region.
Finally, we acknowledge the important role played
by the European Union military operation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, EUFOR Althea, in supporting the
country’s efforts and maintaining a safe and secure
environment. We therefore supported the renewal of
the EUFOR Althea mandate for an additional period of
12 months, as set out in resolution 2247 (2015), adopted
today.
To conclude, we commend the work accomplished
by the Office of the High Representative in support
of peace, security and development in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We are confident of a better future, in
the expectation that the leadership of the country will
be able to look beyond the divisions of the past by
advancing political, social and economic reforms and
moving towards a peaceful and prosperous future.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me at the outset welcome and thank High
Representative Valentin Ink for his presence here, and
8/23

10/11/2015

express the support of the Government of Spain for his
work and for his Office. We wish also to welcome the
new Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Miloš
Vukašinović, to whom we express the full readiness of
the Mission of Spain to cooperate in any consultation
he might wish to engage in on all issues relating to the
Security Council. We also wish to associate ourselves
with the statement to be made later by the delegation of
the European Union.
We have read attentively the quarterly report
(S/2015/841) and listened carefully to the presentation
of the High Representative. Progress has been made
over the past six months in the implementation of
the five objectives and two conditions necessary for
the conclusion of the mandate. Achieving all five
objectives and both conditions as quickly as possible
would without a doubt be the best way of marking the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
However, in order to be successful, it must be supported
by all of those involved.
We deem important the fact that we have just
unanimously adopted resolution 2247 (2015) renewing
Operation Althea of the European Union military
operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, whose executive
mandate remains unchanged. I wish in that respect to
note the positive role played by the mission, both in
support of the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and in the very important role of training and capacitybuilding.
Since the Council met six months ago (see
S/PV.7440), Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
characterized by a positive political environment,
given that progress has been made on the path towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, which was the choice of the
citizens themselves. Indeed, the entry into force of the
Stabilization and Association Agreement in June and
the adoption by the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina
of the Reform Agenda in July are steps in the right
direction. However, it is vital that every effort be
focused on translating into reality, without delay, the
commitments made.
We remain concerned at the divisive rhetoric of
certain political leaders and at certain initiatives, such
as the announced referendum in the Republika Srpska
on the applicability of the judicial power of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Spain unconditionally and unreservedly supports
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of Bosnia

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and Herzegovina as well as the need for political leaders
to respect the rule of law and the principle of legality in
all of their undertakings.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I wish
to thank High Representative Inzko for his leadership
of the Office of the High Representative and his crucial
efforts on behalf of the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We again reiterate our strong
support for his mandate under the Dayton Agreement
as the final authority regarding the interpretation of the
civilian implementation of the Peace Agreement.
The United States joins members of the Council
and the European Union Foreign Affairs Council
in our continued support for the European Union
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) mandate and would also
like to commend the continuing work done by NATO
through NATO headquarters Sarajevo.
The United States fully backs the EUFOR Althea
mission, and we are pleased that today the Security
Council has adopted resolution 2247 (2015), which
renews all authorities, each and every one, and carries
forward all prior Council actions on EUFOR, the Office
of the High Representative and NATO.
We know that many in Bosnia and Herzegovina
depend on the Dayton institutions and the Peace
Agreement to ensure that their rights are protected. The
presence of EUFOR, as well as the Office of the High
Representative and NATO, provides reassurances that
this trust is well founded and has the backing of the
international community.
We look forward to the day when Bosnia and
Herzegovina meets the objectives and conditions
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative, but
that day has not arrived. Again, that day has not come
and the Security Council has reaffirmed that today. We
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders and all
members of the international community to support the
actions and reforms necessary to reach that milestone.
As the High Representative has noted, the adoption
of the reform agenda in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
good step towards that future; it must not be allowed
to falter. The United States strongly supports the
European Union’s initiative to advance quickly those
important economic and social reforms. We also
continue to support Euro-Atlantic integration, as it is
a cornerstone for security and stability in a previously
troubled region.

S/PV.7555

This year we marked 20 years since approximately
8,000 people were slaughtered in the mountains of
eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those who perpetrated
that genocide must be held accountable. We continue
to be disturbed by statements made by some political
leaders and groups that deny that a genocide ever took
place.
But let us be very clear: the escalating and divisive
rhetoric coming out of the Republika Srpska, and in
particular from Republika Srpska President Dodik. It
threatens both the Dayton Agreement and the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In recent months, words
and rhetoric have regrettably turned into action with
the passage in the Republika Srpska National Assembly
of a referendum law directly challenging the Office of
the High Representative and State-level institutions. As
the High Representative warned the Security Council
in his September letter (S/2015/841, annex) and again
in his briefing to us just this morning, the proposed
referendum may represent the most serious challenge to
the Peace Agreement in the last 20 years. It threatens to
disrupt the achievements of the international community
and of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina since
the end of the war. The referendum is dangerous, it is
anti-Dayton and it must not go forward.
We hope that constructive dialogue will prevail,
including through the structured dialogue on justice.
But no one should harbour any doubt as to the United
States commitment and dedication to both Dayton and
a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is whole and at peace.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a critical juncture.
Twenty years after the signing of the Dayton Agreement,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has transitioned from war to
peace. But we all know that peace is fragile and must
be constantly nurtured by all who participate in the
democratic sphere.
Two paths lay before the country, one of stagnation
and division and one of prosperity and greater
integration with Europe. The international community
must support Bosnia and Herzegovina as it pursues the
reforms necessary for a successful and stable future.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have listened carefully to the briefing by
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko. His regular briefing on the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement has
confirmed that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are independently tackling and solving very complex

15-357329/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

issues on their national agenda. They are doing so
successfully, especially when they are not interfered
with.
The priority task at this stage is to complete the
implementation of the “5+2” agenda. Pending problems
within that framework must be resolved by Bosnians
themselves through inclusive dialogue and on the basis
of the agreement of all three constituent peoples. The
exclusive task of the High Representative is to promote
such dialogue among the local parties and to assist in
the search for common ground. However, the report
of the High Representative (S/2015/841, annex) does
not include a detailed account of what has been done
in that area. Once again, the document lists only, in
chronological order, all the events that took place in
the country during the reporting period. Unfortunately,
that is not an innovative approach, nor does it reflect
the quality of the work undertaken. The analysis of the
report is superficial and does not attempt to consider
in depth the contemporary issues in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
First and foremost, this concerns the idea of ​​Banja
Luka to carry out a referendum of no confidence in the
central Bosnian judicial bodies, which was actively
discussed in the Chamber today. Instead of seeking
and understanding the real reasons for the situation in
which one of the constituent peoples justifiably state
that their rights have been brazenly trampled upon, the
High Representative limits himself to merely stating
his view with regard to the violations of the Dayton
Agreement. The document is drawn up in such a way as
to leave one with the impression that the leadership of
the Republika Srpska consistently does nothing other
than violate the Dayton Agreement and impede and
delay socioeconomic reforms with a view to splitting
from Bosnia and Herzegovina.
That thesis, unfortunately, again is further backed
by assessments of the April congress of the Alliance
of Independent Social Democrats, where a decision
was approved at the party level to carry out in 2017 the
referendum on the independence of the Republika of
Srpska if the violations of its legitimate rights continue.
There is no reference at all to the plans of the other
parties to turn Bosnia and Herzegovina into a unified
State or the popular idea of the creation of a third
entity. In other words, Serbians are not the only ones
experiencing problems. Other constituent peoples are
experiencing them as well.

10/23

10/11/2015

In this situation, we call upon Mr. Inzko not to look
for people to blame or those who are guilty, but to carry
out his work on the basis of promoting national dialogue.
Experience has shown that only through such national
dialogue can one address serious concerns, especially
in a complex State like Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We encourage and call upon all members to look
very carefully at the documents. The arguments for
holding a referendum are exhaustively spelled in a letter
from the President of Republika Srpska, Mr. Milorad
Dodik, to the Secretary-General. If members read
President Dodik’s letter carefully, the commitment of
Bosnian Serbs to international law and the letter of the
Dayton Agreement is unquestionably clear.
We would like to recall that the High Representative
acts on behalf of the entire international community.
His mandate derives from a Security Council resolution,
which obliges him to keep his activities in line with
the recommendations of this body. In practice, we are
forced to note that none of our comments addressed to
the High Representative were implemented.
We believe that the primary duty of the High
Representative is to maintain an unbiased and
balanced approach to his assessment of the internal
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, focus on
strengthening relationships of trust among the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and promote genuine national
reconciliation. That is the basis for the development of
a single State in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Progress in
that regard was noted today, within the framework of
the upcoming anniversary of the Dayton Agreement.
We again underscore the lack of alternative to the
further reduction of the budget of the Office of the High
Representative as part of the closure process adopted
by all of us. Arguments that he should retain the ability
to carry out his mandate, especially in the light of what
we have heard today, do not stand up to criticism. His
work hinders the further development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a modern European State that does not
pose a threat to international peace and security and
that deserves respect instead of external interference,
which is close in nature to that of a protectorate. In that
context, discussions regarding the Office’s possible
use of emergency tools or other instruments against
the Republika Srpska are absolutely unacceptable and
harmful.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I want to
begin by thanking the High Representative for Bosnia

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

and Herzegovina for his very comprehensive briefing
of the situation. I reiterate our full support for him and
commend his work on the subject.
I also associate myself with the statement to be
made shortly on behalf of the European Union.
France welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2247 (2015), demonstrating that the members
of the Council share the same fundamental principles
regarding Bosnia and Herzegovina: support for the
presence of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force (EUFOR) Operation Althea, authorized under
an executive mandate; respect for the commitment of
the leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to a European
perspective for their country; the importance of respect
for the international arrangements originating from
the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement; and the need
to cooperate with the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The unity of the Council around that common pillar
sends a signal of peace to the region. It reminds us of
the international community’s agreement to support the
independence and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as of its respect for that country’s
choices, provided that it respect international law and
the framework set by the Dayton Peace Agreement.
As others have said before me today, 2015 is heavily
symbolic for Bosnia and Herzegovina, because it marks
the twentieth anniversary of the events of Srebrenica,
which have been qualified as genocide by the ICTY and
the International Court of Justice, and the anniversary
of Dayton-Paris Accords. That dual anniversary
reminds us of our common obligation. It highlights not
only the great progress that has been made since the
mid-1990s, but also how the factors that cause division
can reappear at any time. In that context, France
expresses its concern over the proposed referendum
the authorities of Republika Srpska have referred to in
recent months, aimed at challenging the competence of
the jurisdiction of the central State. Such an approach
runs counter to the spirit of the Peace Agreement.
Our position on this is clear. The Republika Srpska
must comply with the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. There is room for improvement in the
functioning of the jurisdiction of the central State. The
efforts undertaken in partnership with the European
Union-led Structured Dialogue on Justice must speak
to those issues. However, any viable solution can be
achieved only through good-faith dialogue among

S/PV.7555

the various compoents of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina — the central State and the Entities — in
compliance with constitutional requirements. Political
leaders have a crucial role to play in that regard. We call
on them to abandon the outdated rhetoric of division.
France fully supports Bosnia and Herzegovina in its
sovereign choice to move closer to the European Union.
We are indeed convinced that the European integration
can meet the economic and social aspirations of the
population. That perspective is beneficial for the
country and for the rest of the Balkans. Closer ties with
the European Union are an expression of a decision
made by the Bosnians themselves through their
collegial Presidency. It is reflected in a commitment to
economic, social and political reforms that paved the
way for the entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June and the endorsement,
a few weeks later, of the Reform Agenda for Bosnia and
Herzegovina for 2015-2018. The European Union will
continue to assist the authorities in the implementation
of those reforms. EUFOR Althea will continue its
work in order to enable the Bosnian security forces to
operate independently and to participate thereby in the
consolidation of a pacific and forward-looking society.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, despite
its fragility, seems to have taken the path towards
normalization. The presence of the international
community remains no less necessary at the present
stage, and is firmly based on the framework of the
Dayton-Paris Accords. We therefore call on all parties
to cooperate with the institutions mentioned in the
Peace Agreement, in particular, the Office of the
High Representative and the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. However,
without undermining the founding principles of the
Dayton-Paris Accords, our common goal should be to
develop the international presence so that it is fully
adapted to current realities. The reflection on the
reconfiguration of the Office of the High Representative
should therefore continue.
Twenty years after experiencing the horror of the
war, Bosnia and Herzegovina is making strides in the
right direction. The United Nations, European Union
and regional partners must continue to show their
presence, alongside that country in the same unanimous
way that the Council has shown today.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I would like to thank
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his briefing and
for his comprehensive reports to the Council, including

15-3573211/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

the special report of 4 September. Listening to his latest
update on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
cannot help but feel that despite the voluminous work
and publications on the horrors of war, the lessons of
war and human tragedies appear to have been ignored.
Twenty years ago this month, the conflicting parties
in the Balkans war signed the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The agreement was brokered and guaranteed by key
members of the international community, endorsed
by the Council and subsequently upheld by various
Security Council resolutions. The Peace Agreement
ended a devastating war that saw a level of genocide
and ethnic cleansing in Europe unprecedented since the
Second World War. Since then, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has made considerable progress, reflecting the
achievements of peacebuilding by the United Nations,
in partnership with regional organizations. The
international community has invested a great deal in
rebuilding the country. Unfortunately, 20 years later,
the progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well
as the Balkans region, seems far from irreversible.
Malaysia is deeply concerned about the direct
challenges posed by the Republika Srpska to the
Dayton Peace Agreement, in clear violation of its
international commitments. Last April, the President of
the Republika Srpska declared that his political party
would call for a referendum to secede from Bosnia and
Herzegovina in 2018 if the party’s demands, as they
relate to the redistributing of competencies among levels
of Governments, were not met. In another alarming
development, last July the Republika Srpska National
Assembly decided to hold a referendum, scheduled for
this coming weekend, with the aim of challenging the
authority of the Office of the High Representative, the
rule of law and the judiciary of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Such a decision is contrary to the country’s Constitution
and the Dayton Peace Agreement.
In addition, during the reporting period the
President of the Republika Srpska continued to make
irresponsible statements denying genocide in Srebrenica,
in spite of the decisions of the International Court of
Justice and the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. As we may recall from previous
reports of the High Representative, the secessionist and
nationalistic rhetoric of Republika Srpska politicians is
not new and has been on the rise over in the past few
years. However, the recent decisions adopted by the
Republika Srpska authorities have effectively taken the
matter to a disturbing new level, constitute the gravest

12/23

10/11/2015

violations of the Dayton Peace Agreement to date, and
raise serious doubts about the future of the region. We
strongly urge Republika Srpska authorities to respect
the country’s Constitution, various Security Council
resolutions and the Dayton Peace Agreement, cease in
proceeding with the referendum on 15 November, and
renounce their divisive politics and secessionist agenda
so as to avoid the further destabilization of the region.
Earlier today, the Council unanimously voted on
resolution 2247 (2015), renewing the mandate of the
European-led multinational stabilization force for
another year. Malaysia welcomes the renewal of the
authorization of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea operation and the unity shown
once again by the Council on the matter. However, we
regret the fact that several key elements of the previous
resolutions have been removed or watered down in
resolution 2247 (2015).
In particular, Malaysia views it more important now
than ever for the Council to reaffirm its commitment
to the Dayton Peace Agreement and its support for
the Office of the High Representative, in view of the
worrying developments on the ground. We reiterate the
need to fully implement the “5+2” agenda as a condition
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative.
Until then, Malaysia reaffirms its strong support for the
Office of the High Representative, as laid down in the
Dayton Peace Agreement and upheld in various Council
resolutions. Verbal attacks and personal insults against
the High Representative and the staff of his Office are
unacceptable and must immediately cease.
Malaysia takes note of the positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina during the reporting period.
We welcome the increase in exports, foreign trade and
growth projections for 2015, as well as the country’s
improvement in credit and business ratings. We also
look forward to the country’s upcoming membership in
the World Trade Organization, which will further boost
foreign trade and investment.
Malaysia underlines the need for the Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to remain steadfast in its
reform agenda, particularly with regard to addressing
unemployment, fighting corruption and strengthening
the rule of law. After the collapse of the governing
coalition in May, we hope to see political stability return
to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Despite
the political uncertainties in the entity, we commend
the Federation authority for adopting the new labour
law under its reform agenda.
15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Malaysia also takes note of the priority accorded
by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
European integration as a cornerstone of its foreign
policy with a view to achieving peace, stability and
progress. In that regard, we welcome the country’s
movement towards that aim, especially the entry into
force of the Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union in June.
In conclusion, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to the independence, sovereignty, national unity
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in line with the Dayton Peace Agreement and
previous Security Council resolutions. We reiterate
our unwavering commitment to contributing to the
country’s nation-building, reconciliation and economic
progress. Malaysia has long supported Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its reconstruction efforts and will
continue to do so, especially in the areas of trade,
investment and education, as well as through technical
and defence cooperation programmes.
We urge all peoples to create a common space to
continue building Bosnia and Herzegovina for a better
future. That should be achieved by exercising collective
responsibility and intensifying efforts towards national
reconciliation and socioeconomic reforms to ensure
peace and stability in the long-term interests of the
country and the region.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to express our thanks and appreciation to the HighRepresentative for Bosnia and Herzegovina for his
briefing and for his report (S/2015/841, annex) on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as for the positive developments
set out in his reoprt with regard to the programme of
reform. However, we are concerned by the greater
challenges that beset the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which contravene
the Dayton Agreement.
We regret that certain parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the leaders of the Republika Srpska
are sowing doubt about the General Framework
Agrement for Peace by calling for a referendum on
separation. We warn against such declarations, which
could plunge the country into a dangerous crisis with
serious consequences. We urge those who call for a
secessionist referendum to abide by national legislation
and norms and to work to achieve the development and
progress of the country within the framework of the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

S/PV.7555

All influential international parties should engage
with the parties concerned in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and should use their good offices to contain those
worrying developments. The General Framework for
Peace is the only way to achieve stability and peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Stability in the Balkans in
general will be achieved only through endeavours by
all States in the region to establish good neighbourly
relations and to bolster their cooperation at all levels.
That will consolidate peace in the region. We therefore
welcome the noticeably improved relations between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Serbia,
which have led to the signing of bilateral agreements in
many fields. We also welcome the measures undertaken
by the Bosnian authorities geared to implementing their
obligations within the Stabilization and Association
Agreement and to joining the European Union. Those
measures will positively impact the livelihood of
Bosnian citizens. We urge the Bosnian authorities to
continue on that positive path and to implement the
requirements for their integration into the European
Union.
We pay tribute to the statement delivered by the
Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
at the General Debate of the seventieth session of
the General Assembly, in which he confirmed the
determination of his authorities to improve the living
conditions of citizens, promote the rule of law and
establish an egalitarian society for all (see A/70/PV.22).
We welcome the reform programmes undertaken over
the recent period and urge the Bosnian authorities
to intensify their efforts with a view to speeding up
reforms, in particular with respect to the promotion of
the rule of law and the fight against corruption.
We voted in favour of resolution 2247 (2015),
which renews the authorization for the European Union
military mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina for another
year. We pay tribute to those forces for their efforts to
achieve a thriving and secure future for Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the assistance of the Office of the
High Representative, whom we commend and whose
action we applaud. We stress the importance of the
continued work of that Office, given the threats and
dangers that beset the country.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his briefing and
report (S/2015/841, annex). The twentieth anniversary
of the General Framework for Peace in Bosnia and

15-3573213/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

10/11/2015

Herzegovina is an opportunity to encourage joint
work in the search for a united, stable Bosnia and
Herzegovina, where all communities of the country
can live together in peace. National integration and
reconciliation call for a shared vision for the country.
For that reason, we welcome the adoption of the
reform agenda for Bosnia and Herzegovina for 20152018, which the Parliamentary Assembly adopted on
17 September.

receive the political, financial and logistical support
needed for the fulfilment of its important functions.

We call once again for leaders to refrain from
negative rhetoric, which invariably exacerbates
inter-community violence, undermines cohesion,
blocks national reconciliation and delays the country’s
progress. Civil society plays a key role in fostering
understanding and dialogue to pave the way to
peacebuilding.

Our meeting takes place at an important moment
for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The commemoration of
the Srebrenica genocide earlier this year reminded
us all of the importance of continued reconciliation
efforts in the region. Twenty years ago this November,
the Dayton Peace Accord brought peace to the wartorn region. The international community through its
engagement contributed to the security, stability and
realization of the vision of a prosperous, multi-ethnic
country which the Peace Agreement had outlined.

We support Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to
overcome its past, and we acknowledge the progress
made by the Supervisory Board for the Implementation
of the War Crimes Prosecution Strategy in tackling
the pending cases. We also commend the efforts of the
Office of the High Representative in support of the
authorities for recognition and compensation to the
victims of sexual violence. However, efforts must be
made to continue supporting the return and reintegration
of refugees and internally displaced persons, as well
as the exhumation, identification and restitution of the
remains of the disappeared. Those are indispensable
conditions for achieving national reconciliation. We
reiterate the firm commitment that our country has had
from the beginning to a stable Bosnia and Herzegovina,
with institutions that work in the service of its people.
The presence of the multinational European
Union military operation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(EUFOR ALTHEA) and the NATO headquarters in
Sarajevo remain the guarantors of the country’s social
and political stability. That is why we have actively
participated in the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea for more than 10 years and
why we have supported the renewal of its presence in
the country for 12 months. Similarly, we call on the
international community to remain committed to the
full implementation of the Dayton Accords of 1995.
We hope that all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to cooperate with the Office of the
High Representative until the end of its mandate, in
accordance with the Peace Agreement.
Finally, I wish to reiterate our support for the Office
of the High Representative, which should continue to
14/23

Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): I join others in
welcoming High Representative Valentin Inzko back to
the Security Council, and thank him for his briefing. I
would also reassure him of our full support.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Through its positive agenda and prospects for
membership, the European Union has provided an
incentive for much-needed reforms for the countries in
the region. Bosnia and Herzegovina’s choice of EuroAtlantic integration has been confirmed on numerous
occasions and should not be questioned by anyone.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has applied to and remains
an aspirant for the NATO Membership Action Plan.
In this context, we welcome the progress noted in the
report of the High Representative (S/2015/841, annex)
on registration of defence property and look forward to
the completion of the remaining steps that would enable
activation of the NATO Membership Action Plan for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Important steps have been taken towards realizing
the country’s European perspective. Its authorities
reiterated their commitment to European integration
as a strategic goal. The Stabilization and Association
Agreement between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the European Union has entered into force. A
comprehensive reform agenda adopted at the State and
entity levels in July offers a framework for addressing
the most pressing social and economic challenges.
A crucial moment has come for all the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina to live up to their
responsibility before the country’s citizens and embark
on the implementation of this comprehensive agenda,
with the aim of improving social and economic
situation, strengthening the rule of law and enhancing
administrative capacities so that the agenda is translated
15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7555

into real benefits, jobs and opportunities for the nation.
A properly functioning mechanism of the coordination
of EU-relevant matters is of vital importance.

Representative. It should stand firmly behind Bosnia
and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united country and
in support of its Euro-Atlantic integration.

At this juncture, when consolidated efforts are most
needed to advance the reform agenda, we are seriously
concerned about the divisive rhetoric that threatens the
future course of the country. We are also alarmed by the
intention of the authorities of the Republika Srpska to
hold an entity-level referendum on State-level judiciary.
It is particularly troubling that such divisive rhetoric
is used to pursue political objectives that run counter
to the letter and the spirit of the Peace Agreement and
threaten the very sovereignty and unity of the country,
as noted in the special report of the High Representative.
This may seriously damage the country’s efforts to
improve the life of its citizens and its progression on the
EU accession path. Prospects for EU membership have
been extended to Bosnia and Herzegovina as a united
country. We reiterate our commitment to the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and
united country — a country with a European future.

Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin lnzko, for his briefing.

We believe that the shortcomings of Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s judicial system should be addressed
through constructive dialogue. The EU has engaged
in that regard through the Structured Dialogue on
Justice. We call on all the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to cooperate with the Office of the High
Representative with an aim of fulfilling the remaining
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office.
We also call upon all the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as well
as the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals.
Over the years the international community and
this Council have stood with Bosnia and Herzegovina
and greatly invested in creating security and stability in
the region. We fully support the continued presence of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Operation Althea with an executive military role to
underpin Bosnia and Herzegovina’s efforts to maintain
a safe and secure environment. We welcome the renewal
of the EUFOR Althea mandate by the Council today.
Both the words and the actions of the Security
Council are being followed closely in the countries of
the region. At this important juncture for the future
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council should be
united in condemning all actions that threaten the
Peace Accords. It should support the Office of the High

Twenty years after the signing of the Dayton Peace
Accords, Bosnia and Herzegovina has pursued its efforts
to consolidate peace and stability at both the national
and regional levels, although some challenges still need
to be overcome if the full and effective reconciliation of
all dynamic forces of its society is to be achieved.
Venezuela reaffirms its full support for respecting
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina and believes
that the international community must continue to
support the country in implementing the 1995 General
Framework Agreement for Peace as a way to contribute
to the peaceful settlement of disputes between the
actors concerned. In this context, we reaffirm that it
is up to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina to lead
the efforts related to the fate of their country, in which
process the various ethnic groups must resolutely
work, through dialogue, for peace, human rights,
cooperation and economic and social development.
For this reason, we urge that the work of the High
Representative in support of those efforts be fair,
transparent and constructive. Moreover, such efforts
should seek common denominators and be conducted in
an impartial, balanced and prudent manner that reflects
the opinions and views of all stakeholders.
The European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR) Operation Althea has carried out its work
under the mandate that has been given, in collaboration
with the authorities, in order to ensure a safe environment
for all ethnic communities. We therefore welcome the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2247 (2015), which
renews EUFOR Althea’s mandate for 12 months.
In another vein, we are concerned about the violence
that took place between April and October 2015, and we
condemn it, in particular the terrorist act perpetrated
against a police station in the town of Zvornik in the
Republika Srpska, as well as attacks against citizens
presumably on ethnic grounds. In this regard, we
appreciate the efforts of senior authorities to prevent
these unfortunate events from happening again and we
call for dialogue and reconciliation in the interests of

15-3573215/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

peace and stability. Moreover, we welcome the adoption
of the border treaty between Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Montenegro in Vienna in August, which emphasizes
once again that dialogue and negotiation between the
parties are the only way to peacefully resolve disputes.
We hope that the ratification process for the agreement
signed by both countries will end with success.
We reiterate our solidarity with and support for
Bosnia and Herzegovina in its firm commitment to
peace and stability in the country for the benefit of its
citizens. With regard to violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law committed during the
armed conflict in the territories that belonged to the
former Yugoslavia, we support the work being done
by the International Criminal Tribunal charged with
trying those responsible for such atrocities.
Finally, we call on all parties to redouble their
efforts with renewed political will and courage to build
confidence and joint work within the framework of
international law, which are aspects necessary for a just
and durable solution in the best interests of the parties
and the entire region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I welcome Valentin Inzko back to the Council
and thank him for his briefing and report (S/2015/841,
annex). I join others in reaffirming our full and
continuing support for his role as High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2247 (2015), renewing
the mandate of the European Union-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea. The deterrence and security it
provides are fundamental during this period of reform
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The political and security
situation on the ground remains worrying. Stability is
not yet entrenched and, sadly, divisive ethnic rhetoric
persists. That is why we welcome the Council’s
unanimity on this mandate renewal. We have sent a
clear message today that the whole Security Council is
committed to the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the implementation of the
Dayton Peace Agreement and the delivery of the reform
agenda of the European Union (EU).
To be clear, the United Kingdom is committed to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s future membership of the
European Union and NATO, and we are fully committed
16/23

10/11/2015

to helping it undertake the reforms necessary to achieve
its goal of Euro-Atlantic integration. In that regard, I
am pleased that the European Union was able to bring
into force the Stabilization and Association Agreement
earlier this year. We welcome the commitment made
by Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political parties to a
substantive reform agenda that will stabilize the
economy and improve the functionality of the State. We
also welcome the progress made on the issue of defence
property, which is needed for the entry into force of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s membership action plan, a
prerequisite for membership of NATO. We hope we
will see continued progress in the coming months.
However, serious challenges continue to threaten
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability and security. Last
month, the EU’s Foreign Affairs Council strongly
condemned the threat of a referendum in the Republika
Srpska that questions the State-level judiciary and
the powers of the High Representative. Threats of a
referendum are divisive, anti-constitutional and contrary
to the Dayton Agreement. There is a need to improve the
justice system at all levels, and we welcome the recent
steps taken by the European Commission to re-energize
the structured dialogue on justice. That is the right way
to address legitimate concerns, not through divisive
threats. We are fully committed to the continuation
of the Office of the High Representative until the
completion of the five objectives and two conditions for
its closure. The United Kingdom offers its full support
to the High Representative as the final authority on the
interpretation of civilian implementation of the Peace
Agreement, and we support use of the bond powers if
the situation requires.
I would like to close with a final reflection.
Twenty years ago, and four months after the genocide
of Srebrenica, the Dayton Agreement brought peace
and the prospect of a prosperous, stable future. As we
look back and remember how far the country has come,
let us also look to the future and see how much more
progress is needed before all the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina can benefit from the lasting prosperity
and stability they deserve. That will be achieved only
when all political leaders look beyond shortsighted,
self-interested actions. Today those leaders should
be struck, as I am, by the strength of concern in this
meeting of the Security Council about any rhetoric or
action that undermines Dayton. Significant work lies
ahead, requiring strong and courageous leadership.
I am pleased that today the United Kingdom and the

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Council have committed to supporting the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in making that a reality.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November, and to wish you and your
delegation every success. We welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
have taken note of his forty-eighth report (S/2015/841,
annex), covering the period from 21 April to 21 October
2015.
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the Council’s
adoption today of resolution 2247 (2015), which
extends the mandate of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) Operation Althea
for 12 months. The mandate of the EUFOR Althea
mission, with a current strength of 600 personnel on
the ground, is implementation of the military aspects
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace,
contained in its annexes 1A and 2. The situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has now been calm and
peaceful for a long period, which has had a positive
impact on regional stability. During the past few years
the EUFOR Althea mission has been reconfigured, and
its focus has shifted from deterrence and ensuring a
safe and secure environment to capacity-building and
training, reflected in the conclusions on 12 October
of the Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union
(EU). I should also mention that we have had good,
productive cooperation with EUFOR Althea in building
the capacity and training Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
armed forces.
We have demonstrated that Bosnia and Herzegovina
has come a long way. It has gone from being a security
consumer to becoming a troop contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping missions and thus a provider
of security for international peace and security.
Today, military and police personnel from Bosnia and
Herzegovina participate in many international peace
operations, including the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mali, Afghanistan, Liberia, South Sudan and
Cyprus.

S/PV.7555

The adoption of today’s resolution coincides with
the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace, which laid the
foundations of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s constitutional
and political system. The Agreement acknowledged
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a complex, multinational
State and reflected its unique historical and multicultural
background. It has played an important role in postconflict reconciliation in the region as a whole as well
as in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I would like to highlight some positive developments
that have taken place in Bosnia and Herzegovina during
the reporting period. First, since the last elections we
have seen the creation of a positive atmosphere that
has made a major contribution to advancing economic
and social reforms in the country and fostered progress
towards its admittance to the European Union. In
that connection, our Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the EU entered into force on 1 June,
while the EU reform Agenda was adopted in July. The
agenda stipulates the enactment of socioeconomic
reforms including in the areas of fiscal policy, the rule
of law and good governance, and constitutes one of the
country’s most significant steps forward of the past few
years. Shortly after that, the Presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina adopted a master plan for our integration
into the European Union. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities are fully committed to maintaining positive
momentum in this. The next step will be submitting
our application for EU membership at the beginning of
2016 in order to acquire candidate status by the end of
2017.
Secondly, it is worth mentioning that since 19 May,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has chaired the Committee of
Ministers of the Council of Europe, an organization that
promotes and strengthens democracy, human rights and
the rule of law throughout the continent. During our
chairmanship, we focused particularly on the promotion
and protection of human rights, with a special emphasis
on protecting the rights of vulnerable groups. On
22 October, we signed the Additional Protocol to the
Council of Europe Convention on the Prevention of
Terrorism. The Protocol is a significant step forward
in the fight against terrorism, and it accords with the
provisions of resolution 2178 (2014).
Thirdly, Bosnia and Herzegovina has continued
to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The ICTY’s closure
does not imply the end of my country’s fight against

15-3573217/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

impunity. Fighting impunity at the domestic level is a
prerequisite for achieving national reconciliation and
long-term stability in the country and the region. In
that regard, the implementation of a national strategy
for processing war crimes, regardless of the national
or religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to a complex, multinational State.
Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains fully
committed to further bolstering cooperation among
countries of the region. A special focus on regional
cooperation has been included in infrastructure projects
as a precondition of substantial economic development.
In that regard, the positive trend continues and a number
of important meetings have taken place at all levels
with representatives of the Western Balkan countries.
The most recent was an official visit by the delegation
of Serbia, led by the Prime Minister, to Sarajevo, where
a joint meeting between the Government of Serbia and
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina
took place on 4 November.
Fifthly, the country’s economic and fiscal
situation, as a result of global economic crises, remains
difficult. However, economic indicators have shown
some improvement. In the first eight months, export
increased by 4.9 per cent; by July, industrial production
had increased by 2.3 per cent, in comparison to the same
month in 2014. July’s unemployment rate decreased by
1 per cent, compared to the same period in 2014.
Finally, I would like to express the readiness of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities to continue their
work in securing a better and prosperous future for their
citizens. At the same time, we would like to express
gratitude to our international partners for supporting
Bosnia and Herzegovina on that path.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Vale de
Almeida.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: Allow me, in my first
intervention before the Council, to salute all of its
members and to say how much I look forward to fruitful
cooperation in the future.
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the
European Union and its member States. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
Ukraine and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

18/23

10/11/2015

We thank the Security Council for adopting
resolution 2247 (2015), renewing the mandate of the
European Union-led peacekeeping force (EUFOR)
Operation Althea in Bosnia for one year. I join other
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko back to the Council, and would like to express
our full and continuous support for him and his role,
as set out in the Council’s previous resolutions. I would
also like to welcome the new Permanent Representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Ambassador Miloš
Vukašinović. I wish the Ambassador a successful
tenure in New York and thank him for his statement.
The European Union (EU), emphasizing the
importance of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration, continues to work
closely with Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance its
stability, prosperity and European integration. This
year is one of historic anniversaries, and a time when
we are reminded of the country’s painful past. It has
also been an important year in terms of progress
achieved. The European Union and the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have worked together to move
the country forward towards the European Union. We
welcome the progress achieved so far. At the same time,
more needs to be done to ensure that a united, stable
and multi-ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina can move
forward towards prosperity and the European Union.
Fostering good-neighbourly relations with all of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s neighbours and other countries of
the region is of vital importance in that regard.
This year, Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU perspective
was further strengthened. The Stabilization and
Association Agreement between the European Union,
its member States and Bosnia and Herzegovina entered
into force on 1 June. It is an important step forward.
Contractual relations with the European Union have
been reinforced, bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the EU closer together economically, institutionally and
politically. The Agreement opens a binding agenda for
deep reforms that, as experience shows, will improve
people’s quality of life and move the country closer to
EU membership. The confidence of investors, domestic
and international, should increase and Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s businesses could further improve their
access to the EU’s internal market of some 500 million
consumers, thereby providing their services across the
EU and competing for public contracts.
The most comprehensive package of socioeconomic
and judicial reforms ever in Bosnia and Herzegovina — the

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

S/PV.7555

so-called Reform Agenda — was adopted by the political
leadership at the State and Entity levels in July. The
Reform Agenda reflects the collective wish of all
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina for real change,
greater prosperity, stronger rule of law and more
opportunities. The EU and the international financial
institutions will continue to support the implementation
of the Reform Agenda, including by providing €1 billion
over three years, and putting aside another €500 million
for investment. That should encourage more private
investment and boost the overall economy, creating
more jobs and opportunities for everyone.

also risks undermining the efforts to make further
progress in EU integration to which all political leaders
are committed. It also distracts attention from the social
and economic problems that people throughout Bosnia
and Herzegovina face on a daily basis. Divisive and
separatist rhetoric remains a cause for serious concern
and is disruptive and a distraction from the reforms
Bosnia and Herzegovina has to go through. Politicians
need to focus their efforts on implementing the Reform
Agenda, which is aimed at stabilizing the economy and
create new jobs, particularly for young people, improve
the rule of law and tackle corruption.

Meaningful progress in the implementation of the
Reform Agenda, including the Compact for Growth
and Jobs, will be necessary for an EU membership
application by Bosnia and Herzegovina to be considered
by the European Union. When requesting the
Commission’s opinion on the membership application,
the Council will ask the Commission to pay particular
attention to the implementation of the Sejdic-Finci
ruling. Furthermore, ensuring efficient coordination
on all EU-relevant matters is one of the main tasks
facing the country. Such coordination should facilitate
the decision-making needed in the EU integration
process and serve as an effective vehicle to ensure
domestic legislation harmonization with the EU acquis.
Moreover, the EU urges Bosnia and Herzegovina to
fully uphold its commitments and obligations under
the Stabilization and Association Agreement, including
those relating to the adaptation of the Agreement.

The shortcomings of the judicial system in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should continue to be addressed and
improved through constructive dialogue. The EU works
with all relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
in the framework of the Structured Dialogue on Justice,
and stands ready to intensify its efforts to improve
the performance and functioning of the legal system.
We also call, on a more general note, on the Bosnia
and Herzegovina authorities to continue to cooperate
fully with all entities involved in the implementation
of the Dayton-Paris Peace Accords, including the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made progress in the
last two decades both domestically and in its relations
with neighbouring countries. This year, concrete
progress has been made on the country’s EU path after
a prolonged period of stagnation. But that progress must
not be jeopardized by initiatives taken for short-term
political purposes and misleading and harmful political
visions. We call on the leaders and people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from divisive rhetoric, pull
together and move forward.
We express our serious concern about the
preparations for holding an Entity-level referendum on
the State-level judiciary in Republika Srpska. Holding a
referendum on the State judiciary in Republika Srpska
would challenge the cohesion, sovereignty and integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to which the leaders of all
the main political parties represented in the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliaments, including the President of
Republika Srpska, are committed. Holding a referendum

The European Union’s deep engagement in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is firmly entrenched
and multidimensional. EU High Representative
Vice-President Mogherini, together with Commissioner
for European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement
Negotiations Hahn, and in close collaboration with
EU member States, will continue to carry out the
EU commitment in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And
we will also continue working closely with the High
Representative, his Office and our international
partners in our endeavours.
The European Union’s strengthened political
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina will remain in
the person of the Head of Delegation/EU Special
Representative, my colleague Ambassador LarsGunnar Wigemark, and his Office with a view to
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina in all EU-related
matters, including by providing political guidance on
military issues with a local political dimension to the
EU Force Commander.
The European Union will also continue to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s progress in the security
field and towards its national ownership. The overall
security situation has remained calm and stable, yet
stability has not been fully entrenched. The European

15-3573219/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Union welcomes the continued presence of EUFOR
Althea, which retains the capability to contribute to
the deterrence capacity of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
authorities if the situation so requires, while focusing
on capacity-building and training. In this context,
as part of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the EU confirms its readiness at this
stage to maintain an executive military role to support
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s authorities in maintaining a
safe and secure environment, under a renewed United
Nations mandate. At the same time, the EU has agreed
to keep Operation Althea under regular review, with a
view to assessing progress on the conditions conducive
to the delivery of its mandate. In this context, furthering
the efforts of EUFOR Althea in the field of capacitybuilding and training could be considered.
In the context of the overall EU strategy for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we look forward to continuing the
discussion with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, in the
appropriate forum, and call on the authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to meet without further delay the
outstanding objectives and conditions for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative.
To conclude, 20 years since the Dayton-Paris Peace
Accords, the European Union reiterates its unequivocal
commitment to the stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and united
country. We welcome the adoption of an ambitious
Reform Agenda in July, as envisaged in the December
2014 EU Council Conclusions, and the entry into force
of the Stabilization and Association Agreement. This
positive momentum needs to be not only maintained,
but intensified by all political leaders for a prosperous
and European future of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
its citizens. In that context, the EU, being a direct
neighbour of Bosnia and Herzegovina, presents great
opportunities for the country and its citizens. The
European Union stands ready to further assist in this
respect.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me start by joining
other speakers in welcoming High Representative
Valentin Inzko I would also like to express Croatia’s
appreciation for his briefing and comprehensive report
(S/2015/841, annex), as well as for his hard work and
dedication in carrying out his important mandate.

20/23

10/11/2015

Croatia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the obsever of the European Union (EU),
and I shall add several remarks in my national capacity.
In just a few days, on 21 November, we will
mark the twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. There is no doubt that the Agreement
was a major diplomatic achievement that stopped the
bloodshed and brought much needed peace to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It also established a complex and
specific political system based on ethnic representation,
resting on genuine equality among three constitutive
peoples. For Croatia, it remains the key element for the
stability and functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign and united
country, are fundamental prerequisites for the stability
and prosperity of South-East Europe.
It is therefore unfortunate and deeply troubling that
the twentieth anniversary of Dayton is being marred
by secessionist and inflammatory rhetoric that is not
only politically unacceptable but also potentially
harmful for the reforms which Bosnia and Herzegovina
has to go through. We strongly oppose and condemn
the secessionist statements and divisive actions that
have been recently undertaken by Republika Srpska.
We condemn the decision of the members of the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to call
for a referendum on High Representative decisions
concerning the Court and the Prosecutor’s Office of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Conducting such a referendum
would have a detrimental effect on the sovereignty and
integrity of the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in clear
violation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Furthermore,
it would overshadow the Reform Agenda and pivotal
socioeconomic issues waiting to be resolved. The legal
uncertainty that would arise after the referendum could
have multiple negative implications, including for
security.
We strongly believe that the steady and forwardlooking European integration process is the most
efficient and constructive way to reach the internal
consolidation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and lay
strong foundations for its prosperous future. Croatia
firmly supports the new EU approach for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We fully support the ongoing engagement
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
new EU initiative for that country, and we hope that it
will continue to support the implementation of much-

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

needed political and economic reforms that require the
consensus of all political parties in the country.
The entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June was is a first concrete
step in the country’s process of European integration
and the first contractual relation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the EU. It paves the way for the two
sides to work more closely together. The Agreement
is a first concrete institutional framework for the
implementation of all necessary reforms. Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to fully uphold its commitments
and obligations under the Agreement, including those
relating to its adaptation following the accession of
Croatia to the European Union in 2013.
The adoption of the Reform Agenda in July, which
is aimed at improving socioeconomic conditions and
the rule of law and tackling corruption, is certainly
a positive sign. It is an important step in the right
direction, and all those who are carrying it should be
supported and encouraged.
As far as Bosnia and Herzegovina’s advancement to
NATO is concerned, we believe that the intensification
of the NATO integration process is also of importance
to the stability and security of the country. We invite
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
intensify their efforts regarding the implementation
of the six parties’ political agreement on the issue of
registering immovable defence properties and to work
constructively to implement the agreement in order to
start the first Membership Action Plan cycle for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
The security and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are vital to the security of the whole
European continent. Therefore, Croatia continues
to support the executive mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea. Its
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to serve
as a support to the authorities in maintaining a safe and
secure environment, if needed, in situations of security
threats. It also has an important role in capacitybuilding and training.
In Croatia’s view, the executive mandate should
not be seen in any way as an obstacle to the country’s
process of Euro-Atlantic integration. On the contrary, it
should be seen as a part of the comprehensive approach
of the European Union to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and an important element of its commitment to the
European future of the country.

S/PV.7555

Croatia advocates, and will continue to do so, for a
sharp and permanent focus on Bosnia and Herzegovina
at the European and international levels. That important
country, with all its rich and often troubled history,
and untapped potential, deserves our full and constant
attention. We believe that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is within the community of States and
nations of the European Union and NATO. We are
ready to render our full support as a neighbour, friend
and partner.
The President of the Republic of Croatia, Ms. Kolinda
Grabar-Kitarović, recently stated in Sarajevo that:
“Bosnia and Herzegovina is Europe’s treasure,
which needs to be recognized and accented. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is not Europe’s problem, but rather
an opportunity for affirming the idea of European
cooperation and unity in diversity — a historical
project of peace.”
We sincerely hope that, 20 years after the end of
the war that caused unspeakable atrocities — such as
the genocide in Srebrenica, the twentieth anniversary
of which we commemorated a few months ago — the
twentieth anniversary of Dayton will be an opportunity
not only to take stock of the past 20 years but, even
more so, to look towards the future, the secure, stable
and prosperous future that Bosnia and Herzegovina
deserves in every way.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Mr. Milanović (Serbia): At the outset, I would like
to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as today’s adoption of
resolution 2247 (2015).
Bosnia and Herzegovina is not only a next-door
neighbour, but also one of the key partners of my country
in the region. At a time when Europe faces numerous
challenges, dialogue, understanding and cooperation
in the Western Balkans and South-East Europe are
perhaps more important than ever before. It is therefore
only natural that the promotion of comprehensive
relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina is one of Serbia’s
priorities. The potential for cooperation between our
two countries is enormous, all the more so as we remain
committed wholeheartedly to achieving our common
goals and set our sights on a positive vision of the future.

15-3573221/23

S/PV.7555

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Serbia is a guarantor of the Dayton Peace
Agreement, the twentieth anniversary of which we are
currently marking. Twenty years ago, the Agreement
was instrumental in ending the tragic conflict in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and established the basis for
a peaceful and stable future and, just as important, for
reconciliation. It was followed by economic and social
recovery, development and progress in the process
of European Union integration, as well as by the
strengthening of neighbourly cooperation in the region.
A good neighbour, my country was and remains open
to close relations and joint activities with Bosnia and
Herzegovina that bring us ever closer to membership of
the European Union.
Serbia has always respected, fully and consistently,
the principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States, an international standard of paramount
importance. In that context, my country has been a
staunch and steadfast supporter of the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as provided for by the Dayton Peace Agreement. For
the stability and development of that country, also the
homeland of 1.5 million Serbs, and its regional and
European integration have no alternative.
Over the past 20 years, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has demonstrated that dialogue and agreement between
its entities best address the issues that are important
for its future. Active dialogue is needed today, too, just
as is intensive communication, if differences are to be
overcome. We firmly believe that all political leaders
in Bosnia and Herzegovina are also aware of that need.
We also believe that all the crucial decisions important
for the future of the country should be arrived at as
a result of dialogue and agreement among its entities
and its three constituent peoples, as they reflect the
interests of, and benefit, them all.
In that context, it should be pointed out that the
holding of the referendum in the Republika Srpska on
the judiciary of Bosnia and Herzegovina is an internal
question to be resolved by dialogue among political
actors, within the existing legal system of that country.
After all, the creation of ever-greater trust among
Serbs, Bosniacs and Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina
is exceedingly important for joint activities and reforms
conducive to the country’s full membership of the
European Union.
As a neighbour and an important partner, Bosnia
and Herzegovina occupies an important place in the
activities of the current Government of Serbia. It was,
22/23

10/11/2015

I recall, the first country that Serbian Prime Minister
Aleksandar Vučić visited after his election, and the
political dialogue between Serbia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which my country invested significant
efforts, culminated this year. Last week, a joint session
of the Governments of the two countries took place
in Sarajevo — indicative of the importance attached
to the development of mutual relations. The session
also focused on furthering good-neighbourliness and
reconciliation and the quest for ways and means to
promote cooperation and meet the expectations of the
peoples of the two countries to live a better life.
Last July, the victims were commemorated in
Srebrenica 20 years after the crime. Serbian Prime
Minister Vučić also went to pay respects. Regrettably,
he was brutally attacked at the Potocari Memorial
Centre. Yet, well aware that senseless acts of violence
must not be taken as points of reference for relations
among States, and guided by the spirit of Serbia’s
avowed policy of friendship and cooperation, the Prime
Minister invited the members of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to visit Serbia only 10 days
after that incident. The occasion was used to reconfirm
the resolve of my country to work just as hard and as
undeterred as before on the promotion of good relations
and cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to conduct dialogue on all issues, including those
in respect of which differences exist. In addition to
sending a strong message that the leaders of Serbia and
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are responsible people who
look optimistically to the future and have the well-being
of their children at heart, the visit was used to sign three
practical agreements in the field of telecommunication,
the environment and cultural heritage, and a protocol
on cooperation in the search for missing persons.
Also last May, Prime Minister Vučić participated
in the Sarajevo Business Forum, alongside political
and economic leaders from all over the world. He
will also participate in the International Investment
and Development Conference, scheduled to begin
in Srebrenica tomorrow. In the spirit of a genuine
collective commitment to the future, especially
lasting reconciliation and a better life for all — and
for young people in particular, which that conference
symbolizes — Serbia is ready to help the local selfGovernment of Srebrenica by constructing a necessary
public facility in the town.
Avowals of support for a cause or a policy may
ring hollow and sound phony unless substantiated

15-35732

10/11/2015

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

by evidence that they help the cause and the policy
succeed. Here, therefore, are some basic statistics.
In 2014, the overall trade exchange between Serbia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to €1.4 billion.
In the period from January to July 2015, it reached
€822 million. This year, Serbia’s exports increased by
9.2 per cent and its imports by 9.6 per cent, as compared
with the same period last year. The possibilities for
increasing those amounts even further are manifold,
especially with regard to investment in infrastructure
development, energy, tourism, joint ventures and the
defence industry. A joint approach to pre-accession
assistance would help in that regard, too.
Serbia welcomes the decision of the European
Union last June to de-freeze the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A staunch advocate of European integration for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Serbia views the possible submission
by that country of its candidature for membership in
the European Union in a positive sign. We are willing
to strengthen mutual cooperation in that regard,
especially through the work of the commission on the
implementation of the action plan of the memorandum
of understanding on cooperation in the field of European

S/PV.7555

integration, the next meeting of which is to be held in
Serbia in the first quarter of 2016. On a note of special
satisfaction, let me point out that the Serbian presidency
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe was delighted to see Bosnia and Herzegovina in
the chair of the Council of Europe. As a very important
forum in which to cooperate on addressing many
important issues on the agenda of the two organizations
jointly, it was also a sign of recognition of the level of
stabilization and cooperation achieved in our region.
By way of conclusion, let me reiterate what my
country has said many times over: we are committed
to promoting ever-closer and the best possible relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We treasure its stability
and prosperity. For us, the policy of dialogue, goodneighbourliness and cooperation has no alternative.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
For future reference, I would like respectfully to
remind all representatives that, when the microphone
light starts flashing, it means it is time to stop talking.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

15-3573223/23
