Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Third Committee

antagonisms and deep unrest in society, aggravated by
the existence of conditions of economic and social
inequality,
Aware that discriminatory prejudices must be combated and eliminated by means of education and information as well as by the adoption of positive legislative or other measures designed to bring about a climate
of understanding and co-operation among the various
ethnic and cultural groups of society,
Convinced that the International Year for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination, which
the General Assembly has proclaimed for the year
1971, will not achieve its objective unless effective
measures are taken in all fields to combat attitudes and
laws contrary to the principles of the Charter and the
norms of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
Welcorr.ing the entry into force of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and noting with satisfaction the first
report of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination,11
1. Solemnly reiterates its condemnation of all forms
of racial discrimination wherever they may occur, and
particularly of apartheid, as a flagrant contradiction of
the spirit and the letter of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, and deplores the persistence of such_ practices;
2. Appeals to the Governments of countries where
forms of racial discrimination still persist and to the
Governments which officially apply such policies as
apartheid to take without delay all the legislative,
educational and social measures necessary to end them
and to ensure respect for human rights in accordance
with the Charter;
3. Vehemently affirms the need for all men to be
given an equal chance and to be enabled to live and
work together in an atmosphere of mutual trust and
tolerance, without discrimination and with full respect
for the national and cultural identity of peoples or
distinct ethnic groups;
4. Urges Member States to do their utmost to
eliminate all racial discrimination in education, employment, housing and other fields of community life, and
to encourage the development of multiracial activities
with a view to removing obstacles to understanding
among the various racial groups;
5. Invites all peoples of the world and all men of
goodwill to condemn unrelentingly the evils of racial
policies and to disseminate all information calculated to
combat such policies;
6. Invites countries which are not yet parties to the
International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination to take any steps
necessary to ratify it or accede to it if possible in 1971,
on the occasion of the International Year for Action
to Combat Racism and Racial Discrimination;
1. Emphasizes the importantic- of the work being
done by the United Nations, io particular the Commission on Human Rights and tl-ic Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of
Minorities, and by the speciafo:ed agencies, including
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the International Labour Organisation, and the non-governmen',tl organizations asso-·
r,'ofjicial Records of the Gene;,.' 1issembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplemem No. 17 { A/ll\11.,

73

ciated with their efforts towards the elimination of all
forms of racial discrimination;
8. Reaffirms. its intention to take the opportunity
of the International Year for Action to Combat Racism
and Racial Discrimination to promote throughout the
world social justice based on absolute respect for the
dignity of the individual.
1915th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.
2648 (XXV), Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Noting that the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination
entered into force on 4 January 1969 and that, as at
22 October 1970, forty-four States had deposited their
instruments of ratification or accession to the Convention,
Noting also the meetings of the States parties to the
Convention in 1969 and the election by them of the
members of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination in accordance with the provisions
of article 8 of the Convention,
Having received the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination,8
1. Stresses the significance, for the fulfilment of the
objectives of the United Nations in the field of human
rights, of the coming into force of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination and of the bringing into being of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which was created by that Convention and which
should play an effective role in the achievement of its
purposes;
2. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, submitted under article 9 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination, on the first year of its activities;
3. Requests all States parties to the Convention to
give full co-operation to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in order that it may
fulfil its mandate under the Convention.
1915th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.
2649 (XXV). The importance of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of
independence to colonial countries and peo•
ples for the effective guarantee and observ•
ance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Emphasizing the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination and
of the speedy granting of independence to colonial
countries and peoples for the effective guarantee and
observance of human rights,
Concerned that many peoples are still denied the
right to self-determination and are still subject to
colonial and alien domination,
6 fbid.

74

General A11embly-Twenty 6fth Session

Regretting that the obligations undertaken by States
under the Charter of the United Nations and the decisions adopted by United Nations bodies have not
proved sufficient to attain respect for the right of
peoples to self-determination in all cases,
Recalling its resolution 2588 B (XXIV) of 15
December 1969 and resolution VIII adopted by the
International Conference on Human Rights held at
Teheran in 1968,7
Considering that it is necessary to continue the study
of ways and means of ensuring international respect for
the right of peoples to self-determination,
Noting the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, 8 which elaborated the principle of selfdetermination of peoples,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling its resolution 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970 on the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
1. Affirms the legitimacy of the struggle of peoples
under colonial and alien domination reco~zed as
being entitled to the right of stlf-determination to restore to themselves that right by any means at their
disposal;
2. Recognizes the right of peoples under colonial
and alien domination in the legitimate exercise of their
right to self-determination to seek and receive all kinds
of moral and material assistance, in accordance with
the resolutions of the United Nations and the spirit of
the Charter of the United Nations;
3. Calls upon all Governments that deny the right
to self-determination of peoples under colonial and
alien domination to recognize and observe that right in
accordance with the relevant international instruments
and tb:. ;)rinciples and spirit of the Charter;
4. Considers that the acquisition and retention of
territory in contravention of the right of the people of
that territory to self-determination is inadmissible and
a gross violation of the Charter;
5. Condemns those Governments that deny the right
to self-determination of peoples recognized as being
entitled to it, especially of the peoples of southern
Africa and Palestine;
6. Requests the Commission on Human Rights to
study, at its twenty-seventh session, the implementation
of the United Nations resolutions relating to the right
of peoples under colonial and alien domination to selfdetermination, and to submit its conclusions and recommendations to the General Assembly, through the
Economic and Social Council, as soon as possible.
1915th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.

2650 (XXV). Report of the United Nations High
f.A>mmissioner for Refugees

The General Assembfy,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
'f Final Act of the International Conference on Human
Rights (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIV.2),
i;,. 9.
8 Resolution 262.'i (XXV).

0

High Commissioner for Refugees11 and having beard
bis statement, 10
Noting with appreciation the results obtained by the
High Commissioner in the accomplishment of bis
humanitarian task of providing international protection
to refugees within his mandate and promoting permanent solutions to their problems,
Noting the constant efforts being made to this end by
the High Commissioner, in co-operation with United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote the
voluntary repatriation, the mtegration in countries of
asylum or the resettlement in other countries of
refugees who are his concern-whether groups of
refu,ees. or in~ividual refugees-:-who~e p~blems are
causing mcreasmg concern, especially 10 Africa,
Commending the encouraging progress obtained in
the field of interagency co-operation, which, particularly
as far as the rural settlement of refugees in develo:eing
countries is concerned, is essential in order to achieve
durable solutions that are closely linked with the economic and social development of these countries,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Commissioner's
assistance programme and the substantial increase in
some of these contributions,
Expressing its appreciation of the growing number
of accessions to the Convention relating to the Status
of Refugees of 1951 11 and the Protocol relating to the
Status of Refugees of 1967,12 and expressing the hope
that this trend will continue,
1. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees to continue to provide international pr~
tection and assistance to refugees who are bis concern,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
resolutions, in particular those relating to the new
groups of refugees in Africa, and with the directives of
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
efforts to achieve, in co-operation with the Governments concerned, the specialized agencies and other
members of the United Nations system, speedy and
satisfactory solutions to the problems of refugees;
3. Urges Governments to continue to lend their
support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian and
constructive task l,y:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection;
( b) Continuing to co-operate in the promotion of
permanent solutions for refugees, including in particular
mdividual cases in Africa;
( c) Providing the necessary means to enable the
financial targets, established with the approval of the
Executive Committee, to be reached.
1915 th plenary meeting,
30 November 1970.
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/8012) and Supplement No.
12A (A/8012/Add.1).
10 Ibid., TwentY•fifth Session, Third Committee, 1789th
meeting.
11 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189 (1954), No. 2545.
12 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-first
Session, Supplement No. llA (A/6311/Rev.1/Add.1), part
one, para. 2.
