UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

16 JUNE

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2284). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda. . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge d’affaires of the Permanent Mission
of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/14509) . . , . . . . . , . , , . . . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . . . . . .

1

SlPV.2284

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Qfficial Records of the Security Comcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions
qf the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactiveIy to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2284th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 16 June 1981, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Porfirio

MUNOZ

LED0

(Mexico).

(India),
Mr. Suwondo
(Indonesia),
Mr. La Rocca
(Italy),
Mr.
Nuseibeh
(Jordan),
Mr.
Al-Sabah
(Kuwait),
Mr. Tue’ni (Lebanon),
Mr. Erdenechuluun
(Mongolia),
Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco),
Mr. Ahmad
(Pakistan),
Mr. Freyberg
(Poland),
Mr. Marinescu
(Romania),
Mr. Koroma
(Sierra Leone), Mr. Adan
(Somalia), Mr. Abdalla (Sudan), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic),
Mr. Kirca (Turkey),
Mrs. Nguyen
Ngoc
Dung
(Viet
Nam),
Mr.
Alaini
(Yemen),
Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Mutukwa
{Zambia),
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines,
Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional

agenda (SIAgenda12284)

I.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge
d’affaires of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/14509)
The meeting

of the agenda

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives of
Nicaragua and Sri Lanka, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives
to participate
in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rutes of procedure.

was called to order at 12 noon.

Adoption

of the Agenda

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Iraq:
Letter dated 8 June 1981 from the Charge d’affaires
of the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
CounciI (S/14509)

At the invitation of the President,
Mr. Chamorro
Mora (Nicaragua)
and Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [228&h to 2283rd meetings], I invite the
representatives of Iraq and Israel to take places at the
Council table, and I invite the representatives
of
Algeria, Bangladesh, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Guyana, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Mongolia, Morocco,
Pakistan, Poland, Romania, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Viet
Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zambia and of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to take the places reserved for
them at tbe side of the Council chamber.

(interpretation
from Spanish):
3. The PRESIDENT
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a Ietter dated 16 June 1981 from the
representative
of Uganda [S/14540]; which reads as
follows:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittani (Iraq)
and Mr. Blum (Israel) took places at the Council table
and Mr. Bedjaoui (Algeria), Mr. Kaiser (Bangladesh),
Mr. Corr&a da Costa (Brazil), Mr. Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Hulinsky (Czecho:
Slovakia),
Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Sinclair
(Guyana),
Mr.
Rdcz
(Hungary),
Mr,
Krishnan

4. If I hear no objection,
1 shall take it that the
Council agrees to that request.

“I have the honour to request you to invite, under
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, Mr. Sigvard Eklund, Director General of
the International
Atomic Energy Agency, to participate in the present debate in the Security Council
entitled ‘Complaint by Iraq’.”

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sigvard
Eklund, (Director General of the International
Atomic
Energy Agency) took the place reserved for him at the
side of the Council chamber.
1

and then revelling publicly in the attack of 7 June 1981
against the Tamuz atomic reactor, Israel committed a
premeditated military act which neither what it calls
the preservation of its security nor its avowed fear of a
supposedly forthcoming Iraqi atomic bomb suffices to
justify today. And its reference to Article 51 of the
Charter is not merely abusive but also misleading. In
this case, there was no legitimate self-defence; there
was aggression, because Israel was in no way facing
an imminent attack, irrefutably proved and demonstrated, As regards the Iraqi bomb, it existed onIy in
the imagination of the Israeli leaders. The French
Government which provided the reactor and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have
formally and categorically gone on record on that
point.

5. The PRESIDENT (‘interpretation from Spark/z):
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents: S/14534, letter
dated 15June 1981from the representative of Israel to
the President of the Council; S/14535, letter dated
12 June from the representative of Qatar to the
Secretary-General; and S/14536,letter dated 15 June
from the representative of Indonesia to the President
of the Council.
6. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (interpretation from
Mr. President, my delegation is already
aware of your devotion to justice and peace. It knows
with what conviction you defend noble causesthat are
in accordance with law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations. It knows also with
what devotion you have been working for nearly two
years now at the head of your delegation to ensure that
Mexico’s activities in the United Nations do full
justice to its prestige and its place in the concert of
nations. Thus we have no concern at seeing you once
again acting as President of the Council to steer our
debates to the appropriate conclusion. It will suffice
therefore if I present my warmest and most friendly
congratulations to you on your assumption of the post
of President.
French):

12. The Israeli act of 7 June thus stems from a clear
will to dominate and an unacceptable propensity for
constantly humiliating the adversary and thus to
contribute to perpetuating the crisis. Viewed in the
light of an already explosive situation, and in relation to a region in which there is already incalculable suffering, such an attitude could only lead to
extremely grave consequences. It is in that context
that we condemn it.

7. My compliments go also to your predecessor,
Mr. Nisibori of Japan,for the notable wisdom and tact
with which he conducted the Council’s work during
the month of May.

13. But there is also the serious effect that this act
will have on the future of international relations.
Claiming that it is ensuring its survival, citing alarmist
and, in any case, biased and slanted information,
Israel challengesthe right of Iraq, or of any State in the
region, to equip itself with installations of its choice,
particularly nuclear installations, in order to promote
its technological progress and to work for the development of its people. For above and beyond today’s
target, Osirak, that is what we are actually dealing
with. Hence our grave concern over the idea that,
despite the rules of international law, any sovereignty
can be thus brutally curtailed, and that any State can
set about in the future attacking another State, merely
invoking its instinct for preservation. Hence our cal
upon the Security Council to take up this precedentsetting action with the care and seriousness it deserves. For the stability of the world is truly in danger.
The law of the jungle is making new converts. The
Charter, in the name of which the United Nations is
striving to discipline the world, runs the risk of losing
out in terms of its essenceand credibility.

8. I shall now add my voice, the voice of the Niger,
to those of the very large number of previous speakers
to continue and perhaps strengthen what Mr. Blum
has, without batting an eyelid, at this sametable called
“The sham and charade [which] will not add to the
stature of the Council” [228&h meeting, para. 64. We
shall thus take our place within the league castigated
by the representative of Israel, welcoming the fact,
however, that that speaker added his own humbug to
the sham and charade which he is denouncing.
9. But we do this not out of spite nor from opportunism. And if we were to shed tears over this tragic
affair they would certainly not be crocodile tears, but
rather a simple and sincere manifestation of our
condemnation of this crime and this wretched waste of
human lives.
10. Thus, we take part in this debate because the
Niger cannot remain silent when law is so spectacularly flouted; when the sovereignty of a State
Member of the Organization is so blatantly violated
and trampled on; when peaceand stability in an entire
region of the world are so gravely threatened; and
when open attempts are made to take us back to the
times-long gone, we thought-when force and warlike adventurism ruled the day,

14. The Iraqi project had the merit of openness, since
it was carried out in the full light of day, within the
appropriately restricted framework of the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons [General
Assembly resolution 2373 (XXZI), annex] and under
the strict umbrella of the IAEA safeguards system.
Furthermore, it had the benefit of international cooperation, which we for our part do not believe is
capable of complacency or complicity. The fact that
Israel ignored so many pre-conditions and precautions
clearly demonstrates that country’s insatiable determination to flout the international community con-

1I. Our intention, therefore, is a perfectly clear one.
By conceiving, calculating, organizing, carrying out
2

stantly, to act in a headstrong manner, mindful only of
its policy of defiance, power and expansion. And all
that in order to attempt to avoid indefinitely
a crucial
problem, a problem at the very centre of its own
concerns and at the heart of the entire Middle East
problem-that
is, the burning problem of Palestine.
15. For 33 years the Middle East region has been
unlike other regions. Instability reigns there, because
law is no longer respected. Tragedies take place there
because justice is flouted. Wars take place there one
after the other because brutal force has the key to the
city. An entire people is living the life of refugees, and
the usurper has sworn to attack any neighbouring
country which, out of duty or solidarity,
aids and
supports that people. Lebanon, for example, is currently paying a tragic price, in full view of the United
Nations and, indeed, the Security Council.
16. I tend to believe, therefore, that the raid on
Qsirak had, all things considered, no other motive than
this: to prevent the Arab nations that are protecting
the Palestinians from rapidly acquiring a mastery of the
technology
by which Israel dominates the region,
equips itself with an armour of invincibility
and selfishly undertakes to profit by that. For a technologically
and technically advanced Arab world would mean Palestinians more able to reconquer their rights. But that
disregards the fact that the international
context is
changing radically, that the fact of Palestine is making
itself felt, that the Palestine Liberation Organization
now has credentials in all parts of the world, that the
detente of recent years has been replaced by a new
period of cold war-and the Council must not be alone
in underrating
the symptoms or disregarding
the
dangers.
17. Another raid of the same kind or significance
could therefore quickly set fire to this Middle East
powder-keg if, by misfortune-by
weakness or by
obstruction-the
Council were to conclude the present
series of meetings without taking the measures necessary to ensure that the aggression against Osirak can
never be used as an example or a precedent.
18. My delegation is ,ready to subscribe to any
resolution condemning the Israeli military action and
ordering sanctions, any resolution that would solemnly warn Israel against repeating such acts and
would call for just compensation for the destruction
and damage caused by Israel in its sordid raid.
19. Mr. ARCILLA
(Philippines):
At the risk of
stating the obvious, I wish to say that the subject of
which the Council is seized at the moment is of a very
delicate and precarious nature. However, we are
confident that under your stewardship, Mr. President,
and given your experience and keen sense of political
judgement,
this august body will be able to act
expeditiously
and decisively on this subject, as well as
on others that may come before it this month. That
you represent a great country, which shares with mine

a long history of common values and traditions dating
back to the days of the galleon trade in the seventeenth
century, is also of particular significance to us.
20. We wish also at this time to pay special tribute to
your‘ predecessor, Mr. Nisibori
of Japan, for the
excellent manner in which he discharged the duties of
President of the Council. His leadership qualities and
sensitivity to the nuances of international
diplomacy
are highly remarkable.
21. A noted political scientist once calculated that if
the period between creation and now were to be
compressed into a single year, the advent of home
sapiens would comprise the last one minute of that
year-and
modern civilization,
as we know it, would
be the last eight seconds of that minute.
22. The so-called pre-emptive strike by Israel against
the Iraqi nuclear installation
might well have preempted all of us from ever reaching the ninth second of
that last minute. Thanks, however, to the admirable
restraint with which the Government
and people of
Iraq, and the other Arab nations in the area, have
reacted to the Israeli aggression, and to their decision
to take their case to the Council instead of resorting to
military retaliation, we shall yet see that ninth second
behind us.
23. My Government,
in deploring Israel’s act of
aggression, has weighed carefully the reasons Israel
has given for its precipitous act. Apart from merely
saying [S/14.5101 that Israel learned from “sources
whose reliability
is beyond . . . doubt” that the Iraq
reactor was designed to produce atomic bombs-a
reason which, in itself, holds no water-there
was
nothing else to justify Israel’s rash action.
24. On the other hand, we find the report of IAEA
highly illuminating:
Iraq has satisfactorily
applied
the safeguards required by the Agency, which has
inspected the reactors and has not found evidence of
any activity not in accordance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
25. Granting, for the sake of argument, that the Iraqi
reactor was designed to produce atomic bombs and
that it was about to go “hot”, we would still find it
extremely difficult to accept Israel’s reasons for the
armed attack. It was against the basic tenets of
international
law and the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations.
26. If Israel was so sure that Iraq was on the verge of
manufacturing
nuclear weapons, it could have raised
the matter before the appropriate international bodies
for verification. Perhaps it did not do so because it is
not a party to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty, which
leads one to wonder why it is not.
27. We also find Israel’s dismissal
opinion against the attack particularly

of world public
disturbing.

28. The Israeli assertion that the act was carried out
in accordance with its inherent right to self-defence is
both morally and legally indefensible.
Such a dangerous precedent would leave us faced with a situation
in which every State, on mere suspicion of bellicose
intent, could arrogate unto itself the doubtful right to
launch an armed attack against another.

of Jordan and Saudi Arabia. As if that were not
enough, Minister Begin has on a number of occasions
himself said that Israel would act similarly whenever it
considered it necessary and that it cared nothing for
what friends or foes might think.
35. The Government
of Panama has constantly
defended the Jewish State’s right to live within secure
frontiers in peace with the other countries of the region
and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to
exercise sovereignty over territory illegally occupied
by Israel. But we are concerned at the fact that the
party that has most strongly expressed the desire to
live within secure frontiers is the one that ignores not
merely the frontiers of neighbours but frontiers hundreds of kilometres
away and then gives us an
outrageous and dangerous interpretation
of selfdefence.

29. For the Philippines
and other developing countries, the development of nuclear energy for peaceful
uses is essential in their drive for modernization.
That
inalienable right must remain inviolable.
30. As a founding Member of the United Nations, the
Philippines has faithfully abided by and supported the
noble aims and purposes for which it was created. We
have firmly upheld the view that aggression, with
whatever excuse or on whatever pretext, is intolerable
and reprehensible. For that reason, we have given our
support to the efforts to resolve the larger dimensions
of the Middle East conflict in a comprehensive,
just
and durable framework that would take into account
Israel’s right to exist as a sovereign State, on the one
hand, and the recognition of the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to a homeland of their own, on
the other.

36. The Israeli Government ridicules the officials of
a responsible organization, IAEA, giving credence to
more convenient “home-made”
information. But this
also forcefully draws our attention to the fact that at
this stage there are officials from another country who
are still inclined to take that information seriously and
who have still not decided whether Israel was acting in
its own defence or not.

31. We around this table are only too aware of the
serious implications
of this act of Israel. The world
watches closely to see what we will do in the face of
this perilous situation. Now more than ever we should
give meaning to our resolve, made at San Francisco
35 years ago, “to save succeeding generations from
the scourge of war”, “to reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights”, and for these ends “to unite our
strength to maintain international peace and security”.

37. We hope that they will realize the gravity of what
has occurred, since my Government wishes to believe
that the efforts currently being made by the United
States Government in the Middle East through direct
negotiations are aimed at finding formulas that will
make possible a lasting peace in the region. Unfortunately, that will never come to pass until Washington
understands that Israel is abusing its friendship and
misinterpreting
an alliance,

32. Mr. OZORES
TYPALDOS
(Panama) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, first of all,
I should like to say that my delegation is particularly
pleased to see you performing the delicate tasks of the
President of the Security Council during this month,
not merely because you are a worthy representative of
the noble Mexican people, with which Panama has
fraternal relations, but also because of your excellent
personal qualities as an able and experienced diplomat. You may be sure that you can look to us for
whole-hearted co-operation,

38. As a developing country, Panama wishes to make
it very clear that all States, and particularly those that
are technologically
disadvantaged, have the right to
make progress through the peaceful use of atomic
energy without there being objections from any party,
much less from one that does not hide the desire to
have a nuclear monopoly in the area and has never
permitted international
inspection.
39. We wish to conclude this brief statement by
expressing the condolences of the Government and
people of Panama to the relatives of the Iraqi citizens
and the French technician who died as a result of the
Israeli bombardment.
We would add that my delegation is prepared to vote for a draft resolution that
would not merely condemn Israel for the aggression it
has committed but also ensure that acts of this nature
do not happen again. If the State of Israel, or any other
State, were the victim of a similar action, we should
call for the same thing. What is most important is to
ensure that there are no further inexcusable acts that
dramatically aggravate the already difficult situation in
the Middle East and endanger world peace-to use the
words of the final part of the statement of the
Government of Panama of 11 June [S/1451.5].

33. At the same time I should like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Mr, Nisibori of Japan for
performing the same task during the month of May
with great tact and ability.
34. Rarely has the Security Council been convened
to consider a situation as serious as the one we are
considering now. The Tel Aviv Government has not
merely committed
an inexcusable act of aggression
against a State Member of the United Nations, but it is
taking pride in having violated fundamental principles
of international law-that
is, in having used force in
international relations and having violated the airspace
4

40. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Yemen.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement,

weapons and the capability to manufacture them.
They have already acquired the capability and a
stockpile of nuclear weapons. They have refused to be
a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of
Nuclear Weapons. They have refused to receive
representatives of IAEA or to allow them to inspect
the Dimona nuclear installations.
Yet, Israel gives
itself the right to attack others; to attack a State that
subscribes to the safeguards system of IAEA and that
has fulfilled all the obligations under the system.

41. Mr. ALAINI
(Yemen): Mr. President, my delegation is pleased to see you presiding over this very
important body. The objectivity and sense of responsibility and justice with which you have guided the
work of the Council on previous occasions reflected
the wise foreign policy of your country, Mexico, with
which my country has friendly relations. Your knowledge, skill and experience will contribute to the
successful conclusion of the current debate.

50. This Israeli attack on the nuclear reactor centre
at Baghdad is not an attack only against Iraq, or
against the Arabs. It is, in fact, an attack against the
safeguards system of IAEA and against the regime of
the Non-Proliferation
Treaty. It is part of the Israelis’
unchecked behaviour in the Middle East.

42. For 20 years the Security Council has been
dealing with Israeli atrocities and aggressions against
the Palestinian people in their own homeland and in
the refugee camps, For the last 14 years we have had
also the problems of the occupied Arab territories,
Today, with the latest act of aggression against Iraq, it
has become clear to everyone that what is going on in
the Middle East is a deep, real struggle between the
Arab nation as a whole and the Zionist invaders.

51. Israel should stop it. It should stop attacking
Lebanon and the Palestinians in Lebanon. It should
stop threatening Syria and stop its arrogance of power.
The Council should deal with these repeated serious
violations of international
law very seriously and
promptly for the benefit of the Middle East and the
world as a whole.

43. The confrontation
is not limited to the military
aspect any more. It is not any longer a matter between
the Palestinians and the Israelis, or even between the
Israelis and the neighbouring countries. It has become
a matter between the Israelis and the Arab nation from
the Ocean to the Gulf.

52. The big Powers should look beyond their narrow
internal considerations and discharge their responsibilities for preserving world peace and security
before it is too late.

44. The conflict is no longer limited to military
operations, but includes all fields of science, technology, progress and development.
From now on,
every Arab country feels insecure.

53. The United States should realize that Israel
should not be spoiled too much. Without American
advanced weapons, expertise, technology, and financial and political support, Israel would not dare attack
the Arab countries, disregard the United Nations and
defy world public opinion.

45. Today the Israelis attack Baghdad for having a
nuclear reactor centre that was described by the Board
of Governors of IAEA, in its resolution of 12 June, as
“peaceful nuclear facilities” [S/14.532].

54. Condemnation is not enough. Sanctions are what
the whole world is expecting.

46. Tomorrow
they may attack any other Arab
country for having a textile factory or for organizing its
police force or its trade unions, and they may say that
they are acting in “self-defence”.

55. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

47. The Begin doctrine, if accepted, would give the
green light to any country to attack any other country
in “self-defence”,
Israeli style. The East may attack
the West, or the West may attack the East in “selfdefence”.

56. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic): To
begin with, Mr. President, allow me to take this
opportunity to express to you and, through you, to
your great country and countrymen, my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of June. Close ties of friendship
have long bound the Syrian people to the Mexican
people and, like all Syrian Arabs, I have been raised to
look upon your countrymen and their achievements
with admiration and respect.

48. Many countries have problems with and suspicions of other countries. Why do they not follow the
Begin example and attack each other? Is this not “selfdefence”? If the world were to adopt the Begin
doctrine, we would find ourselves back in the jungle.

57. This is my maiden speech in Council. A novice I
may be, but I am no novice, nor is any Arab, for that
matter, to Israeli atrocities, Israeli arrogance, Israeli
expansionism, to the Israeli cancer in our region.

49. Statements
and documents published in the
united States and many other countries have all made
it clear long since that the Israelis possess nuclear
5

What is the world to do with Israel? How is this
international community to handle it? HOW will the
Council deal with it?

58.

59. We call ourselves a family of nations but this
family, despite its imperfections, has to protect its own
members from a maverick creature that has gonemad,
and Israel has gone raving mad.

Security Council to condone Israel’s contention that it
was “exercising its inherent and natural right to selfdefence, as understood in general international law
and well within the meaning of Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations”? [228&h meeting,
para. 97.1

65. Yet, Article 51 of the Charter clearly defines selfdefence as an inherent right only if an armed attack
occurs against a Member of the United Nations.

60. But among us is a member of the family, a highly
influential member, whose tolerance towards this
offspring is beyond human endurance. Mother USA
continues to clasp this frenzied child to her bosom.
The picture may be touching, but what assuranceswill
this mother-figure extend to the world? What guarantees that her crack-brained child will not destroy the
world in its raving deliriums-not merely the Arab
Nation, but the entire world? Moreover, with maternal
over-protectiveness she blindly refuses to see her
offspring’s congenital deformities, trying to shield its
ugliness from the eyes of the world.

66. Therefore the United States position, as
explained in Mr. Haig’s letter to Mr. O’Neill, Speaker
of the House, and to Senator Percy, Chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee, is predicated upon the
concept of legitimizing pre-emptive strikes, a concept
that has been refuted time and again in the Definition
of Aggression [General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX), annex] and dismissed as unacceptable, since
it usurps the powers of the Security Council as set
forth in Article 39 of the Charter and curtails the
Council’s authority. This body is surely not meeting in
order to determine the origins of the means of
delivery. We are here to declare the existence of a
threat to peace, a breach of the peace or an act of
aggression.

61. We ail know that one cannot correct the deep
scars in a psychopathic personality by withholding
four F-16 lollipops for a few days or by milder forms of
admonishment or reprimand.
62. On 7 June Israel committed yet another blatant
act of aggression. Secretary of State Alexander Haig
wrote on behalf of the President of the United States,
in part:

67. The Council, in its collective capacity, is called
upon to meet a situation whereby an act of aggression
has been committed officially, openly, defiantly by
the aggressor. Moreover, this same aggressor unabashedly vows to repeat the aggression in the future,
whether against Iraq or elsewhere.

“In these circumstances, I must report on behalf
of the President that a substantial violation of the
1952Agreement may have occurred.”

68. During the generous coverage allotted by the
United States news media to Israel after this vile
attack, we all heard a bloodthirsty Begin justifying this
aggression as “a morally supreme act of national selfdefence” or raving hysterically: “Never again. . . .
We shall not allow any enemy to develop weapons of
massdestruction against us. . . . should the Iraqis try
again to build a reactor through which they can
produce atomic weapons, Israel will use . . . the
possibilities at its disposal to destroy this reactor.”

I stress the word “may” -it may have occurred. He
continues:
“We are conducting a review of this entire matter
and will consider the contention of Israel that
this action was necessary for its defense because
the reactor was intended to produce atomic
bombs . . =”
63. By accepting consideration of this Israeli contention, the United States of America is in fact undermining the Charter, the principle of the noquse of
force and thus the very raisan d’e”tre of the Security
Council, as well as the very purpose for which the
Council is meeting. Everyone knows that the most
sophisticated warplanes of United Statesmanufacture
have for years been sowing death and destruction in
our region and that the United Stateshas never denied
Israel accessto its most advanced war arsenal.

69. It is quite clear that the spiralling military
aggression and the accompanying threats, as well as
the slogans designed to rationalize the irrational, are
meant to deceive both Jews and gentiles during an
election campaign in which the main political parties
do not differ on the principles of Zionist racist
expansionism, but only on the timing of acts of
aggression.
70. Besides, what means and whose means is Begin
talking so confidently about, and what possibilities?
That question is addressed to Secretary of State Haig,
if only to refresh the memory of the members of the
Council. In his letter, which I have mentioned,
Mr. Haig did not even refer to the United States
Administration’s early condemnation of the raid.
Instead, the letter politely and simply took note of

64. The “may” in the letter of the Secretary of State
of the United Statesof America is meant to dilute the
gravity of the offence under national legislation.
Assuming that the equipment, materials and services
used in this aggression were not stamped “made in the
USA”, would that enable a permanent member of the
6

,

criticism expressed by Begin and his Israeli supporters
to the effect that the United StatesAdministration had
attacked Israel without taking into account the latter’s
contention that the raid was carried out in its own
defence.

portations, the maiming of the Palestinian mayors, the
poisoning of Arab crops, and the diversion of Arab
waters are systematically perpetrated as acts necessary for the security of Israel.
74. Israel’s doctrine of security, whether applied
inside or outside the occupied territories, is but a
fabrication meant to impose on the Arab people
conditions of destruction and destitution. That onesided fantasy of security has been constantly used to
deflect attention from the ruthless reality of the Zionist
entity, whose exclusivist and exclusionist nature is the,
r&on d’&tre of that racist entity, that enclave of
international terrorism.

71. Mr. Alexander Haig’s letter is far subtler than we
think, hiding more than the complexities of a deep and
organic United States-Israeli relationship. Secretary of
State Haig mentions in his letter, as reported by The
New York Times of 11 June, that sales to Israel fall
under the Foreign Military Sales programme, and are
governed by a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement
of 23 July 1952,’ which provides in the pertinent part
that:

75. The Israeli air strike of 7 June against the Iraqi
centre for generating nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes is but one link in the Israeli chain of
aggression against the Arab nation, yet it denotes two
new dimensions: the first is the unprecedented geographic expansion of the long-arm policy of Israel,
made possible by the sophisticated, lethal United
States arsenal, and the second is Israel’s determination
to prevent the Arabs, irrespective of their geographic
location, from enjoying the benefits of their inalienable
right to scientific and technological progress, in much
the same spirit as its denial to the Palestinians of their
inalienable right to self-determination.

“The Government of Israel assures the United
States Government that such equipment, materials,
or services as may be acquired from the United
States , . , are required for and will be used solely to
maintain its internal security [or] its legitimate
self-defense, [or to permit it to participate in the
defence] of the area of which it is a part.”
The last short phrase should not go unheeded, for it
extends the concept of self-defence to envelop an
undetermined area, whether contiguous or remote,
leaving it to Israel to reach out its ever-lengthening
lethal arms to grab at the Nile and strike at the Tigris
and the Euphrates.

76. This recent devefopment clearly reveals Israel’s
ominous intention to extend its domination and United
States hegemony over the Arab homeland, since
Israel-this colonial outpost-views any Arab social
or economic development as constituting a threat to its
security. The irony lies in the fact that Israel, known to
be a de facto nuclear Power and a non-party to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty, could determine that a nonnuclear Power, party to the Treaty-Iraq, in this
instance-should be deprived of an inalienable right
recognized as belonging to it under the Treaty. This
Israeli logic undermines the foundations, the structures, the institutions, the controls and the safeguards
of the non-proliferation regime, causing the parties to
question the viability of their membership and the nonparties to suffer further alienation. As the Director
General of IAEA stated:

72. Thus, the mere consideration of Israel’s contention, as mentioned in the Haig letter, is per se an
admission that the United States Administration condones the doctrine of the legitimacy of pre-emptive
strikes carried out under the guise of legitimate selfdefence. But we knew beforehand that the United
States could not but bless this new Israeli act of
lawlessness, whether it assumed the guise of hot
pursuit, was christened a pre-emptive strike, or was
renamed preventive self-defence. In all cases, that
Israeli terminology has become familiar to us whose
lives and property have, since 1948,been at the mercy
of those twentieth-century vandals.
73. Israel’s fantasy of security is but a cover for its
war crimes and expansionist practices. At all stages of
the unfolding of the Zionist stratagem, fear for its
security has remained the deceitful slogan of Israeli
leaders, used to cover up any aggression or expansion.
Colonial settlements in the occupied Arab territories
are built on that false pretence; southern Lebanon has
been subjected to a scorched-earth policy and repeatedly invaded on the pretext of security, preemptive or preventive; thousands of Arabs have been
evicted from home and property, and the excuse is
Israeli security; the Israeli collusion in the 1956
tripartite aggression occurred under the banner of
preventive security; and the 1967 blitzkrieg and
Israel’s consequent expansion to six times its original
size were also justified as a pre-emptive imperative.
Arrests, assassinations, collective punishments, de-

“During my long time here, I do not think we have
been faced with a more serious question than the
implications of this development. . . . From a point
of principle, one can only conclude that it is the
Agency’s safeguards regime which has also been
attacked.“2
77. This Israeli attack has not only affected a
peaceful civilian target; it has not only violated the
sanctity of the airspace of three sovereign Arab
countries, but has created a real concern as to the
future security of any industrial, cultural or technological establishment within or beyond the Arab
region whenever Israel decides to strike. Ostensibly,
Israel has arrogated to itself the right to determine the
7

level of economic, social and technological development allowed to any Arab people. Every industrial
complex in the Arab countries is today threatened by a
possible Israeli attack-by air, by land or by sea-and
in every instance we have to await the United States
sentence on whether the Israeli “contention” is
justified or not.

the Council is requested in the same resolution to
impose mandatory sanctions-in particular, a binding
prohibition on all Member States of the United
Nations from furnishing Israel with military, economic
and technical assistance. Unless the Council standsup
to its responsibilities under Chapter VII in a situation
where the existence of an act of aggression is
universally recognized and condemned, and unless the
Council decides to impose such concrete compulsory
measures as are provided for under Article 41, we
perceive no hope that Israel will put an end to its
continued aggression against the Arabs and others, of
which the Iraqi episode is the most recent manifestation.

78. This is the crux of the problem before us today:
can the Council afford to allow Israel, by might and
not by right, to dictate to sovereign countries their
internal and external policies? Is this attempt at
extending dominance and hegemony consonant with
the elemental rules of international behaviour? Is this
not per se a subversion of our international system of
which the Council is the guardian? World public
opinion now understands the sinister objectives behind Israeli threats to attack the Arab deterrent forces,
whose peaceful purposes and defensive character are
internationally recognized. Israel is bent on humiliating, scorning, cowing, dishonouring and disdaining
the Arab peopIe to perpetuate and further extend its
territorial ambitions. By extending the sphere and
identity of its military operations, and by issuing
threats against Lebanon, Syria and other Arab countries, Israel aims at distracting attention from the core
of the Middle East conflict, namely, the question of
Palestine.

82. Failure to act here and now will augur an
explosion in the area, the responsibility for which
Israel and its supporters will have to bear.
83, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I now call on the representative of Israel, who has
asked to be allowed to exercise his right of reply.

80. All these hazardous developments come in the
wake of the Camp David system, which has temporarily tilted the strategic balance of power, thus
favouring Israel’s attempts at extending its hegemony
and exporting its aggression over and beyond the
region.

84. Mr. BLUM (Israel): In my statement last Friday
[2280th meeting] I submitted well-documented scientific and technical data showing beyond a shadow of
doubt that Iraq was bent on developing a nuclear arms
option. In all the predictable barrage of abuse heaped
upon my country thus far and the flood of distortion
and deception unleashed by a procession of repetitive
speakers, we have not received answers to the serious
questions raised by the technical data that I have
presented. So that these questions should not be lost
under a heap of abuse and bigotry, let me outline them
again. First, why did Iraq first try in 1974to acquire a
nuclear-power reactor of a kind designed primarily to
produce large quantities of plutonium for military
use? Secondly, why did Iraq insist on receiving a
70-megawatt reactor which has no use as an energy
source and which is far too large for its demonstrable
research purposes of a peaceful kind? Thirdly, why did
Iraq insist on receiving weapons-grade nuclear fuel
rather than the alternative of “Caramel” fuel which
was offered to it? Fourthly, what is Iraq’s need for
nuclear energy, given its abundant oil suppiies?
Fifthly, if it has such a need, why has Iraq not
developed a commercial nuclear programme? Why has
it not made any transactions relevant to such a
programme? Sixthly, why, if it is genuinely interested
in nuclear research-say for medical or other peaceful
purposes-did it rush to buy plutonium separation
technology and equipment? Seventhly, why has Iraq
been making frantic efforts to acquire natural uranium
wherever and however it can?

81. The time has come for all those genuinely
concerned with preventing the further deterioration of
a situation fraught with danger to world peace and
security to take concrete measures against Israel
under Chapter VII of the Charter. In addition to a
clear-cut condemnation of this recent Israeli attack,

85. Given the fact that Iraq has been in a state of war
with Israel since 1948--for over three decades-and
given its open threats to liquidate my country, is any
fair-minded member of the Council prepared to tell
Israel to ignore the answers to all the questions that
1 have just reiterated?

79, The Israeli argument that an oil-producing country does not need a different source of energy is as
bankrupt and insane as the act itself. Indeed, it is the
duty of a developing oil-producing country to invest in
research so as to acquire the know-how to generate energy for peaceful purposes-including nuclear
energy. This duty arises from commitments undertaken under the programmes for economic co-operation among developing countries, based primarily on
self-reliance and mutual co-operation among developing countries. But Israel, which co-operates with
South Africa in exploding nuclear devices and in
developing nuclear armamants, knows that by destroying Osirak or by threatening to redestroy it, as
well as to wreck other peaceful energy plants of its
choosing in other parts of the developing world, it is
indeed inflicting harm on Africa and on Asia, while
acting in the spirit of this unholy alliance with the
Pretoria rtZgime.

8

86. What has been going on here is a feverish effort
to line up States to speak at length to blur and
Confound the issues I have raised. What has been
going on here only proves that it is impossible for
Israel to expect from the Council, and indeed from the
Organization,
a fair hearing.

inspection and safeguards, as Iraq has done with
regard to all its nuclear facilities. If he answers that to
the Council’s satisfaction, perhaps we need no more
debate here about why his Government carried out
that act of aggression on 7 June,
93. I said that the real intended audience of Israel is
not in these chambers and should like to add that,
apparently,
in this case Israel is having enorlnotls
difficulty in convincing even its closest friends, That is
why the representative of Israel is in a quandary. I aIll
not just saying that for debating purposes. I respect the
Council’s time, but to show what I mean I should like
to use, just as examples, three quotations to demonstrate, first, the tactics used by Israel in this matter
and, secondly, its failure to convince, not the Council-we have seen the results of that-but its closest
friends even in the United States.

87.

A clear sign of the unfairness which is rampant in
the United Nations and its various agencies was given
last week when IAEA discussed Israel’s operation
against Osirak and denied Israel even its right to speak
and to explain its position,
88. But the questions I have raised, as well as other
questions
raised by experts and concerned people
around the world, will not walk away. They require
serious attention and serious answers. They will
certainly not be answered by suggestions like the one
we heard yesterday that Israel should pay reparations
to Iraq for destroying Osirak. Did the Allies pay
reparations
for the Nazis’ atomic plants at Peenemuende and elsewhere which they destroyed during
the Second World War? Let me assure the Council
that Israel will pay precisely the same sum as what
those who made this bizarre suggestion paid after the
Second World War, and not one brass farthing more.

94. Everyone remembers the statement made on
8 June by Mr. Begin, the Prime Minister of Israel.
Indeed, this was an official statement of the Govern..
ment of Israel. Everyone will recall that Mr. Begin
repeated this statement on television, on “Face the
Nation”.
Israel’s friends are using it every day in the
media. I shall now quote from that statement, as
reported in The New York Times on 9 June:

89.

The PRESIDENT
(intfrpretationfiom
Spanish):
of Iraq has asked to be allowed to
speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call on him.

“The goal for these bombs”-Iraqi
bombs, presumably- “was Israel. This was explicitly stated by
the Iraqi ruler. After the Iranians slightly damaged
the reactor, Saddam Hussein remarked that it was
pointless for the Iranians to attack the reactor
because it was being built against Israel alone”.

The representative
90.

Mr. KITTANI

(Iraq): Once again the represenclearly that he really
has no interest in the views of the Council. This is not
surprising because Israel has nothing but contempt for
the Organization and this principal organ of the United
Nations.

tative of Israel has demonstrated

That official statement by the Government of Israel
has been repeated over and over again-and it will
continue to be repeated despite what I shall now say.

91. Listening to the latest audacious statement of the
representative
of Israel, one would think that it was
Iraq which had been brought to account for its actions
before the Council. One would think that it was Israel
which had rushed to the Council and asked for the
convening
of this series of meetings in order to take
appropriate
action for something that Iraq had done. If
that is not an insult to the intelligence of the Council,
I do not know what is.

95. I have before me some articles, not from Iraqi
newspapers, but from two Israeli newspapers. The
first is Davnr. The article is by its correspondent
Daniyel Bloch and is datelined Tel Aviv, 14 June.
I quote the following from Davar:
“The Foreign Ministry has ordered Israeli representatives abroad to stop using the quotations
from remarks made by Iraqi ruler Saddam Hussein
which were used by Prime Minister Begin and
according to which Hussein said that the Iraqi
reactor was directed against the Zionist enemy.
Following a comprehensive examination carried out
by the United States of America, it emerged that
there is no proof that this quotation is accurate.
Israeli sources have not succeeded in finding any
basis for it either”.

92. The real audience of the representative of Israel
is not here in this building; we have learned that. It is
beyond these walls; it is not very far away, but it is not
within
the Headquarters compound.
Here, as the
debates have shown over the last four years, Israel has
failed totally and completely to convince any member
of the Council of any of its arguments. That much is
clear. So the representative of Israel shifts his ground
and asks us to account for things that we may or may
not have done. I shall ignore that and simply ask one
question
in answer to all his questions. I shall ask
Professor Blum why it is that his Prime Minister and
his Government have refused and continue to refuse to
put any of its nuclear facilities under any international

And if they cannot find a quotation, one wonders how
one can trust what they call “unimpeachable information”. The article in Davav goes on:
“The quotation the Prime Minister used Was
based on the Iraqi paper Ath-Thawrah of 4 October
9

1980. However, as noted, it turned out that this
quotation does not appear there at all. The sole
source that exists is the report in an Israeli paper by
its Arab affairs correspondent, but no basis could be
found for this report. Only after lengthy examination
was an editorial in the same style found in another
Iraqi paper, Al-Junhuriyah,
but without any quotation from, or attribution to, the Iraqi leader.
“This revelation has caused considerable embarrassment because Israeli information made’ use of
the quotation and Israel’s United Nations Ambassador based parts of his planned Security Council
speech on it.”

dangerous to turn into weapons. Secondly, these
Administration leaders say United States intelligence has no information whatever to back up
Begin’s claim that the Iraqis have constructed a
special underground chamber to work on the bomb,
The third point being made is that information
available to United States intelligence indicates it
would have taken another five to six years before
the Iraqis could develop a bomb, even with all of the
outside help they could get.
“Begin has repeatedly asserted that his Government’s information came from ‘unimpeachable
sources’. United States authorities say that despite
the excellence of Israel’s intelligence agency, information available to the United States was at least as
good as, if not better than, Israel’s in this case. No
Administration spokesman is accusing Begin of
misrepresenting or distorting the facts”-indeed, no
one would today. Mr. Scali went on: “The information is not being volunteered, but in answer to
questions from interested parties, top officials are
making available the facts as they see them, and
they are angry that Israel is presenting a version that
is in conflict with what Washington believes to be
true.”

96. This is the quotation from the second Israeli
newspaper:
“Yediot Achronof reported today that the Foreign
Ministry has instructed all missions abroad to stop
quoting an alleged statement by Iraqi President
Saddam Hussein that the nuclear reactor was
intended to produce bombs for use against Israel.
Begin quoted Hussein to that effect in his initial
statement of 8 June justifying the Israeli air strike.
He apparently got it from Iraqi newspapers but
Israeli authorities realized that there was no direct
quotation from any Iraqi leaders or proof that
Hussein had ever made the statement.”

99. I have only one final word to say; I do not want to
take too much of the Council’s time.

97. Next I shall read out a very short excerpt from a
report by the Jewish Telegraphic Agency yesterday:

100. Even Israel’s closestfriends in this country, and
indeed people inside occupied Palestine, are apparently not convinced of the case that the representative
of Israel has tried to present to the Council. All the
arguments that have been repeated, one after the
other, are falling like autumn leaves. The Council must
face the fact that everything that we have presented to
the Council is concrete, correct, factual material.

“Meanwhile Begin and his Cabinet faced
unexpected criticism from military sources with
respect to Begin’s claim that the target of the Israeii
raid was a secret underground installation where
atomic bombs were being manufactured. Ma’uriv
reported today that military experts”-and
these
are Israeli military experts-“had no information
about any such secret facility.”

101. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish): The representative of Israel has asked to be

98. My next quotation is from something closer to
home: the ABC Network News, 15 June, at 7 p.m.
A statement was made by Mr. John Scali, who is no
stranger to these halls; some representatives who have
been here for a few years will remember that he was
the Permanent Representative of the United States to
the United Nations and sat in the Council. This is what
Mr. Scali said on the ABC News:

allowed once again to exercise his right of reply. I now
call on him.

102. Mr. BLUM (Israel): The hour is very late and
I shall be very brief.
103. I have put a number of questions to our
distinguished Iraqi colleague. Not surprisingly, he has
chosen not to reply to any of those questions. Instead,
he has asked indignantly, “It it Iraq that is being called
to account for its activities?”

“The Reagan Administration is seriousIy questioning Begin’s claim that an immediate life-anddeath threat forced Israel to bomb Iraq’s nuclear
reactor. Key business leaders and Congressmen are
being told that the French successfully ‘poisoned’
the uranium provided the Iraqis so that they could
not turn it into nuclear weapons without far more
equipment than Iraq possessed.The word ‘poisoned’
was used by one Cabinet member in telling an
audience how, before shipping the uranium, the
French treated it in a special way to make it too

104. Under normal circumstances, that is precisely
what should have happened. Having been confronted
with the questions that I raised, Iraq, if it were
acting in good faith, should have had no problem in
answering them. But, since it did not act in good faith,
it does have very serious problems, as is evidenced by
the statements of Mr. Kittani.
10

majority. The rest is posturing; the rest is bigotry; the
rest is hypocrisy.

105. Now, obviously, Iraq can proceed in the Organization with impunity, It will not be censured; it will
not be questioned; it will not be interrogated; it will not
be condemned, because Iraq and other countries enjoy
virtual impunity in the Organization.

The meeting

rose at 1.35 p.m.

NOTES

’ hitid
States Treaties and Other international Agreements,
Vol. 3, Part. 4, 1952 (United States Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C., 195S), p. 4985.
z This statement was made at the 563rd meeting of the Board of
Governors of IAEA, the official records of which are issued in
summary form.

106. I do not have to go into the reasons for that. It is
idle for them to masquerade here as the protagonists of
international law and international justice. The simple
fact is that whatever they do and however they do it
and whenever they do it they are assured of a built-in

11
