63

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

3. Recommends that the Commission on Human
Rights should consider the question of the exploitation
of labour through i11icit and clandestine trafficking at
its next session, as provided in Economic and Social
Council resolution 1706 (LIil), as a matter of priority;
4. Invites the International Labour Organisation to
continue the studies it has begun on illicit trafficking
in foreign labour, which is a form of exploitation, and
to strengthen international machinery for the protection
of migrant workers;
5. Urges the Governments which have not yet done
so to give high priority to the ratification of the Convention of the International Labour Organisation concerning Migration for Employment (Revised 1949),
in the context of their efforts to eliminate illicit trafficking in foreign labour.
2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2921 (XXVII). Report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the Committee on the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination on the third year
of its activities,~ submitted under article 9, paragraph 2, of the International Convention on the Elimimtion of A11 Forms of Racial Discrimination, 6
l. Takes note of the report of the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination;
2. Urgently requests all States which are not yet
parties to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination to ratify
or accede to the Convention, if possible by 10 December 1973, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights;
3. We/comes the adoption of the new procedure
for the consideration of reports submitted by States
parties under article 9 of the Convention, which includes an invitation to States parties to be present at,
and take part in. the Committee's discussions when
their reports are under consideration, as suggested in
paragraphs 5 and 6 of General Assembly resolution
2783 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971.
2085 th plenary meeting
15 November 1972
2922 (XXVII). Draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of
Apartheid

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2786 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Reaffirming its firm conviction that apartheid constitutes a total negation of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and is a crime
against humanity,
Recognizing the urgent need to take further effective
measures with a view to the suppression and punishment of apartheid,
5 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/8718).
6 Resolution 2106 A (XX).

Reaffirming again that the conclusion of an international convention on the suppression and punishment
of the crime of apartheid would be an important contribution to the struggle against apartheid, racism, economic exploitation, colonial domination and foreign
occupation,
Noting with satisfaction the efforts made in order
to elaborate an international document on the suppression and punishment of the crime of apartheid,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
the Special Committee on Apartheid and to States the
revised draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid7 and the amendments thereto 8 for their comments and views;
2. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
request the Commission on Human Rights at its twentyninth session to consider as a priority item the revised
draft Convention on the Suppression and Punishment
of the Crime of Apartheid and the amendments thereto,
and to submit the results of its consideration thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session.

2085th plenary meeting
15 November 1972

2955 (XXVII).
Importance of the universal
realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting
of independence to colonial eountries ancl
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Having considered the item entitled "Importance of
the universal realization of the right of peoples to selfdetermination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples for the effective
guarantee and observance of human rights",
Recalling resolution 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, in which the General Assembly urged the
Security Council as well as States Members of the
United Nations or members of specialized agencies to
take effective steps to ensure the implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all peoples under
colonial and alien domination to self-determination,
freedom and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, and with
Assembly resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November
1970 and 2787 (XXVI) of 6 December 1971,
Disturbed at the continued reluctance of the colonial
and racist Powers, such as Portugal and South Africa,
to recognize and to apply the right to self-determination and independence for the peoples of the Territories
under their control,
Deeply concerned at the negative attitude of certain
Member States to the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Session. Annexes, agenda item 50, document A/8880, para. 42.
8 fbid., para. 43.
