UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-SEVENTH

YEAR

2324’”

MEETING:

8 JANUARY

1982

q 1;p

NEW YORK

5 ~~~~
N

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2324) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .’ +. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

PflgfJ

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . .**.a. . * . . >,. . I . , . . . . . . . * * .

I

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
((I) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821) . . . . . . . , . , , , . . . . . . . . . , , . , . . .

I

SlPV.2324
1
!b’

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters com: b‘ined i&h figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sj. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S11pplem~nrs
of the OfficY Rcrwds
of the Security
Council.
The date
;of;the documentkrdicates
the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsollrtions
rmd
Decisions
c?f the Sccwity
Cormcil.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2324th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 8 January 1982, at 3.30 p.m.
Mr. Oleg A. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

Psesidrnt:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland,
Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire.
Provisional

agenda (SlAgendaf2324)

1.

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
((I) Resolution 497 (1981);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the occupied Arab territories:
(a) Resolution 497 (1981);
(n) Report of the Secretary-General (S/14821)
I. The PRESIDENT
(interpwtation from Russian):
In accordance with decisions taken at previous
meetings [2322nd crnd 2323rd meetings], I invite the
representative of Israel and the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic to take places at the Council
table. I invite the representatives
of Afghanistan,
Algeria, Bangladesh, Cuba, Democratic Yemen, the
German Democratic Republic, India, Kuwait, the Lao
People’s
Democratic
Republic,
the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Morocco, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Yemen and Yugoslavia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber. I invite the representative of the Palestine
Liberation Organization to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council chamber.
A f the invittrtion of the Pw.sident, Mr. Blr~rn(I.srvrr~/)
rilld Mr. El-Futtrrl (Syricrn A rtrh Republic,) took plrrtvs
-rf the Connc*il table; Mr. Zarif (A.fghrrniston), Mr, Bed:rrorri (Algeria), Mr. Ktrimr (Bcrnglrrdesh), Mr. Roa
Yonri (Cubtr), Ms. Ashtrll (Dernocwrtic* Yemen),
Mr. Florin (Gcrtnnn Detnmmtic
Republic-), Mr. Krishzrln (Indirr), Mr. Abrrlhtrsscrn (Kurwit), Mr. Kittikhoun
Lao People’s Dcmocrcrtic. Repuhliv),
Mr, Burwin

2. The PRESIDENT
(interprctution
jiwn Rmsilrn):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Hungary, Iraq, Pakistan and the Ukrainian
Soviet
Socialist Republic in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure.
At the invitcrtion of the Pwsident, Mr. Rricz (Hungtrry), Mr. AI-Ah’ (Ircly), Mr. Mtrhmood
(Ptrkistcln)
und Mr. Krwrts (Ukrtrinitrn Soviet SocUist Rqwblic*)
took rho pimples resm~ed for thrrn trt the side of the
Corrnvil c*hamhcr.
3. The PRESIDENT
(intet.ppl’etation from Russim):
I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/14827, which contains the
text of a letter dated 7 January from the representative
of Benin to the Secretary-General.
4. The first speaker is the representative
of Yemen.
1 invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
5. Mr. MUBAREZ
(Yemen): Allow me at the outset,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month. I am certain
that your wisdom and long experience will help the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities
as it should,
I should also like to commend your predecessor, the
representative
of Uganda, for the excellent manner
in which he guided the work of the Councit last month.
6. I should like also to avail myself of this opportunity of addressing the Council to extend our sincere
congratulations
and very best wishes to the new
Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier P&ez de Cukllar.
Mr. PCrez de CuelIar has already established a very

Indeed. it will remain such unless the Council forces
ismel to comply with its provisions. We hope that
Israel’s supporters will this time go beyond their
narrow interests and join the international consensus
to compel Tel Aviv to implement the provisions of
the Council’s resolution in the common interests of
peace and legality.

distinguished record of ac+hievement in his previous
capacity in the Organtzatton and we feel confident
that his skilled discernment and diplomatic qualities
pIace him jn an eminently prominent
pOSitiOn
t0 guide
the
United
Nations
in the pUrSUit
of Its t3Obk god Of
achieving peace and prosperity for mankind. We wish
him well and assure him of our tOtd
SUpport
and
co-operation.

Israel’s decision to annex the occupied Syrian
Il.
Golan Heights, after having already annexed Jerusalem, is another step towards the annexation of all
occupied Arab territories.
Many of those participating in this meeting have undoubtedly read about
or heard the Zionist leaders reiterating the necessity
of extending Israel’s sovereignty over all occupied
Arab lands. Israel’s lust for expansion and colonization
and its leaders’ ambitions for domination and hegemony will be curbed only when the Arab nation mobilizes all its capabilities to defend its rights and existence and when the. Council takes immediate deterrent
measures in support of justice and the principles of
the Charter.

7, The Council meets today to discuss what can be
done to ensure Israel’s COnlplianCe
with COUnCil
resolution 497 (1981) concerning the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights. Israel has been habitually rejecting
United Nations resolutions On the qUeStiOn
Of PdeStine and the Middle East for over 30 years, and this
time is no exception. The Israeli representative wasted
no time in rejecting that resolution outright, even
before the ink on the document had dried.
8. I do not intend to deal at length with this issue,
for the basic facts have been sufficiently explained
by previous speakers and the Council has already put
the Israeli decision to annex the occupied Golan
Heights in its proper legal perspective. Members of
the Council concurred, whether in statements made
during the debate or through the resolution that was
adopted thereafter, that Israel’s decision is a blatant
and open violation of the Charter of the United Nations
and that the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under international law and a violation of the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.’
It furthermore constitutes a deviation from established
international norms and ethics.

12. The Government
of the Yemen Arab Republic
has expressed its condemnation
of the recent Israeli
aggression against Syria, It said in the official statement issued on I5 December 1981 by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs:
“The Government
of the Yemen Arab Republic.
while strongly denouncing the null action taken by
the Zionist entity, affirms its firm and unreserved
support for the Government
of the Syrian Arab
Republic”.

9. Although this resolution adopted by the Council
caused concern to the Government of Israel at first,
Tel Aviv rejected and defied it, The Israeli leaders
were convinced that their allies and friends in the
Council would not allow the Council to go beyond
simply issuing the resolution. Israel has also learnt
from several experiences that its friends, notably its
ally the United States, might have to join the international consensus in denouncing Tel Aviv’s adventures
and its attacks on its neighbours but would not ultimately allow Israel to be punished, whatever its crime
might he. Has not Washington continued to support
Israel Politically, economically and militarily,
despite
the latter’s defiance of the Council resolution
on
Jerusalem h’cuolrtfion 465 (/USO)] to which the United
States was a party? Have not certain other capitals
continued their customary support of Israel despite
their reservations on Israel’s illegal actions and practices in the occupied Arab territories? Notwithstanding
the dismay of Israel’s friends and the protests of some
of them over Israel’s repeated incursions into Lebanon
and its raid on the Iraqi peaceful nuclear reactor, Tel
Aviv has continued to receive their unreserved and
unlimited support.

The statement goes on to say that the Government
the Yemen Arab Republic

IO. Now there is the latest Council resolution which
Israel has rejected and considered to be empty words,

15. The Council should assume the special responsibility entrusted to it by States Members of the Organ-

of

“appeals to the international
public opinion represented by the United Nations to shoulder its responsibilities in regard to that Zionist step, which is a
flagrant violation
of international
will and a total
disregard for al1 norms and values”.
13. The credibility
of the Council and the effectiveness of the Organization
are to a great extent contingent upon what action the Council adopts this time to
ensure the implementation
of its resolution.
Even
more important, the future of peace and security in the
region at the present stage and perhaps in the foreseeable future depends on the results of these deliberations.
14. Israel’s friends in the Council should remember
that peace is indivisible and that securing a just peace
in the Middle East is in the best interest of everyone.
After all, respect for their interests in the area is possible only to the extent that they respect the inalienable rights of the Arab people.

2

ization. It should address itself to the question of
immediately
imposing sanctions against Israel, in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter. That is
the only alternative if the law of the jungle, which the
Zionist State has been pursuing in the area, is to be
eliminated and if peace is to prevail in the Middle East
area in the interests of the region and of the rest of the
world.

recall the words used by Chairman
his appointment:

Arafat in welcoming

‘*Your election and appointment
is a victory of
the will of the peoples of the third world struggling
for its independence
and economic
and social
development . . . We are certain that under your
valiant leadership the United Nations will be faithful to its commitment
towards peoples struggling
against imperialism,
Zionism and racism, and for
the free expression of its legitimate and inalienable
rights.”

16. The PRESIDENT
(imvprctation
jiwn Russirrn):
The next speaker is the representative of the Palestine Liberation Organization. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.

23. Mr. Kurt Waldheim,
who has concluded his
mandate as Secretary-General,
merits our gratitude,
not only for his talent, perseverance and skill, but
because he proved, during his IO years as SecretaryGeneral, to be a champion and a friend of the Organization and its principles.

17. Mr. TERZI
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization): Sir, it is a privilege to be addressing the Council, on the specific issue of acquisition by force and
annexation of territory, under your presidency. You
represent a great nation, a nation which paid with
the lives of more than 20 million innocent men, women
and children to liberate its territory from the yoke of
foreign domination. Thus, when we address this issue
of occupation and annexation, you understand our
plight because you do know. The knowledge is even
more profound because the occupying Powers have
the same militaristic expansionist and racist motives
and aims. Your country succeeded in crushing the
Fascists, but unfortunately
the forces of racism,
encouraged in particular by the Government of the
United States, still finds breeding facilities to perpetrate their evil and criminal acts.

24. To the member who voiced his opposition to our
participation,
I can only repeat the words of James
Reston:
“This administration
is getting in trouble with
its adversaries and its allies, not because its instincts
are wrong but because it thinks it can make the
world, at home and abroad, shape up to its desires.”
25. The Council, according to the approved agenda,
is dealing with a specific and precise matter, namely,
resolution 497 (1981) and the report of the SecretaryGeneral [S//482/].
The Council is dealing precisely
with Israel’s decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights, as well as with Israel’s non-acceptance
-rejection-of
a Security Council decision, Article 25
of the Charter of the United Nations notwithstanding.
The Council has already decided that Israel’s decision
is null and void and without international
legal effect.

18. In particular, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), on behalf of the Palestinian people,
expresses its deep appreciation for the principled support-moral,
political and concrete-that
the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics gives to our cause and
struggle to achieve a comprehensive and just peace in
the Middle East through peace in Palestine.
19. The most recent visit to the USSR of the PLO
delegation under the leadership of Chairman Arafat,
and the warm, brotherly and comradely reception by
the Soviet leadership led by President Brezhnev are
concrete manifestations of the relationship between
the PLO and the USSR.

26. In his report, the Secretary-General
reproduces
Israel’s reply, dated 29 December I98 I. Among other
things, the reply admits that: “The Golan Heights
Law-5742/1981
was enacted almost 15 years after the
six-day war of June 1967” {ibid., pcrr. 31. This is truethe law was enacted I5 years after the occupation.
The question is whether the occupation of the Syrian
Golan Heights in 1967 was accidental. Or was it the
implementation
of the Zionist plan and the concretization of the Zionist aggressive expansionist dreams?

20. To you personally, Sir, I wish to extend my
congratulations on the assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and to reiterate our
confidence in your prudence and objectivity, I should
like to thank you and, through you, all the members
of the Council who joined in inviting the representative
of the PLO to participate in the current debate.

27.

21. To my friend Mr. Otunnu of Uganda I should
like to express our admiration for his skills, clear
vision and judiciousness, and especially for the dynamism with which he conducted the work of the Council in December.

In 1968 Arnold Toynbee

wrote:

“There is widespread ignorance of the fact in the
Western world and, above all, in the United States,
the Western country which has had, and is still
having, the greatest say in deciding Palestine’s fate.”
My delegation
help.

22. I should like to extend to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier PCrez de Cuellar, a hearty welcome and
3

believes that recalling

the facts might

,---_-

words ,Great Palestine’ or ‘Palestine and its neighbouring lands’- otherwise it’s nonsense. YOU do IlOf
get the 10 million Jews into a land of 25.000 kild=
metres.”

28. The

Zionist Organization’s
memorandum
to
the Supreme Council at the Paris Peace Conference
-document
~&-was submitted on 3 February 1919.
The boundaries of the territory demanded for the
Zionist State were as f0llOws:

33.

However, the extent of the area demanded hy
delegation
at the Paris PtXCtt CWfcWnN
was less than the Herzl plan. It comprises, in current
terms, as indicated on the map. the whole of nmndated Palestine; southern Lebanon, including
thtr
towns of Tyre and Sidon, the headwaters of the River
Jordan on Mount Hermon and the southern PWth (IT
the Litani River; in Syria, the Golan Heights--and thi*,
is the theme and the subject of our discussion todayincluding the town of Kuneitra, the River Yarmuk and
El-Himmeh Hot Springs; in Jordan, the whole of the
Jordan Valley, the Dead Sea, and the eastern highlands up to the outskirts of Amman, running southwards along the Hejaz railway to the Gulf of Aoahr~.
leaving Jordan with no access to the sea: and in Egypt.
from El-Arish on the Mediterranean
in a Straight
southerly direction to the Gulf of Aqaba.
the Zionist

“Starting on the north at a point on the Mediterranean Sea in the vicinity of Sidon and following
the watersheds of the foothills of the Lebanon as far
as Jisr El-Kara’on, then to El-Bire, following the
dividing line between the two basins of the Wadi
El-Korn and the Wadi El-Tiem, then in a southerly
direction following the dividing line between the
eastern and western slopes of the Herrnon, to the
vicinity west of Beit Jenn, then eastward following
the northern watersheds of the Nahr Mughaniye,
close to and west of the Hejaz railway.
“In the east, a line close to and west of the Hejaz
railway terminating in the Gulf of Aqaba.
“In the south, a frontier to be agreed upon with
the Egyptian Government. [It has been indicated
that the southern border would extend from El-Arish
in northern Sinai to Aqaba in the south.]
“In the west, the Mediterranean

Sea.”

This area, the Zionist memorandum

stated,

34. Thus, what the Council is dealing with is only one
aspect, a derivative of the Zionist designs and plitnyMy delegation would have wished the Council fta
address the core of the conflict, namely, the question
of Palestine, the future of the Palestinian people and
territory, the case for peace: a comprehensive and julrl
peace. But I must repeat: what the Council is uddressing is the fate of the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights, and precisely the fate of the Charter of the
United Nations and its provisions.

“shall be placed under such political, administrative
and economic conditions as will ensure the establishment therein of the Jewish national home and
ultimately render possible the creation of an autonomous Jewish commonwealth.”

35. The annexation of the occupied Syrian G(>liln
Heights came as no surprise to us in the PLO. The
Zionist designs are being realized, albeit systemutitally and slowly. First, there was a national home fclr
the Jews in Palestine, which became a Jewish State
in Palestine-a
Jewish State in all of Palestine-+&
now the process has started for the Zionist State it\
submitted to the Paris Peace Conference in 1919.

29. I have here a copy of that map of 1919 which was
the Zionist proposal for a Zionist State. I hope that
somehow the Security Council will be able to have it
as one of its documents. We shall try to find a way
’ to have it distributed,
30. The boundaries shown on this map are actually
less than those demanded as the boundaries of the
“State for the Jews” as indicated in Dcr JLldc/z,srrrot
of 1896. Herzl then defined the boundaries as follows:

36. The annexation of the Golan Heights, again, W:I~
no surprise: it figured clearly in paragraph I I of the
coalition platform-the
coalition of the present Government in Tel Aviv. What was left for the Isracti
Cabinet-or,
rather, for the so-called democratically
elected Prime Minister-was
to decide on the timing
for the grab.

“The northern frontier is to be the mountains
facing Cappadocia [in Turkey]: the southern, the
Suez Canal. Our slogan shall be “The Palestine of
David and Solomon’.”

3’7. Naturally, the Israeli Cabinet was aware that
there would be international opposition.
Begin is,
reported to have said that the United States would he
compelled-and
I stress the word “compelled”-tc,
criticize the Golan laws in international forums but
that Israel would be prepared for such an eventuality.
Begin said that Israel had an account to settle with the
United States over other matters and that that wils
one way of asserting Israel’s independent political
Position. That is an odd way of settling accounts.
Strange as it might seem, Begin and the entire Knessct

31. On another occasion, the area was described as:
“from the Brook” -presumably
meaning the Nile“to the Euphrates”.
3% On 29 October
Theodor Herzl:

1899, David Trietsch

wrote to

“I would suggest to YOUto come round in time to
the Greater Palestine’ programme before it is too
late. . . . The Basle Programme must contain the
4

shied away from admitting that the annexation was
in conformity with a plan designed in 1919 and a point
in the platform of the coalition in Tel-Aviv.

dividends. The spokesman of course added some
sugar-coating to the pill by referring to postponing
“discussions intended to implement the Memorandum
of Understanding” , a memorandum on joint aggression
and a memorandum which, we recall, was condemned
by the international
community.
The postponement
is, in fact, an excessive price for the sovereignty of
Syria over its territory under occupation. The spokesman of the State Department prescribed negotiations
between the victim and the aggressor at an unthinkable price.

38. Sometimes an action calls for humour and I wish
here to applaud the cartoonist Bill Schorr for his
cartoon reproduced in N~I~*.sII*PP~, the issue of 4 January, which is captioned:
“This land is my land-their
land is my land:
“From the River Jordan to the Heights of Golan:
“From the Sea of Galilee to the camps for refugees:
“This land was annexed by little me.”

42. The United States keeps talking about negotiations. Yet the Government of the United States is
determined not to talk to or deal in any way with the
principal party to the conflict in order to achieve peace.
The United States Government is even opposed to
hearing or listening to the PLO, the representative of
the Palestinian people-the
principal party. Is it lack
of consistency or is it malice, or a determination
to
undercut and undermine all genuine endeavours to
achieve peace?

Well, the crooner here is Begin. Little-yes,
he is, if
it were not for the billions of taxpayers’ blank cheques
in dollars donated by the United States of America to
the Zionist armed forces to realize their expansionist
dreams and aims.
39. How did the Government of the United States
react to the annexation? Of course, not by immediate
action, concrete action in accordance with the provisions of the Charter but, on the contrary, by delaying
tactics: ” Oh give that little me, that little boy, a chance;
he is just out of hospital, possibly a nervous wreck
and the Knesset will surely reconsider”.
And Begin
was just as sure that in time the world would forget.
What is, in our opinion, very serious is the following
statement of a State Department spokesman on 18 December 1981:

43. Negotiations between Syria and Israel-negotiations on what? Israel occupies Syrian territory. Thus
the first step should be termination
of the Israeli
occupation of sovereign Syrian territory. The sovereignty of States over their territory is not a bargaining chip. We can still recall the negotiations
between Israel and another aggrieved State in the
Middle East. The negotiations resulted in an arrangement. The same Begin declared, “the arrangement is
based entirely on security for Israel”. The arrangement was not meant to achieve peace or to resolve
the conflict or to restore the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and bring to an end the miserable
conditions of dispersion and statelessness. No, the
arrangement was meant only to achieve security for
Israel.

“We have stated that we do not recognize Israel’s
action, which we consider to be without international legal effect. In our view, their action is inconsistent with both the letter and the spirit of United
Nations Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973). We continue to believe that the final
status of the Golan Heights can be determined only
through negotiations
between Syria and Israel,
based on those two Security Council resolutions,
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).”

44, The occupation and annexation of the Syrian
Golan Heights was determined more than 60 years ago,
together with the seizure of other territory, as shown
in the 1919 map, And there is absolutely no reason
to believe that the Zionist movement has changed its
designs and plans. It is a matter of time. The seizure
of territory demands the evacuation of others: the
indigenous population,

40. That statement was made subsequent to the
unanimous adoption of resolution 497 (1981), in paragraph 3 of which the Council determined
“that all the provisions of the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of I2 August 1949,’ continue to apply
to the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since
June 1967”.

45. Again, let me recall some facts. The spiritual
leader of the Zionist revisionist group, the group
currently under the leadership of Begin, was a certain
Jabotinsky and as far back as 1916 he “saw in the
evacuation of the Arabs from Palestine the basic prerequisite for the implementation
of Zionism”. He proposed to implement Zionism through the “iron wall of
a Jewish armed force”. Thus the genesis of the conflict is not aggression in the classical sense but through
a process of elimination of the indigenous population,
a process bordering on genocide. A member of the
same clan of Zionist revisionists, a certain United
States citizen by the name of Meir Kahane, was more

The resolution unanimously
affirms the sovereignty
of Syria over that territory. Yet the State Department
spokesman maliciously
attempted
to change the
status into “disputed territory”
instead of “occupied
territory” and thus prepare for a final status, through
what are called “negotiations”,
that will convert the
Golan Heights into .“Israeli territory”.
41. So Begin was right: the United States Government, after settling outstanding debts, will pay the
5

explicit. He wrote: “They
Israel survive its malignant
lation?“.

must go. How long can
and growing Arab POPU-

its neighbours. Israel will not be secure for as long as
it pursues its policy of expansionism,
for as long as it
maintains its occupation of the territories it occupied
by force and, definitely, for as long as it rejects and
fails to comply with the will of the international community. The will of the international
community has
been precisely defined: total and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from all Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem: and
the attainment
and free exercise by the Palestininn
people of their inalienable rights in Palestine, including
their right to return to their homes and property, their
right to self-determination
and their right to establish
their own independent sovereign State.

46. One wonders: is it just the Zionist WiSiOniStS
or
all Zionists who preach the elimination
of the Arabs?
One Mr, Weitz of the coionization department of the
Jewish

Agency

said in 1940, just

at the

the

Of the

outbreak of the Hitlerite eXpanSiOniSt
Campaign,
that
‘halI Arabs should be transferred to the neighbouring
countries. Not one village, not one tribe should be
left’*-an act of genocide.
47. Begin and his gang may suggest, for the purpose
of the election campaign in Israel, integration
and
coexistence with the Palestinian Arabs. But his opponent, the “moderate”
Peres, is enraged and loses
control and tells the truth, namely, that “this is not our
Zionist pr*eject. This is suggesting a binational State.”

52. Israel definitely and bluntly told the Council that
it did not accept the Council’s decision in resolution
497 (1981). Article 25 of the Charter reads as follows:
“The Members of the United Nations agree to accept
and carry out the decisions of the Security Council
in accordance with the present Charter.” Those who
do not carry out the decisions of the Council have no
place among the Members of the United Nations-and
out they go.

48. I am recalling all this to pinpoint the genesis of
aggression in our area, and since the Syrian Golan
Heights are an integral part of the Zionist territorial
design, this should help some people to determine
where and when aggression started and where it will
lead to.

53. Those who join the United Nations enter into it
contract-a
binding contract-to
the effect that they
are bound by the provisions of the Charter. And if they
say openly that they are not bound by those provisions, then there is no room for them here.

49. In a few words, the Zionist aggression will continue if it remains unchecked. The entire area indicated
on the map will be seized and annexed, resulting in
more bloodshed and more wars. For our part, we the
Palestinian people, under the leadership of our sole
and legitimate representative, the PLO, will not be
accommodating. We will not be willing and acquiescing
victims of a new racist genocide-a
holocaust, if you
will-perpetrated by the Zionists. We will not; instead,
we will pursue our struggle by all means to survive
and to regain our land and restore our rights. This we
VOWto go on doing unless and until the Security Council exercises the powers vested in it by the Charter
and steps in to prevent a holocaust and an apocalypse
and also to guarantee our survival and our rights.

54. The Council cannot and should not content itself
with only determining
that Israel violated the principles of the Charter and the provisions of convention:
the Council is called upon to take action-concrete
action. The Charter does provide for such action. The
application
of the provisions in Articles 39 and 41
could help to maintain the credibility and the usefuiness of the United Nations and, in so doing, the Council would be carrying out its responsibility to maintain
international
peace and security,

Well, that is fine. No one is asking Israel to maintain
a military administration, On the contrary, the international community has been demanding from Israel
full and unconditional withdrawal from these territories-and
good riddance. There is a basic prerequisite for Peace: just like love, it cannot be imposed;
otherwise it would be rape, and rape is a crime,

55. Before concluding, I wish merely to inform the
Council that those who came to Palestine as aliens and
who are now the rulers are apparently not aware that
there used to be such a thing as Palestinian citizenship, I have here with me my so-called British passport- “Palestine”.
I’t says explicitly that 1 am a Palestinian citizen. I should like those who say that
Palestine and Jordan are one and the same to know
that for us Palestinians to go to Amman, we needed
a visa for Transjordan. True, it cost us only a shilling,
but we still needed a visa to go to Amman. So Pafestine
and Transjordan,
which became the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, are two distinct entities, despite the
fact that temporarily
we had some sort of agreement
after the Israeli aggression. I merely wanted those
aliens who came to my country and took my home to
know that we Palestinians did exist before they came.

51. To address the question of secure boundaries,
State can feel more secure by seizing the territory

56, The PRESIDENT
fintcr;owt(rtion from Russitrn):
The next speaker is the representative
of Algeria.

50. In his report, the Secretary-General
reproduced
Israel’s reply, in which, inter rrlitr , Israel stated:
“The Government of Israel could not wait endlessly
for Syria to begin to show political will to make
Peace and agree on secure boundaries. Israel cannot
he expected to maintain indefinitely
a military
administration
merely to accommodate
Syria’s
interest in persistent conflict,” [ihid. 1

no
of
6

0

L

1 invite him to take a place at the Council
to make his statement,

table and

of the Organization,
mines.

57. Mr. Bf3JAOl-U (Algeria) (i/ltPI.pI.(‘T(lrj0/1 f,am
FR~/?(~/?): Mr. President, I should like first of alI to
express heartfelt congratulations
on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month. 1 am all
the more pleased to do so since you represent
a country with which my own maintains relations of friendship and fruitful co-operation
for the benefit of our
perplex. Your vast knowledge of international
affairs
and your great experience guarantee that the Council
will receive intelligent
guidance in its consideration
of the grave question before it today. I wish you full
sucwss
in the exercise of your functions,

the authority

of which it under-

63. This situation is well known to the Council. On
many occasions the Council has been called upon to
consider renewed outbreaks of aggressive force by
the Zionist entity.
64. The decision to annex the Golan thus constitutes
one more link in a chain of other equally serious initiatives of the same nature which the United Nations
has solemnly declared invalid and unlawful.
65. We need not look back far in time. Let us merely
look back to 1980, when the Zionist leaders implemented their policy of annexing occupied Arab territories through the promulgation
of a text annexing
the Holy City of Al-Quds.

58, I should like also to pay a tribute-a
very
special
tribute-to
your predecessor, the representative of
Uganda, Mr. Olara Otunnu, for the remarkable qualities he demonstrated
in guiding the work of the
Council last month, and to express my Government’s
gratitude to him, His competence,
his skill and his
dynamism have earned that worthy son of Africa the
admiration
and respect of all.

66. By its brutality, by its wilful disdain for the condemnation of the international
community,
the decision to annex the Golan has appeared as a re-emergence yet again of everything the peoples of the United
Nations have fought against by promoting, through
the purposes and principles of the Charter, international relations based on law and justice. In fact, the
very serious nature of this additional act of “legislative pricacy” which the decision to annex the Golan
Heights constitutes prompted unfailing condemnation at the universal level.

59. Lastly, I should like most warmly to welcome
Mr. Juvier P&rez de Cu@llar, who, in his new and lofty
task us Secretary-General,
will be placing at the service of the United Nations the probity, dedication and
effectiveness so characteristic
of him. Henceforth,
as the first servant of peace, understanding,
development and co-operation among nations, Mr. PCrez de
CuL;;II:\r can be assured of our support in the discharge
of his weighty international
responsibilities.
His
personal success will truly be that of the entire intern:&onal community
as well, and this makes our best
wishes to him all the more heartfelt.

67. The internationally
illegal act which the Council
is called upon today to condemn is crystal clear. A
territory occupied by force, through aggression, is
subjected to an annexationist
measure. No Zionist
reasonings can change that grave fact.
68. The condemnable
act is among those whose
radical illegality
has been established by general
international
law, the Charter of the United Nations
and previous Security Council decisions.

60. The meetings now being held by the Council
-the very first of a year which we hope will be beneficial to international
peace and security-remind
us
that under the skies of a Middle East afflicted by
Zionist
adventurism,
uncertainty
still reigns and
intolerable
violations of the very foundations of the
United Nations are committed.

69. Such an act constitutes in fact a clear-cut violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter.
The attack on the sovereignty and integrity of a Member State of the United Nations by such a measure is
the very negation of international law, the parent and
source of laws and obligations freely contracted. From
this higher norm come universally accepted principles
such as the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by force and its corollary, the principle of nonrecognition of situations, particularly territorial gains,
obtained by force.

61, The situation created by the decision to annex
the occupied Syrian Golan Heights is assuredly among
those which bear witness to an unacceptable flouting
of ethics and law and involve a serious threat tO the
security of the peoples of the region.
62. But this new misdeed is certainly not an isolated
fact. For three decades now the policy of aggression
to meet expansionist greed has doomed the entire
region to instability and insecurity. This policy, built
on the denial of the right of the Palestinian People to
;I freely decided national existence, leads, through
concentric
thrusts extending ever farther, to the
occupation
of territories
by force and their illegal
annexation. It continues through constant defiance of
the international
community
and, first and foremost.

70. Contrary as it is t’o general international law and
the Charter, the act of annexing the Golan is at the
same time, a violation of inviolable norms concerning
the protection of civilian persons in time of armed
conflict. Humanitarian
law quite rightly concerns itself
with the physical and moral integrity of a population
temporarily
under foreign domination
and also the
status of individuals, and recalls that it is normal for
7

rejecting resolution
This is a disdainful

the national legislation of a State whose territory is
occupied to apply. What then can be said of the plight
of Syrian citizens of the Golan when the only alternative they are left with is the choice between being
uprooted and taking citizenship of the occupier?

497 ( I98 I) and defying its author.
and outrageous response.

75. The Council must take note of this open rebellion
against its authority. The situation is clear. Preceding
annexations
and the impenitent
adventurism
that
underlay them clearly place the annexation measure
regarding the Golan in its proper context, pointing out
exactly this new defiance of the Council.

71. The Council itself has analysed this situation
since a considerable number of resolutions adopted
unanimously concerning all the occupied territories
reiterate, with remarkable consistency,
a doctrine
whose legal correctness and political coherence are
unassailable. Let us mention among others-at
random, I was going to say-resolution
465 (1980) in which
the Council

76. Unless the Council draws the necessary conclusions from the obstinacy of the Zionist entity in
defying the United Nations, and unless it brings all
its influence to bear to impose justice and the restoration of law, its reactions will have no dissuasive influence, now or in the future. We could then expect
further annexation measures by the Zionists. They rare
easy to foresee.

“Determines that all measures taken . . . to change
the physical character, demographic
composition,
institutional structure or status of the Palestinian
and other Arab territories occupied since 1967.
including Jerusalem, or any part thereof have no
legal validity”.

‘77. Gloved condemnations
carefully limited in scope.
verbal condemnations
never accompanied by dissuasive measures of any effectiveness, platonic appeals
for co-operation addressed to leaders held in the sway
of power -none
can ever restrain designs that iire
admittedly hegemonic.

72. It is directly from this doctrine of the Council
that we arrive at the position expressed by the latter
in its resolution 497 (1981). Thus, the Council, reflecting the unanimity of the international
community
on the unlawfulness of the annexation
measure,
declared that act null and void and demanded that it
should be rescinded forthwith. By that resolution, the
Council made a demand and set a deadline. The unanimity with which that text was adopted and its imperative tone testify to a sense of resolve and determination to act. That deadline is now up. One question,
and only one, arises in all simplicity:
has resolution
497 (1981) been applied? Unfortunately,
the answer
is clearly and unequivocally: No.

78. This is a serious moment indeed, for what would
be the significance of a two-week deadline, a deadline
solemnly set here, if today’s meeting were to conclude
without the adoption of richly deserved sanctions concerning such a clearly internationally
illegal act and
such open rebellion against international
lawfulness?
In its Chapter VII, the Charter of the United Nations
contains provisions aimed at bringing about respect
for law. The Council does not have the right to fail
to use them. At stake is its credibility as well as peace
in the region, perhaps even in the world at large.

73. That answer can be found first of all in the Zionist measures to implement the annexation decision
which are being applied in contradiction
of the demands of the Council. It can be found also in the
loud statements of the Zionist leaders repeated in
this very Council chamber the day before yesterday
12322nd mcefing], when the extravagant thesis was put
forward to justify annexation,
founded, ironically
enough, on texts based on the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force.
To justify annexation, texts are unwisely invoked that
formally prohibit that very annexation.

79. For the peoples of the United Nations,
looking to the Security Council, this meeting
test of exceptional significance,

who are
is a true

80. The PRESIDENT
(interpwttrtion jhm Rmsiad:
The next speaker is the representative of India. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.
81. Mr. KRISHNAN
(India): The new year has begun
with a number of changes.

74. That negative answer can be found also in the
report of the Secretary-General
[3//482/,
purl/. 31
which clearly sets forth the fallacious position of the
Zionist entity, which has placed before the Council its
dissident concept of “peace capitulation”,
a separate,
piecemeal peace which buries the Palestinian problem,
the core of the entire Middle East question. In this way
the Zionist entity is attempting to push Syria to a
choice between capitulation and the loss of part of its
national territory. It is thus engaged in double blackmail: territorial blackmail of Syria and moral blackmail of the Security Council itself. In so doing, it is

82. First, the presidency of the Council has passed
from an outstanding
son of Africa to the representative of the USSR, a diplomat of high distinction,
proven skill and wisdom. India and the Soviet Union
enjoy close and cordial relations and it is therefore
a matter of particular satisfaction to us that you, Sir,
should be guiding the Council during the first month
of the year.
83, Secondly, we have Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar
as the new Secretary-General,
In unanimously electing
8

-

L

him, the world body has recognized his eminent personal qualities and abilities, the role played by Peru
in world affairs and the aspirations of the non-aligned
world. As my Minister for Foreign Affairs said in his
message of congratulations
to the new SecretaryGeneral, we had watched with hope and admiration
Mr. Perez de CuelIar’s courageous and tireless efforts,
as a distinguished
representative
of the SecretaryGeneral, to bring about peace and stability in different troubled regions of the world. We are confident
that he will bring the same dedication and skill to bear
upon his new responsibilities.
While wishing him
success and greater achievements,
I pledge the full
co-operation
of the Government
and delegation of
India. I should also like to take this opportunity to pay
a tribute to his predecessor, Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for
his devoted services over a whole decade to the Organization and to the cause of world peace and progress.

alone and condemned-in
its expansionist
and annexationist policies. The world must have seen in
that resolution a new ray of hope, a new reason for
optimism.
87. The Council is now facing a greater challenge.
Its resolution 497 (1981) remains not only unimplemented, but rejected and repudiated by Israel. The
content and tone of Israel’s statements
since the
adoption of the resolution show beyond any shadow of
a doubt that Israel has no intention of honouring its
obligations
under the Charter. The arguments advanced by Israel in justification
of the occupation and
annexation of the Golan Heights carry no conviction
because the history of Israel’s policy of confrontation
with its Arab neighbours, occupation by force of Arab
territories and gradual annexation
of foreign land is
only too well known. The armistice regime between
Syria and Israel was violated on several occasions
by Israel, and the Council has rebuked it time and
again for committing
breaches of the peace in the
region. Israel itself has acknowledged
the status of
the Golan Heights as an occupied territory, and its
current efforts directed at a so-called normalization
of the situation in the area have no justification
whatsoever.

84. Thirdly, although the Council lost some of its
valuable members at the end of 1981, it has been
enriched by the addition of Guyana, Jordan, Poland,
Togo and Zaire, countries with which India maintains
close and friendly relations.
85. We are gratified to note that the Council has
lost no time in the new year in meeting to consider the
situation in the occupied Arab territories soon after the
expiration of the date set by the Council for Israel
to rescind its annexationist
measures in the Syrian
Golan Heights. The Council would have been spared
the necessity of doing so if Israel had complied with
the call made to it. But this was not to be; and it is a
sad commentary on our times that this has not come as
a surprise to any of us.

88. Israel has sought to argue, as it did last month
before the Council, that the benefits of civilian laws
and administration
could not be delayed indefinitely
for the inhabitants
of the Golan Heights since its
search for a peaceful settlement
had met with no
response.This is indeed a strange and perverse logic.
Surely Israel does not believe-and
does not expect
the world to believe-that
by consolidating
its authority over the occupied territory it has brought peace
to the Golan Heights or has enhanced the prospects
of a settlement, even by its own lights. The people
of the Golan Heights are entitled to Syrian laws and
administration
and can know no peace until that territory is returned to Syria, If Israel is indeed sincere in
its solicitude for the welfare of the people of the Golan
Heights, there is nothing to prevent it from joining
in the search for a comprehensive,
just and durable
peace as defined and determined
by the United
Nations.

86. My delegation is grateful to have this opportunity
of again addressing the Council on the question of the
annexation of the Golan Heights by Israel. Barely
three weeks ago [2317rh meerina], I had the privilege
of speaking to the Council to express India’s full
support for and solidarity with Syria and to underscore our concern over the deteriorating
situation in
West Asia. The universal indignation at Israel’s most
regrettable and inadmissible action in respect of the
Golan Heights was fully demonstrated
during the
debate on the subject both in the General Assembly
and in the Security Council. The unanimous adoption
of resolution 497 (1981) rekindled the world’s faith
in the objectivity
of the Council and its potential
ability to safeguard international
peace and security. The resolution categorically declared that Israel
should rescind forthwith
its annexationist
measures in the Golan Heights, that the imposition
of
Israeli laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights was null and void and
without international legal effect, and that in the event
of non-compliance by Israel the Council would urgently
meet to consider taking appropriate
measures in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
It demonstrated
that Israel stood alone-absolutely

89. Discussion has taken place in the Council in the
past few days on the definition of aggression and the
reasons for the present state of affairs in West Asia.
The responsibility
for the prevailing
tension and
conflict in the’area lies squarely with Israel. The fundamental fact to be noted is that Israel has deprived
the Palestinian people of their fundamental
rights and
is in forceful military occupation of sizeable portions
of Arab lands, including Jerusalem, taken during the
1967 war, which it unleashed on its neighbours of its
own accord. Since then, Israel has defied every United
Nations resolution,
including those of the Council,
which has demanded the vacating of Arab territories
and the exercise by the Palestinian
people of their
inalienable
right to establish a State in their own
9

homeland.
Far from moving towards eventual withdrawal from the territories occupied by force and
the establishment
of peace with its neighbours, Israel
has been engaged in the systematic depletion of the
natural resources of the areas inhabited by the Arab,
population
and in the establishment
of Israeli settlements as a prelude to outright annexation. The action
taken in respect of the Golan Heights is therefore
simply a step taken by Israel ‘in its ambitious programme of expansion. It is undoubtedly
yet another
act of aggression worthy of universal condemnation.
It is by no means an action taken in self-defence, nor
can it be justified as an invitation to negotiations.

1 invite him to take a place at the Council
to make his statement.

table and

93. Mr. ABDALLA
(Sudan): Mr. President. I should
like to thank you and the members of the Council
for giving my delegation the opportunity to participate
in the deliberations on this important question. I should
also like to congratulate
you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. My congratulations go also to your predecessor. Mr. Otunnu.
the representative of Uganda. As fellow Africans and
friendly neighbours,
we are particularly
proud and
gratified by the skilful and able manner in which he
presided over the work of the Council at a time when
significant and delicate issues were dealt with.

90. The course of action before the Council in these
circumstances
is clear. Now is the time to consider
the “appropriate
measures” contemplated
last month
in the event of non-compliance
by Israel with resolution 497 (1981), The explicit provisions for punitive
action contained
in the Charter must be invoked
without delay or hesitation. The expectations raised
by the adoption of resolution 497 (1981) have been
so great that if the Council fails to take action at this
juncture, it will be dealing a mortal blow to its own
credibility.
The principled position that Israel’s traditional friends have taken in criticizing
the latest act
of aggression by Israel has earned them praise and
‘admiration.
The suspension by the United States of
‘the strategic co-operation
agreement-an
agreement
which could not but encourage Israeli intransigencehas been welcomed as a step in the right direction.
We do hope that, acting in the same spirit of rectitude,
the members of the Council will once again be unanimous in their decision to take appropriate measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter to compel Israel to
comply with resolution 497 (1981).

94, We take this opportunity
to congratulate
the
new members of the Council and also to welcome the
new Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Plrez de Cu6ltur.
and wish him every success in his onerous task. We
wish the outgoing
Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, all success in his future endeavours.
9.5. Our deep concern over the issue now before the
Council was expressed in a statement issued by the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 14 December 1981, in
which the Government
of the Democratic Republic
of the Sudan stated its strong condemnation
and
categorical
rejection of the Israeli illegal decision
to annex the Syrian Golan Heights and called upon
the Council to address itself to this serious act of
aggression, which threatens international
peace and
security. We are gratified that the Council acted
promptly
by unanimously
adopting resolution 497
(1981), in which it reiterated the principle of the inadmissibility
of acquisition
of territory by force. The
Council declared that the Israeli decision to impose
Israeli laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the
occupied Syrian Golan Heights was null and void and
without international
legal effect. The Council appropriately demanded
that Israel should rescind that
illegal decision forthwith,
Immediately
following the
adoption of the resolution [23/9t/? nzceting], the representative of Israel informed this body of his Government’s non-acceptance
of and non-compliance
with
that resolution. Now the Council is meeting in accordance with paragraph 4 of that resolution.

91. The Government of India has continued to watch
the situation in West Asia closely in the last few weeks.
Speaking to a group of Arab envoys who called on her
last month to apprise her of the present situation
there, the Prime Minister of India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi,
assured them of India’s continued and firm support of
the Arab cause. India’s Minister for Foreign Affilirs
said in the IndianParliament
on 17 December 1981 that
Israel’s annexationist
policy with regard to the Syrian
Golan Heights was “highly provocative
and aggressive, being a policy of conquest and confrontation
which will further aggravate the already tense and
indeed volatile situation in West Asia”. Indian leaders
have been in touch with the leadership ofSyria on that
question recently. A few days ago, a parliamentary
delegation
led by the Honourable
Speaker of the
Indian Parliament
was in Damascus, where our solidarity with the Government
and people of Syria was
reaffirmed.
India and the other non-aligned countries
have again called for sanctions against Israel. India
stands ready to extend its full support to the measures
that the United Nations must now take.

96. The non-compliance
of Israel with resolution
497 (1981) is a surprise to no one. Numerous resolutions have been adopted by the Council and by the
General Assembly and have been consistently and
defiantIy rejected and disregarded by Israel. All these
resolutions are still unimplemented
and will remain SO
as long as the Council does not exercise its defined
role in the maintenance of peace and the suppression
of aggression.
97. In his note of 29 December 1981 addressed to the
Secretary-General
[3//4821, plr,.rr. 31, the representative of Israel, in an attempt to justify his Government’s decision to annex the Syrian Golan Heights

The PRESIDENT
(intP,p,.etntion
jhn
Rrrssicrn):
The next speaker is the representative
of the Sudan.
92.

l@

and its non-compliance
stated:

with resolution

497 (19811,

Palestinian people their inalienable rights: the right to
self-determination,
the right to return to their homes
and the right to establish their independent State. The
list of Israeli lawless acts is now crowned by the
annexation of the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, and
this, for sure, is not the last Israeli crime in the area.

“In the view of the Government of Israel, recent
Syrian acts and declarations have made it urgently
_ necessary to bring to an end the anomalous situation regarding the Golan Heights. The Government
of Israel could not wait endlessly for Syria to begin
to show political will to make peace and agree on
secure boundaries”.

101. It should therefore be understandable why we
are deeply alarmed and concerned at the failure of the
Council to act in the effective and urgent fashion
that would put an end to the unparallelled and lawless
Israeli conduct, We are alarmed not only because the
Golan Heights is Arab territory, or because of the
principles involved, but also because of the serious
implications any inaction on the part of the Council
will have on the conduct of international relations.

98. What kind of logic is it that makes annexation of
another sovereign State’s territory a correction of an
anomalous situation? How can annexation be a way
of normalizing a situation in an occupied territory’?
What kind of peace could a victim of aggression agree
to talk about when he is gradually being devoured by
the aggressor?

102. If this latest Israeli violation of the Charter goes
unpunished, a dangerous precedent will be set, and
many small and weak countries will justifiably feel
insecure in a lawless international
system characterized by the frequency of aggression, occupation and
annexation of territory. Moreover, inaction will affect
the credibility and standing of the Charter of the
United Nations, and will certainly jeopardize the
effectiveness of General Assembly resolution 33 14
(XXIX) of the Definition of Aggression, a resolution
that was painstakingly negotiated. For those reasons,
we strongly urge that the members of the Council
bear these serious implications in mind when considering what action the Council should take,

99. The only peace Israel is ready for is apparently
peace on Israeli terms. This can never be t.he just,
comprehensive and lasting peace that the Council and
the General Assembly are calling for. Israel cannot
talk of peace while every day it is planting serious
obstacles to peace. For the last 15 years, the General
Assembly, the Council and the international community have intensified efforts to achieve a lasting peace
in the Middle East. These efforts have consistently
been frustrated by Israeli attitudes and policies. The
Israeli illegal decision to annex the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights is yet another serious impediment to the
search for peace in the region. It is time that the Council realized that Israel must be held responsible for
undermining
international
efforts to establish a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace. We therefore maintain that unless the Council pronounces itself clearly
and firmly on the issue before it, Israel will be encouraged to create by its irresponsible policies more
obstacles on the road to peace. We fear that it will
not be long before the Council convenes to consider
the annexation by Israel of the West Bank and Gaza.
The Council has to realize that expansion, and not
peace, is the ultimate objective and the main motive
of Israel.

103. My delegation holds the belief that one of the
fundamental purposes of the United Nations is to
maintain international peace and security and to take
effective and collective measures for the prevention
and removal of threats to the peace and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the
peace. The Council, in accordance with Article 39 of
the Charter, is to determine the existence of any
threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of
aggression and is entitled to make recommendations,
or decide what measures shall be taken in accordance
with Articles 41 and 42, to maintain or restore international peace and security.

100. The apprehensions
we have expressed are
reinforced when we look at the records of the Council and when we review its many resolutions in which
it has denounced and condemned Israel and called
upon it to respect the Charter of the United Nations
and to abide by its resolutions and decisions. One
indeed wonders why stronger and more effective
action was not taken earlier against Israel. The kind of
serious violations of the Charter and international law
that have been perpetrated by Israel are unparalleled
in recent history. These violations include acts of
aggression against Arab countries, occupation of
Arab territories,
bombardment
of civilian centres,
violation of the airspace of two Arab countries to bomb
an Iraqi nuclear research centre, planting of illegal
settlements on occupied territories-the
list is indeed
endless. Above all, Israel persists in denying the

104. It has been clearly elucidated by those who
have spoken before me that the Israeli act of annexation of the Syrian Golan Heights is a clear act of aggression under the provisions of Article 39 of the Charter,
as well as General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX).
The Security Council is therefore called upon strongly
to condemn Israel for its failure to implement its
resolution 497 (198 I) and General Assembly resolution
36/226 B of 1981. It is also incumbent upon the Council to determine that Israeli measures in the occupied
Syrian Golan Heights constitute an act of aggression
under the provisions of Article 39 of the Charter and
General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX). The Council should thereafter take the appropriate measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter to oblige Israel to
restore all occupied Syrian territories to the full
sovereignty of the Syrian Arab Republic.
11

105,

The

PRESIDENT

(infrrpwtotion
is the RpIYSentatiVe

.tiwm

of the basic principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and provisions of international
law. which
gravely endangers peace and security in the region
and in the world as ~1whole”. The repreSentalive
0f
the Federal Secretariat expressed the deep concern
of the Yugoslav Government and underlined
th:lt
“the international
community must undertake energetic measures in order to prevent aggr’CSSiVe
IsI%~~E
&
actions”. In that connection, the indispensability
undertaking measures necessary to protect the SOYereign rights of Syria and other Arab States in the
occupied territories was expressed.

f?w

of Yugoslavia. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

. sj(ln): The next speaker

106. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): I should like
to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the
post of President of the Council for the month of
January.
My pleasure in doing so is all, the greater
since Yugoslavia
and the Union of SOVlet
Socialist
Republics develop relations of close cq-operatiol.
Your proven and confirmed diplomatic skill and Polltical experience are a guarantee that this body will
successfully consider this very important and acute
issue on its agenda.

I 13. On this occasion,
I am speaking in order to
underline once again that by annexing the G&n
Heights Israel committed a grave and dangerous XI
which will have unforeseeable negative consequences
on the situation in the Middle East and on wider intornational relations as well. What is at stake here is tht
perpetuation of the policy of expansion and the anncx;ttion of foreign territory by force, of which it is difficult-if
not impossible-to
find an example in ctrntemporary history. By this act of the gravest violation
of the territorial integrity of a sovereign country. the
basic principles of modern international relations and
international norms-the
essence of which is the WCPY
respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity
of States-were trampled underfoot.

107. At the same time, I should like to pay a tribute
to your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu of Uganda,
for the highly successful manner in which he conducted the work of the Council last month.
108. I should also like to congratulate Mr. Javiel
PCrez de CuCllar on his election to and assumption of
the high post of Secretary-General. My pleasure is
all the greater since he is a citizen of non-aligned Peru,
a country with which Yugoslavia maintains relations
of traditional friendship and co-operation, His diplomatic experience and political statesmanship are
ample guarantees of his successful performance of this
highly important duty. The Yugoslav delegation will
render all possible assistance to the Secretary-General,
making its contribution to the work and activities of
the United Nations.

114. In addition, it is a serious blow to all constructive efforts for the peaceful solution of the Micidlr
East crisis, which can be based only on the wifhdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories occupied in
the 1967 war, including the Golan Heights and Jercjsalem, as well as the realization of the national right
of the Palestinian people to the establishment
of :~n
independent State, with the PLO participating
on an
equal footing in the process leading to peace.

109. May I also take this opportunity to pay a tribute,
Mr. Secretary-General, to your predecessor, Mr. Kurt
Waldheim, for his outstanding contribution
to the
strengthening of the role of the United Nations.
I IO. I should like also to congratulate the new members-Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and Zaire-on
their election to the Council and to wish them full
success.

11.5, We consider it indispensable to point out wux
again on this occasion the role of the Security Council, that is, of the United Nations as a whole, in rn;tintaining peace and in protecting the independence.
security and territorial integrity of all countries, ahot il”
all small and weak ones.

1I 1. MY delegation participated in the previous
series of meetings of the Council devoted to the issue
now before the Council. In its statement of 17 December 1981 [2318rh meeting],
it described the decision of the Israeli Government to annex the Golan
Heights as an extremely dangerous act; a one-sided
. change of status of that part of the occupied Arab
territory, which not only is contrary to international
law and to numerous United Nations decisions, but
also threatens to lead us irrevocably away from the
road
to a Peaceful
solution of the Middle East crisis
on a just and lasting basis.

116. I should like to stress particularly
that for u’s
the right of all countries to independence,
security-.
territorial integrity and sovereignty and to free natiomil
and social development is an inalienable right and un
indivisible
principle of international
relations, T-flat
means that a violation of that right, wherever it occtiri~
and whoever commits it, is the concern of all ct~untries and peoples as well as of the world community
as a whole. That is an unchangeable principle of the
Policy of non-alignment
and of the Charter of the
United Nations, to which Yugoslavia consistently
adheres.

112. The representative of the Federal. Secretariat for
Foreign Affairs of YugosIavia, in a statement of
I7 December 1981, energetically condemned this
decision as ” an act of Overt aggression against the
Syrian Arab Republic”, and as “a flagrant violation

117. We therefore expect that the Council will react
in accordance with the gravity of the situation and that
it will undetzake energetic action leading
to the annul12

Tent of the Israeli decision concerning the annexatlon. thus securing the sovereign rights of Syria on
the Golan Heights, by using all the measures at its
disposal on the basis of the Charter, including certainly the provisions under Chapter VII. The violation
of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of one
country by aggression, occupation and then annexation
cannot but be described as a threat to peace. It is
even more of a threat given Israel’s disregarding of
the last, unanimously
adopted, decision of the Council on the annulment of the annexation.

125. AS was expected, and in accordance with
Israel’s constant habit, Israel has not abided by the
resolutions of the United Nations. It has disdained for
a long period of time hundreds of United Nations
resolutions. particularly those of the Security Council,
the latest of which is resolution 497 (1981).
126. Israel would not have dared to do so had it not
been for its certainty and for the assurances given to
it that the Council would not be capable of deterring
it or of imposing sanctions upon it. It remains totally
certain that Israel would not have dared to carry out
this aggression, to turn its back on the international
community and the United Nations and to ignore the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council had it not been for the total support of and
the alliance extended to it by the United States of
America.

I 18. If the Council does not find the right response
to the situation created, we shall all feel endangered,
since the premise of stable international
relations,
on which everybody’s security is based, will be jeopardized. For that reason the Council should avoid, by not
giving an appropriate answer, doing anything which
would even temporarily
and indirectly
legitimize
the practice of.filits uwomp1i.s created by force,

127. The annexation of the Golan Heights might
have come as a surprise to some people but the truth
is that it came as no surprise to those who know the
true nature of Israel and its aggressive, expansionist
intentions. It is an entity established on aggression:
the expulsion of the indigenous inhabitants and the
occupation of their land. Its pronouncements of peace
mean nothing but its own peace and the capitulation of
others. Its pronouncements
about secure borders
mean striking at all positions that can stand up to,
resist and confront the Israeli acts of aggression,
whose aim is to eliminate any possibility of resistance
or even of construction and development in the Arab
countries, so that those countries may remain at the
mercy of the entity created by the colonialist Powers
and adopted by the United States as a tool and extension of its aggression against the Arab nation. The
material, military,
political and economic support
which makes of Israel an American State, with priority
over everything, even over the United States itself,
makes the United States a partner of Israel in any act
of aggression it commits, despite any air of innocence
and surprise that the United States may assume.

I 19. This is a case not only of solidarity with Syria
but of the need for solidarity in the defence of general
as well as of individual interests, expressed first of all
in the maintenance of peace and security. That can be
achieved only through guaranteeing the independence,
sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of all countries,
irrespective
of their dimensions,
social system or
geographical
position. That is why Israeli aggression
must be prevented-and
that is possible only by the
prompt and energetic action of the Security Council.
120. Yugoslavia has always advocated urgent United
Nations action in arresting the policy of force and
opposing intervention,
expansion and aggression and
it wifl support every measure undertaken to that end.
121. The PRESIDENT
(intwpwtrrtion
jhm
RUS.rion): The next speaker is the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
122. Mr. MUNTASSER
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya):
First of all, Sir, I should like to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the current month. Your skilled guidance and outstanding qualities are a guarantee that the Council
will take a stand commensurate
with the importance
of the matter under consideration.
I wish also to
commend
the honourable position your country has
maintained
in supporting the Arab cause.

128. Unless that entity is faced with a firm and strong
position world-wide, it will lead to a breakdown in the
concepts on which international peace and security
are based. Unless the world, having today seen this
clear evidence of Israel’s intentions and aims, stands
firm and united against it, that entity will become a
destructive danger to human civilization in that part
of the world.

123. 1 should also like to pay a special tribute to your
predecessor, Mr. Otunnu of Uganda, for the remarkable way in which he directed the work of the Council
during the month of December. As an African, I am
very proud of him.

129. The response of the representative of Israel,
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
[S//482/, pr/rtr. 31, is full of distortions and is simply
an insult to the intelligence of the members of the
international community. He tries to explain and justify
the annexation of the Golan Heights by providing a
pretext that reveals the Israeli mentality, which seeks
the imposition of surrender and domination. He says,
“Syria has repeatedly rejected Israeli offers to negotiate peace” [ibid.]. With that as its justification,

124, It also gives me great pleasure to welcome, in
* the name ofmy delegation, the new Secretary-General,
and
Mr. Pirez de CuCllar, whose administrative
political abilities are well known, and to wish him all
success in his noble task.
13

experience and outstanding diplomatic skill, you will
be able to guide the Council’s proceedings this month
with success. I should also like to express our sincere
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Olara Otunnu
of Uganda, who guided the work of the Council last
month with great distinction.

lsrael therefore annexed the Golan Heights in retaliation for Syria’s refusal to surrender. That is Israeli
logic.
130. In another part of his note, the representative
of Israel speaks about aggression. Naturally, I do not
imagine that he is dealing with the concept of aggression as defined in General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX). There must be another concept of aggression
in the view of the Israeli representative.

139. May I also take this opportunity
to extend
our warm welcome to the new Secretary-General,
Mr. Javier Pirez de Cuiflar. We have great admiration
for his eminent qualities as a diplomat, his vast experience in international
affairs and his dedication to the
noble objectives of the United Nations. We are convinced that under his leadership the United Nations
will continue to make advances in carrying out its
responsibilities
as the primary world organization
for peace.

13 f. The Israeli
representative’s
answer to the
Secretary-General’s
note reveals that Israel refuses to
comply with Council resolution
497 (1981). Under
paragraph 4 of that resolution, the Council resolved
that in the event of non-compliance by Israel the Council would meet to consider taking appropriate measures
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

140. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity
to express once agziin our feelings of deep respect and
appreciation
to the outgoing
Secretary-General,
Mr. Kurt Waldheim, for his outstanding contribution
to the cause of international
peace during his eventful tenure as head of the Organization,
spanning a
decade.

132. There is no alternative before the Council to
meet this challenge on the part of Israel but the application of Chapter VII of the Charter, particularly
Article 41, because Israel has refused to comply with
the Council’s
resolution 497 (1981). The measures
taken by Israel in the Syrian Arab Golan region constitute an act of aggression according to Article 39
of the Charter and General Assembly
resolution
3314 (XXIX) concerning the definition of aggression.

141. On behalf of the Pakistan delegation, I wish to
extend our warm congratulations to Guyana, Jordan.
Poland, Togo and Zaire on their election to this esteemed Council and also express our appreciation to
the outgoing
members,
the German Democratic
Republic, Mexico, Niger, the Philippines and Tunisia,
for their valuable contribution to the fulfilment of the
important tasks before the Council.

133. On the basis of the preceding facts, my country’s delegation calls upon the Council to fulfil the
obligations entrusted to it by the Charter and to adopt
a resolution to punish Israel for its non-compliance
with and refusal to implement resolutions of the United
Nations, particularly
Security Council resolution 497
(1981).

142. Monday,
14 December 1981, marked another
grave step in the Israeli expansionist policies in the
Middle East, as on that day Israel decided to impose
its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the OCCUpied Arab territory of the Golan Heights. The international community
was once again outraged at this
illegal Israeli action and condemned it in the strongest
terms. The position of Pakistan in this regard WBS
expressed in an official statement by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan on I5 December, in which
he strongly condemned the Israeli move of annexing
the occupied Golan Heights and stated that this was
yet another example of Israeli expansionist policies
and Israel’s total disregard of international
law and
contempt for world opinion. We also had the opportunity to reiterate our position in the Council debate
on 17 December [23 18th meeting].

134. Above all, all Member States should be committed to the implementation
of the resolution
in
accordance with Article 25 of the Charter. Reference
to this should be contained in the Council’s
resolution.
135, We hope that the Council will play the proper
role entrusted to it by the Charter and, in accordance
with Article 24, shoulder its primary responsibility
of maintaining
international
peace and security,
136, Unless the Council can deter Israeli aggression and violation
of the Charter, international
peace
and security will be in grave danger, particularly in the
Middle East region.
137. The PRESIDENT
(intcrprcftrfio/z
fk)/n Russic/n): The next speaker is the representative
of Pakistan. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

143. The Council, which was immediately seized of
the matter, unanimously adopted resolution 497 (198 I),
which declared the Israeli decision in respect of the
Golan Heights as “null and void and without international legal effect”. The Council further demanded
that Israel should “rescind forthwith its decision”.

138, Mr. MAHMOOD
(Pakistan): Sir, I should like
to congratulate
you on your assumption of the important office of the presidency of the Council for the
month of January. We are sure that, with your great

144. As was expected, Israel, persisting in its lawlessness and defiance of international public opinion,
14

once again refused with impunity to implement a Council resolution.
Instead, it has advanced untenable
arguments to justify its illegal annexation of the Golan
Heights, which is in clear violation of the Charter of
the United Nations, the principles of international law,
in particular those contained in the fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949,’ and the several resolutions of
the Security Council, particularly
resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), which affirm the inadmissibility
of acquisition of territory by force. Nothing can alter
the fact that the Golan Heights are under illegal Israeli
occupation and it is imperative that this occupied
territory be restored to Syria.

sion and expansion. Furthermore, the moral support so
often extended to the people and Governments victim
of Israeli expansionist policies needs to be reinforced
by effective measures for the realization of theit
just cause. The Council cannot do less if it is to demonstrate its determination
not to accept the right of
conquest in international relations.
149. The PRESIDENT
(intr,‘l;l,‘cJttrtion
,fhun RIISsion): The next speaker is the representative of the
Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
150. Mr. KRAVETS
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) (intcrprcfrrtion ,/km Rltssitrn): Mr President, the delegation of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic is extremely grateful to you and to the members of the Council for the opportunity afforded us to
take part in the work of the Council on such an important and acute problem as the situation in the occupied
Arab territories.

14.5. The Israeli action is the latest of a series of
illegal measures taken by Israel to strengthen its
stranglehold over the Arab and Palestinian territories
occupied since 1967, including the Holy City of Jerusalem. It is relentlessly
pursuing its expansionist
design for a “Greater Israel”, despite repeated Council
resolutions which have determined
that measures
.taken by Israel to change the physical character,
demographic composition,
institutional
structure or
status of the Palestinian Arab territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem, have no legal validity.

I5 1. I should first of all like to congratulate you-the
representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, a country whose tireless efforts in the cause of
peace and international
security have won the most
widespread understanding
and support-on
you1
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We are
convinced that under your skilful leadership the Council will successfully conclude its work on the tasks
facing it.

146. Indeed, over the years Israel has been emboldened in its aggression and intransigence. It has arrogated to itself the right to act unilaterally and at will
regardless of any principles of international
law or
consideration of peace. Its unprovoked attack on the
peaceful nuclear reactor near Baghdad, its brutal
military raids against Lebanon and the reign of terror
let loose against the Palestinian and Arab inhabitants
of the occupied territories are glaring evidence of its
increasing rapacity and expansionism.

152. We should like to express our deep admiration at the great mastery and competence with which
your predecessor, the representative of Uganda,
Mr. Otunnu, conducted the proceedings of the Council.
153. We should also like to express our warm congratulations to Mr. Perez de CuCllar on his appointment
to the post of Secretary-General.

147. The international community cannot acquiesce
in the lawless behaviour of Israel. The latest Israeli
action to annex the Golan Heights, unless it is reversed,
is fraught with grave implications
for international
peace and security and for world order based on the
Charter of the United Nations. It constitutes a most
serious challenge to the prospects of peace and stability in the Middle East.

154. On I7 December, that is, three weeks ago, the
Council vigorously condemned yet one more outrageous act of aggression by Israel and unanimously
adopted a resolution [resolution 497 (/98/)] stipulating
that the Israeli decision to impose its laws, jurisdiction
and administration
in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights was null and void and without international
legal effect and demanding that Israel, the occupying
Power, should rescind forthwith its decision. On the
same day, the General Assembly adopted a resolution [wsolution 36/226 B], against which only Israel
and the United States voted, categorically condemning
the stubborn pursuance by Israel of the policy of
annexation and demanding that it rescind forthwith its
decision regarding the Golan Heights, describing it as
a flagrant violation of all relevant principles of international law. The General Assembly, on behalf of the
Members of the United Nations, requested the Security Council, in case Israel failed to comply with that
resolution, to apply against it the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

148, At this stage, when Israel has contemptuously
defied the Council’s demands to rescind its illegal
annexation, the Council is faced with the heavy responsibility for the maintenance of peace, which is gravely
threatened by the criminal Israeli actions. The fact of
Israel’s non-compliance
with Council resolution 497
(1981) is clearly established and the Council is now
required to adopt appropriate measures under the
Charter. A repetition of condemnation of the aggressor
will not suffice. What is required of the Council is
meaningful
and determined
action to ensure compliance by Israel with its decisions. This calls for
nothing less than the application of mandatory sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter to compel
Israel to put an end to its policies of relentless aggres15

themselves from the extreme conduct of their friend
and ally. The “punitive
measures”
taken against
Israel by the United States represent, rather--as is
shown by the facts-measures
which serve to encourage it to engage in further acts of aggression and arbitrariness with regard to the Arab peoples. The CIrri.srr’tr/~
Scicnc~s Monitor.
commenting
on the forthcoming
trip of the United States Secretary of State, Mr. Haig,
to Israel and Egypt, wrote on 6 January this year that:*

155, Today the world community expects from the
Council decisive action and concrete measures so as
to calI the unbridled aggressor to account. it may well
be asked: how long is Israel going to defy the will of
the international community SO arrogantly and refuse to
comply with the demands unanimously approved by
the Security Council in its resolution addressed directly
to it? it is as if the solemn undertaking assumed by
Israel when it became a Member of the United Nations
to comply with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations is for Israel nothing but an empty and
meaningless utterance. There has been an endless
number of provocative aggressive acts by Israel: many
hundreds of millions of members of the various religious faiths have for centuries considered Jerusalem to
be their Holy City, but by hundreds of votes the
Knesset declared that holy place the single, indivisible capital of Israel. Iraq, in its attempt to develop
its economy, was trying to build a scientific atomic
research centre, but the bosses in Tel Aviv did not
find that to their taste and they destroyed it barbarously. The Israeli political and military brass, without
giving it a second thought, gave the order for the destructive bombing of the capital of Lebanon, dealing
death to hundreds of peaceful citizens, including
women and children. This was followed by one more
naked act of banditry, the annexation of the Golan
Heights. The leaders of Israel do not even attempt
to conceal their annexationist plans with regard to the
West Bank of the River Jordan and the Gaza Strip,
which have been occupied since 1967.

“The United States is intensifying its efforts to
repair damaged relations with Israel . . . At stake
for the Israelis, among other things, could be a
$300 million
increase in the loans for fiscal year
1983 now under consideration
within the Administration.”
That is what the punishment
style, actually amounts to.

of Israel,

American

158. The Ukrainian
people, like all Soviet peoples,
vigorously condemn the expansionist and aggressive
policy of Israel and the United States policy of connivance with the aggressor. Our sympathy and support
are whole-heartedly
on the side of Syria and the just
cause of the other Arab peoples, including the people
of Palestine.
159. On the basis of this position of principle, we
unreservedly support the provisions of Council resolution 497 (1981). In our opinion, since Israel has
cynically repudiated this resohttion, the next step can
only be the adoption of binding sanctions against Israel
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

156. How long is all this going to go on? How much
longer is the patience of the international community
going to be tried in this way? There is no doubt that
the policy of brigandage pursued by Israel and its
aggressive raids against the Arab peoples have been
made possible because it receives comprehensive
support and indeed the blessing of its powerful strategic ally, the United States of America-and
all this
is carried out within the framework of separate deals
and agreements. United States imperialism has chosen
Israel as its main instrument for the implementation
of its plans for establishing political, economic and
military domination in the Middle East and has declared
that region a sphere of its vital interests,

160. We trust that this time the Council will carry
out its mandate in accordance with the Charter.
The meeting

I-ose ut 6.15 pm.

NOTE

157. But no one is taken in by the attempts of the
leaders of the United States verbally to dissociate

I6

1 United

Nations,

*’ Quoted

in English

Tr~rrry

Series,

by the speaker.

vol.

75, No. 973, p. 287.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consutt

COMMENT

UMTED

publications
your bookstore

NATIONS

may be obtained
liom
bookstores
and distributors
or write IO: United
Nations,
Sales Section,
New

SE PROCURER

LES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupris
des ventes. New York ou Get&e,

COMO

CONSEGUIR

in United

Nations,

New

York

PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

som en vente dans les librairies
de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes de1 mundo.
Con&e
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Litho

PUBLICATIONS

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas
estin
en venta en librerias
a so librero
o dirijase
a: Nacioncs

0400

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et IFS agences
a : Nations

depositaires
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas.
Section
de Ventas,

88.60989-April

IYtY-2.050
