S/2020/685

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 July 2020
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on his mission of good offices
in Cyprus

I. Introduction
1.
The Security Council, in its resolution 2506 (2020), requested me to submit a
report by 10 July 2020 on my good offices, in particular on progress towards reaching
a consensus starting point for meaningful results-oriented negotiations leading to a
settlement. In that resolution, the Council urged the sides and all involved participants
to renew their political will and commitment to a settlement under United Nations
auspices. The Council encouraged the leaders of the two communities to provide
written updates to my mission of good offices on the actions they had taken in support
of the relevant parts of resolution 2506 (2020), in particular with regard to paragraphs
5 and 6, with a view to reaching a sustainable and comprehensive settlement, and
requested me to include the contents of those updates in my report. The updates
submitted by the two leaders are annexed to the present report.
2.
The present report focuses on developments from 31 October 2019 to 18 June
2020, providing an update on the activities carried out by my mission of good offices
under the leadership of my Deputy Special Adviser on Cyprus, Elizabeth Spehar. It
also includes an update on the consultations conducted by senior United Nations
official Jane Holl Lute on my behalf.

II. Background and context
3.
In my previous report on my mission of good offices ( S/2019/883), I expressed
hope that a durable settlement to the Cyprus problem could be achieved. I welcomed
the constructive engagement of the sides, the guarantor powers and other interested
parties with Ms. Lute and underscored that the prospects for peace ultimately lie in
the hands of the two sides. I urged the parties to make productive use of the coming
period and to take advantage of the consultations to lay the groundwork for fresh and
unambiguous commitments to achieve a peaceful settlement. In that regard, I
reiterated my call on the parties to constructively consider the framework of six points
that I had offered on 30 June 2017.
4.
As I mentioned in my previous report on the United Nations Peacekeep ing Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP) (S/2020/23), I held an informal joint meeting with the Greek
Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı,
in Berlin on 25 November 2019. It was the first time that I had met with the two
leaders jointly since the closure of the Conference on Cyprus in Crans -Montana in

20-08992 (E)

150720

*2008992*

S/2020/685

July 2017. The meeting provided an important opportunity to take stock of the efforts
towards reaching a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem almost two and
a half years later.
5.
Following the meeting in Berlin, and building on the successful implementation
of key confidence-building measures during 2019, the two sides shifted their efforts
to the bicommunal technical committees and devoted increased attention to the ways
in which these committees could assist in boosting confidence and communication
between the sides and improve the daily lives of Cypriots. In the framework of the
committees, and in the presence of my Deputy Special Adviser, the two leaders met
three times after their joint meeting with me in Berlin. They also had a number of
telephone conversations during the reporting period.
6.
The joint appearances and the confidence-building measures implemented
during the reporting period were generally well received by the public and contrasted
with the climate surrounding the peace process, which has deteriorated since the
closure of the Conference on Cyprus in 2017. On 16 December 2019, the two leaders
attended the head teachers conference for the academic year 2019/20. The leaders
used their joint appearance to send a message of support for the work of the Technical
Committee on Education and the voluntary peace education programme “Imagine”.
On 3 February 2020, the two leaders co-chaired a meeting of the Technical Committee
on Health to discuss the precautions that had been taken in response to the developing
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, as both sides had begun taking initial
steps in late January. After the Committee briefed the two leaders, it issued a joint
statement, observing that all necessary precautions, including screening, had been
taken by both sides in accordance with the guidelines of the World Health
Organization. The members of the Committee also agreed to remain in close contact,
to exchange information and to provide assistance as needed. Following the meeting
of the Technical Committee on Health, the two leaders attended a launch by the
Technical Committee on Culture of an art exhibition, hosted by my Deputy Special
Adviser and co-organized and funded by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the European Commission.
7.
As described in more detail in my report on UNFICYP (S/2020/682), which was
requested in resolution 2506 (2020), on 29 February, citing public health concerns
related to COVID-19, the Republic of Cyprus closed four crossing points linking
south to north, triggering demonstrations by various groups against the closing, with
some groups advocating the continued closure of the crossing points. A few weeks
later, the authorities in the north also closed two additional crossing points following
the emergence of the first cases of COVID-19 on the island on 9 March. In late March,
both sides introduced quarantine requirements at the remaining open crossing points,
effectively restricting movement between the two communities. The emergence of
COVID-19 in Cyprus also led to the announcement on 19 March that the Turkish
Cypriot leadership elections scheduled to take place on 24 April would be postponed
for six months until 11 October, with a possible second round on 18 October. The
postponement extended the electoral cycle, as well as the associated pre-electoral
politics. It also affected a possible resumption of dialogue and steps to be taken
towards a five-plus-United Nations informal meeting since the relevant parties
understand that such a meeting should not take place before the elections. On 12 April,
the day after UNFICYP announced its first case of COVID -19, restrictions on
movement through the crossings to the north were imposed by the Turkish Cypriot
authorities on personnel from the United Nations, multila teral organizations and the
wider diplomatic community.
8.
Following the outbreak of COVID-19 on the island, rapid measures were taken.
While the two sides’ responses to the pandemic were separate and uncoordinated, the
two Cypriot leaders held several telephone calls expressing support for each other’s
2/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

efforts to address the outbreak and agreeing to engage in order to provide assistance
to meet the humanitarian and medical needs of individuals island -wide. Members of
the bicommunal Technical Committee on Health also remained in daily contact,
exchanging information and providing assistance where necessary in an effort to
maintain the ongoing dialogue and cooperation to confront the challenges of this
unprecedented crisis. Economic measures were taken by the authorities on each side
in an effort to address the devastating impact caused by the almost complete shutdown
of the economy of both communities.
9.
Despite the call by the Security Council, in its resolution 2506 (2020), for a
reduction of tensions in the Eastern Mediterranean, regional tensions remained high
over hydrocarbons exploration and, increasingly, maritime boundary delimitation. On
the island, separate proposals were put forward by the two sides during 2019 to
address the hydrocarbons issue, but they have not been taken forward and significant
differences persist. Other strains due to factors on and around the island also persisted
during the reporting period, for example with respect to irregular migration and
Varosha, as described in more detail in my report on UNFICYP.
10. On 23 March, I called for an immediate global ceasefire in order for all efforts to
be focused on addressing the pandemic and saving lives, which my Deputy Special
Adviser echoed through her own letters to the two leaders on 27 March. On 28 March
and 4 May, respectively, the Turkish Cypriot and the Greek Cypriot leaders responded
positively in writing to my call, stressing cooperation and collaboration and referring
to the work of the Technical Committee on Health. In my replies to the leaders on
11 May, I noted that cooperation, dialogue and coordinated initiatives would be
essential to help to tackle the island-wide consequences of the pandemic, and I urged
both leaders to fully empower the technical committees to contribute to the broader
COVID-19 response. Following my appeal, the two sides committed to bringing
additional focus to the committees, and my mission of good offices has explored ideas
and initiatives with them. Since the outbreak of COVID-19 on the island, my Deputy
Special Adviser, my mission of good offices and UNFICYP have actively engaged with
actors on both sides of the island, facilitating information exchange and assistance, and
liaising with other United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well as the
European Commission, to try to reduce the destructive impact of the pandemic.
11. Restrictive measures taken on both sides of the island in the face of COVID -19
resulted in relatively low numbers of cases, with both communities gradually easing
restrictions as from early May. In mid-May, in the middle of an unseasonal heatwave,
fires broke out on both sides of the island. In response to a request from Mr. Akıncı
to Mr. Anastasiades, the two sides cooperated in fighting an especially large wildfire
in the north, and the assistance provided by the Greek Cypriot community to the
Turkish Cypriot community in this context was noteworthy. Following this
development, both leaders spoke on 21 May and agreed to a first phase of the
reopening of crossing points, by allowing the transit of specific categories of people
as from 8 June. However, the authorities in the north postponed the implementation
of the agreement, possibly until 22 June. As also agreed by the leaders on 21 May, the
Technical Committee on Health met on 1 June to discuss the epidemiological situation
in both communities and subsequently gave the leaders a briefing on their exchange,
focusing on epidemiological data, treatment and testing.
12. Representatives of Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot political parties continued
to meet under the auspices of the Embassy of Slovakia. On 29 January 2020, at a
bicommunal event held by the Embassy, the results of the latest opinion poll carried
out on behalf of my good offices mission were presented, and they were subsequently
discussed in detail during a meeting of the political parties on 26 February 2020. The
poll examined political, social, economic and security expectations island -wide, both
with and without a possible settlement in Cyprus. Members of the political parties in
20-08992

3/27

S/2020/685

attendance provided comments and engaged in discussions over the results. Despite
in-person meetings being interrupted in March, the political parties’ dialogue
continued through the COVID-19 outbreak, and a statement was issued on 24 April in
which the parties paid tribute to health workers for their efforts. Displaying
bicommunal spirit, in the statement, the parties called for Greek Cypriots and Turkish
Cypriots “to set aside their differences of opinion regarding the solution of the Cyprus
problem and concentrate on their mental and physical strength in order to eliminate
the danger facing public health” and to address future social and economic
consequences. They also noted the need to show solidarity among Cypriots, expressed
appreciation and support for the close coordination between the leaders and
acknowledged the work of the bicommunal Technical Committee on Health.
13. The religious leaders of Cyprus continued to support peacebuilding and
reconciliation within the framework of the Religious Track of the Cyprus Peace
Process, under the auspices of the Embassy of Sweden. For the first time since they
started meeting regularly in 2011, the religious leaders were physi cally divided owing
to COVID-19-related restrictions. Nevertheless, they remained united and continued
to meet online and issue joint statements. Language courses in Turkish and Greek for
clerics and staff of religious institutions also continued online as a confidencebuilding measure. In a joint communiqué issued on 6 May, the religious leaders stated
that it was a time for “real solidarity, compassion and unity”, while praying “for
Cypriots to heal the painful memories of the past and work united tacklin g our
challenges as one”. On 1 June, my Deputy Special Adviser met with the religious
leaders of Cyprus via videoconference and discussed current developments and the
importance of activities that contribute to a culture of peace in Cyprus. Later that day,
the religious leaders reacted to an incident in Limassol, issuing a joint statement
“condemning acts of vandalism” of a mosque and noting that such acts were not only
“disrespectful to the religious community but to all those who work together to
advance respect, human rights and freedom of religion”.

III. Status of the process: consultations
14. With respect to the consultations being conducted on my behalf, Ms. Lute has
continued her engagement with the parties to the Conference on Cyprus as part of the
efforts to facilitate agreement on the terms of reference that would constitute a
consensus starting point for a negotiated conclusion to the Cyprus issue. She paid her
seventh visit to Cyprus from 15 to 17 November 2019, holding separate meetings wit h
the two leaders on 16 November. She subsequently facilitated preparations for the
informal meeting that I held with the two leaders in Berlin on 25 November. Ms. Lute
also regularly engaged with representatives of the guarantor powers, Greece, Turkey
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as well as with the
European Union in its capacity as an observer to the Conference on Cyprus.
15. In the Berlin discussions, both leaders welcomed my engagement and reaffirmed
their commitment and determination to achieve a settlement based on a bizonal,
bicommunal federation with political equality, as set out in the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including paragraph 4 of resolution 716 (1991). They also agreed
that achieving a comprehensive and durable settlement to the Cyprus problem within
a foreseeable horizon was of the utmost importance to the future well -being of both
communities and that the status quo was unsustainable. In addition, the Greek Cypriot
leader and the Turkish Cypriot leader reaffirmed their commitment to the Joint
Declaration of 11 February 2014, the prior convergences and the six point framework
that I had presented on 30 June 2017 with a view to achieving a strat egic agreement
paving the way for a comprehensive settlement.

4/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

16. The two leaders affirmed, in my presence, some of their prior agreements and
understandings on a number of crucial aspects of the negotiations. In view of those
discussions, I agreed to extend my efforts to achieve terms of reference to serve as a
consensus starting point for phased, meaningful and results-oriented negotiations at
the earliest feasible opportunity. In this regard, I committed to exploring, with the
Turkish Cypriot leader and the Greek Cypriot leader and with the guarantor powers,
the possibility of convening an informal five-plus-United Nations meeting at an
appropriate stage.

IV. Status of the process: activities of my mission of good offices
17. My Deputy Special Adviser and mission of good offices engaged regularly with
the two leaders and their representatives, as well as other relevant stakeholders, on
the current situation and the way forward. Before the COVID -19 outbreak, the
mission put in place contingency plans and thereafter enacted measures to protect the
health and safety of its staff and its counterparts, restricting face -to-face contact with
stakeholders and interlocutors, while continuing to work on mandate delivery.
Although in-person outreach activities were not possible owing to COVID-19
movement restrictions, the mission’s engagement with civil society actors, women,
youth and the business community, as well as the ongoing monitoring of political
developments on the island and in the region, continued via online platforms.
Reporting and analysis by my good offices mission on possible avenues towards and
challenges to the resumption of peace talks continued, despite the pandemic.
18. The 12 bicommunal technical committees formed by the leaders to build
confidence and improve the daily lives of Cypriots continued to function under the
auspices of my good offices mission, which has, with the support of UNFICYP,
continued to coordinate and facilitate their work towards ensuring dialogue and
cooperation between the two sides. Through regular meetings with the coordinators of
the technical committees from both sides, the mission noted increased attention being
paid by both sides to the revitalization of these bodies. The COVID-19 outbreak on the
island, however, coupled with corresponding restrictive measures to prevent further
spread of the virus, negatively affected the work of the committees. The implementation
of several ongoing projects, as well as face-to-face meetings and activities, have been
either indefinitely suspended or postponed. Nevertheless, more than half of the
technical committees, including those addressing health, cultural heritage, education,
the environment, culture and gender equality, remained engaged through online
meetings, issuing statements and drafting proposals for intended projects. While other
technical committees met only once or twice during the reporting period, one of the
committees, the Technical Committee on Crossings, did not meet at all.
19. Following repeated calls by the Security Council for the two leaders to empower
the technical committees, including most recently in its resolution 2506 (2020), as
well as the leaders’ own reaffirmation of their commitmen t to intensifying the
committees’ work, in December 2019 my mission of good offices finalized a
stocktaking exercise on the activities and working methods of the technical
committees over the past 12 years. The stocktaking exercise assessed the
effectiveness of the committees in achieving the purposes for which they were
established; identified their strengths and weaknesses; and proposed
recommendations for improving, strengthening and streamlining their work. Overall,
the exercise concluded that despite challenges and impediments, the committees have
been effective and remain the best vehicles for delivering confidence -building
measures aimed at improving the everyday life of Cypriots while encouraging and
facilitating greater interaction between the two communities.

20-08992

5/27

S/2020/685

20. The stocktaking exercise recommended steps that could be taken by the sides
and by the United Nations to assist the committees in more effectively delivering real
and sustainable benefits to all Cypriots. A summary of the main conclusions and
recommendations was, for the most part, positively received by the two Cypriot
coordinators, and they expressed readiness to consider ways to implement the
recommendations. Initial discussions were held by my mission of good offices and
the sides on ways to proceed; these slowed, however, owing to the outbreak of
COVID-19. Welcoming the readiness of the sides to continue these discussions and
identify mutually agreeable next steps to bolster the work of the technical committees,
my mission of good offices intends to follow up in the coming months. The
implementation of some recommendations from the stocktaking exercise, including
training for all United Nations facilitators of the technical committees in partnership
with the Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs, has already begun.
21. The Technical Committee on Health met in person or online seven times and
maintained routine communication,. Beginning in February, the Committee, focused
its discussions on COVID-19 and exchanged information on the precautions taken by
both sides in response to the pandemic. On 3 February, the Committee gave a briefing
to the Turkish Cypriot leader and the Greek Cypriot leader, who both expressed
satisfaction with what they had heard. Following the adoption of restrictions on
movement and group gatherings, the Committee subsequently began to meet online,
while individual members have remained in daily communication to exchange
information and arrange assistance for individuals on a humanitarian basis as needed.
On 1 and 17 June, the Committee met and exchanged information on the
epidemiological situation in their respective communities, as well as on different
scientific methods employed in the fight against the pandemic. Both sides also
discussed next steps in the lifting of restrictions and confirmed that they would give
briefings to their leaders and provide scientific advice.
22. Following communication between the two leaders and through dialogue
between members of the Technical Committee on Health, important support was
provided in connection with the COVID-19 outbreak, including the provision of drugs
and personal protective equipment from the Greek Cypriot side to the Turkish Cypriot
side. As described further in my report on UNFICYP, the Force also continued
important work in assisting the sides in this respect, by facilitating vital humanitarian
deliveries, including of medical supplies following the closure of crossings between
the two communities and other restrictions on movement.
23. On 3 February 2020, the Technical Committee on Culture organized an exhibition
of artworks and audiovisual recordings that had been exchanged between the two sides
in September 2019. The exhibition followed the agreement on 26 February 2019
between the two leaders on the exchange of artworks. Pursuant to the agreement, the
Turkish Cypriot side had returned paintings by Greek Cypriot artists that had been
under its protection since 1974, while the Greek Cypriot side had shared archive
material of the Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation on cultural activities of the Turkish
Cypriot community related to the pre-1963 period. Selected paintings and audiovisual
materials were unveiled at the exhibition. Subsequently, a detailed catalogue, translated
into the Greek, Turkish and English languages, of all paintings and audiovisual
recordings was distributed, with electronic versions also being made publicly available.
Following the restrictions on movement instituted on the island, the Technical
Committee on Culture met online to continue its discussions. The Committee has
obtained funding from the European Union-funded support facility to the technical
committees to sponsor a poetry contest in which five poets from each community would
be selected to be filmed reciting their own poems written during the COVID-19 crisis.

6/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

24. The Technical Committee on Economic and Commercial Matters continued
discussions on its priorities outlined in early 2020, including several confidence building measures to improve trade and commercial links between the two
communities. Despite the positive working relationship among the members, the
political dynamics on the island continue to pose a challenge to the initiatives aimed
at promoting greater economic ties and increased intr a-island trade that I have
repeatedly called for in my reports to the Security Council. The restrictions on island wide movement following the COVID-19 outbreak compounded the situation, posing
a significant obstacle to further cooperation at a time when b oth communities face
urgent and severe economic fallout from the pandemic.
25. The Technical Committee on Education continued to implement and enhance
the voluntary peace education programme “Imagine”, building on the success of
previous years and the increasing interest from schools in participating in the
programme. The activities include voluntary monocommunal and bicommunal peace
education in schools, training for teachers engaged in peace education and the
development of educational materials that promote peacebuilding and intercultural
dialogue. Because of the COVID-19-related restrictions, in-person “Imagine” events
have been suspended until the next academic year. However, the Technical Committee
on Education continued to develop peace education training materials and other
projects, including a webinar for teachers, which was successfully piloted on 28 May
with the participation of 34 Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot teachers from all
levels of education. In a press release issued on 3 June, the Com mittee announced the
successful completion of the “Imagine” programme for the 2019/20 academic year,
noting that 1,285 students and 162 teachers had been brought together from Turkish
Cypriot and Greek Cypriot schools across the island during the year.
26. The Technical Committee on Gender Equality met twice during the reporting
period using an online platform and discussed issues related to the gender impact of
COVID-19 in both communities, as well as ways in which the Committee could pursue
the request of the Security Council in multiple resolutions, including its resolution 2506
(2020), to develop an action plan supporting the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women in peace talks. While the outbreak of COVID-19 on the island
slowed down the initial discussions regarding the action plan, the Committee raised
awareness on domestic violence following the introduction of the restrictive measures
put in place in both communities to prevent the spread of the virus. The Committee also
highlighted the need to ensure the effective participation of women and girls in response
efforts to the outbreak and to adopt gender-sensitive socioeconomic measures.
27. On 6 May 2020, the Technical Committee on Gender Equality released a
statement in which it noted the upsurge in violence against women and girls during the
COVID-19 outbreak. It quoted civil society sources that had noted a 58 per cent
increase in incidents of domestic violence in the Greek Cypriot community and a 10 per
cent increase in calls to helplines in the Turkish Cypriot community between mid March and 22 April. The Committee concluded that it was of the “utmost importance
that the gendered impact of the pandemic as well as of the measures taken to combat it,
are recognized and addressed”. Several members of the Committee participated in
informal consultations organized as part of a gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact
assessment of a settlement carried out by my mission of good offices in cooperation
with the World Bank, as described in further detail below. Members also attended the
launch of the outcome of the assessment hosted at my mission of good offices.
28. The Technical Committee on Broadcasting continued to work in a constructive
and solution-oriented manner to address issues related to radio frequencies and
possible interference problems. Although the Committee has not met in person thus
far in 2020, the members’ ongoing communication and cooperation have enabled
them to tackle a number of practical issues of concern as they have occurred.
20-08992

7/27

S/2020/685

29. The Technical Committee on Cultural Heritage has over 30 ongoing projects
aimed at stabilizing or preserving cultural monuments across the island such as
churches, mosques, fountains and cemeteries. The Committee is working to repair the
Nicosia walls and stabilize two churches within the buffer zone. Owing to the lack to
access to these monuments and worksites as a result of the restrictive measures
introduced by the authorities to curb the spread of COVID-19, the Committee
conducted weekly online meetings and worked on documents and tender competitions
for several projects. The Committee recently launched the Heritage Youth Ambassadors
initiative to engage young people in its activities and has ensured their involvement in
online programmes. In a joint statement on 11 May, the Co-Chairs of the Committee
announced that, in the coming period, they would be overseeing the safe resumption of
works at 10 cultural heritage sites across the island, by implementing required safety
measures as restrictions were lifted. In accordance with that joint statement, work on
the Agios Georgios and Agios Iacovos churches resumed thereafter, following
enhanced health and safety measures instituted and approved by UNDP.
30. In November 2019, the Technical Committee on Crisis Management, in
collaboration with the Technical Committee on Education and the “Imagine”
programme, organized the “Disaster Ready School” project for students in Pyla in
order to raise awareness on crisis preparedness, with a particular focus on earthquakes
and fire incidents in commemoration of the International Day for Disaster Risk
Reduction. The Committee continued to discuss issues such as the prevention of and
response to floods, fires and other human-caused or natural disasters.
31. The Technical Committee on Humanitarian Affairs met twice during the
reporting period, including most recently on 18 May, when the Committee met
virtually and discussed its potential role in facilitating humanitarian-related requests
made by the communities, to be addressed on a case-by-case basis, including with
respect to access to medical care.
32. The Technical Committee on the Environment met consistently throughout the
reporting period, holding virtual meetings after restrictions were placed on movement
owing to COVID-19. Two technical experts, one Greek Cypriot and one Turkish
Cypriot, were hired in December 2019 with resources from the European Union-funded
support facility. The Committee plans to undertake 12 joint field visits to sites of
environmental significance on both sides of the island, focusing on six thematic
environmental issues and producing subsequent policy reports. The Committee is
working to create a website to raise public awareness of its work and bring together key
environmental experts from both sides. Finally, the Committee participated in a virtual
event organized by UNFICYP for United Nations staff to celebrate World Environment
Day on 5 June, giving a presentation on its work and on biodiversity on the island.
33. The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters met in early February
2020 to discuss organizing a joint seminar with the Technical Committee on Gender
Equality on preventing child abuse and gender-based violence in both communities.
Owing to rising concerns over COVID-19, the organization of the seminar was
postponed. The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters has also worked
on a project proposal in collaboration with the Technical Committe e on Education on
the prevalence, correlates and prevention of bullying in schools and cyberbullying, to
be supported and implemented through the European Union-funded support facility.
Both Co-Chairs recommitted to the work of the Technical Committee on C rime and
Criminal Matters and agreed to consider possible virtual meetings until the
COVID-19 crisis has been overcome. The Joint Communications Room, a
coordination mechanism formed by the Committee, continued its liaison work and
exchanges of information. Following the closures of and restrictions at the crossings,
however, only informal contact to facilitate humanitarian activities took place.

8/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

34. Project proposals continued to be submitted to the European Union -funded
facility in support of the technical committees. The facility was created in cooperation
with UNDP just over one year ago to assist the bicommunal bodies in building
capacity and enhancing the impact and visibility of their work. My mission of good
offices, along with UNDP, the European Commission and the Greek Cypriot and the
Turkish Cypriot coordinators for the committees, reviewed three proposals during the
reporting period and approved two of them, while requesting further details on the
third one. In the first year of its operation, the facility disbursed funds to seven
projects and it continues to be a useful tool in support of the bicommunal committees.
35. Given their relevance for the achievement and sustainability of an eventual
settlement, my mission of good offices continued to maintain extensive contacts and
actively network with a diverse range of civil society actors, supporting and
encouraging their mobilization, advocacy and participation in wider peacebuilding
activities on the island. In close cooperation with UNFICYP, my mission of good
offices strove to create a multiplier effect by facilitating and nurturing connections
between interested, like-minded groups and organizations from both sides of the
island. As an extension of these activities, following the outbreak of C OVID-19 in
Cyprus, the mission coordinated and engaged in communication between and among
international community actors and United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
including UNDP, the World Bank and the World Health Organization, as well as the
European Commission, with respect to the situation on the island and its own work
and outreach. My mission of good offices also continued to give regular briefings to
academics and students on its work in Cyprus.
36. Since the closure of the Conference on Cyprus in 2017, the mission has engaged
with over 50 civil society organizations or social movements, spanning a wide range
of thematic areas (gender equality, civic space, academia, think tanks, business and
entrepreneurship). While efforts were made to maintain regular contacts with as many
individuals and groups as possible, pandemic-related restrictions, including at the
crossings, limited outreach and engagement on the youth and peace and security
agenda during the reporting period.
37. A gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment of a settlement in Cyprus,
requested in Security Council resolution 2453 (2019), was completed during the
reporting period and launched on 17 February 2020. The assessm ent substantiated
that delaying a settlement in Cyprus increases both economic and non-economic costs
and outlined appropriate supportive policies to address existing gender barriers that
limit women’s economic engagement. It noted that reunification would result in
higher incomes and increased gross domestic product growth for both communities,
as well as an expanded set of opportunities that, if coupled with such policies, could
be shared more equally by men and women island-wide.
38. My mission of good offices and the World Bank designed a strategy to widely
disseminate the gender-differentiated policy recommendations contained in the
assessment. Additional steps will include continuing to monitor the economic and
social impact of COVID-19 to determine if those recommendations would need to be
aligned with a post-COVID-19 reality in which pre-existing inequalities between
women and men may be further entrenched and the most disproportionate impact may
be seen with respect to political representation, economic participation and the gender
wage gap, for example.
39. In the weeks prior to the outbreak of COVID-19 in Cyprus, two notable reports
were issued: the Delivering the Cyprus Peace Dividend report published by the
Cyprus Centre of the Peace Research Institute Oslo on 5 February; and the gendersensitive socioeconomic impact assessment mentioned above. Several discussions
were held on the economic limitations of the status quo and the concrete financial and
20-08992

9/27

S/2020/685

other gains that both communities could reap following a settlement in Cyprus. While
economists in Cyprus have indicated that studies on the impact of a settlement may
need to be requantified owing to the inevitable impact of the pandemic on the
economy island-wide, it is nonetheless clear from the substantial work conducted on
this issue that a resolution to the Cyprus problem would continue to present
significant economic opportunities, which might now be needed more than ever.
40. On 8 June, the Cyprus Chamber of Commerce and Industry and the Turkish
Cypriot Chamber of Commerce issued a joint statement. Noting that they had met
through teleconferencing on 2 June, the two Chambers recalled the need to “enhance
the economic cooperation on the island and increase the volume of intercommunal
trade in order to maximize the full economic potential of both communities”. They
expressed their support for the reopening of crossing points which could “help
improve the economic situation in both communities” and facilitate at the same time
“much needed contact between the Cypriot people”, while noting that “necessary
precautions will need to be in place and strictly adhered to”.

V. Observations
41. Three years have now passed since the intensive talks at Crans-Montana,
making it more challenging to resume negotiations. As I stated following our Berlin
meeting, I will continue to extend my efforts to achieve terms of reference to serve as
a consensus starting point for phased, meaningful and results-oriented negotiations at
the earliest feasible opportunity. In this regard, I committed to explore with the
Turkish Cypriot leader and the Greek Cypriot leader and with the guarantor powers
the possibility of convening an informal five-plus-United Nations meeting at an
appropriate stage. I underscore the point that this time must be different.
42. Although I continue to hold out hope that a comprehensive settlement in Cyprus
is possible, the global advance of COVID-19 has, unfortunately, added to an already
complex situation on and around the island. Rising tensions in and along the buffer
zone, concerns over irregular migration and the flow of refugees both on the island
and in the region and friction in relation to the possible opening of Varosha,
hydrocarbons exploration and, increasingly, maritime boundary delimitation have
strained relations among the parties to the Cyprus issue. I will continue to monitor
developments closely and urge all relevant parties to exercise restraint and avoid
escalation. With regard to the question of Varosha, I reiterate that the position of the
United Nations remains unchanged. The United Nations continues to be guided by the
relevant Security Council resolutions and is available to assist in the implementation
of any measures that are consistent with those resolutions. I also continue to stress that
natural resources located in and around Cyprus should constitute a strong incentive to
reach a mutually acceptable settlement to the Cyprus problem without any further
delay. I urge all relevant parties to renew dialogue and explore possibilities for regional
cooperation, and I call for serious efforts to be taken to defuse tensions.
43. Beyond the important regional dimension of the Cyprus issue, much remains in
the hands of Cypriots themselves. Redoubled efforts are required to re -engage
Cypriots, bridge the divide between them and address societal scepticism and
disengagement. Despite the general mood of disengagement and scepticism on both
sides, when the issues of reconciliation and renewed dialogue on the Cyprus problem
are specifically raised in public polls, the results indicate that the two communities
continue to feel that increased cooperation between them on a series of issues could
bring them closer. In a recent poll carried out on behalf of my mission of good offices,
the majority of respondents from both communities stated that the resolution of the
Cyprus issue was of the highest importance or of high importance to them. While both

10/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

communities considered that the other community placed somewhat lower
significance on reaching a solution, both had more positive expectations of a
settlement scenario than of the status quo. As the poll was carried out pre -pandemic,
however, it remains to be seen whether continued separation and restrictions on
movement through the crossings, as well as the broader fallout of the COVID -19
crisis, affect these views. In the light of the continuing challenges, I call upon
influential actors in the political, economic, religious, arti stic and other spheres to
contribute to bringing the communities together. At the same time, acts that are aimed
at provoking the other community or inciting hatred must be addressed and denounced
by political and other leaders on both sides of the island.
44. I welcome the signs of revitalization and increased engagement of the technical
committees that were evident during the reporting period, continuing a trend from
2019 that I previously reported on (see S/2019/37, para. 23; and S/2019/883,
paras. 18, 37 and 38). For example, 11 of the 12 technical committees met at least
once during the reporting period, many members were also directly in communication
with each other between committee meetings, and concrete initiatives and events were
carried out. Joint statements that were issued by several technical committees on a
range of issues during the reporting period, including by the technical committees on
culture, gender equality, cultural heritage, health and education, were significant in
their number and scope. The direct engagement by the two leaders with the
bicommunal technical committees and their presence at their events served as a
welcome reaffirmation of political support for the committees’ important work, as
called for by the Security Council, most recently in its resolution 2506 (2020). As
joint appearances of the two leaders have taken place only sporadically over the past
three years, they carry particular significance, especially considering t he overall
decline in the political climate on and around the island. Although these developments
are positive, it should be noted that a number of the technical committees have not
yet reached their full potential. In this respect, I urge the two leaders to take forward
the recommendations of the stocktaking exercise shared with both sides.
45. Furthermore, I have to reiterate that, despite the critical importance of
confidence-building measures and other forms of cooperation between the
communities, which I continue to strongly encourage in order to improve the daily
lives of Cypriots and create conditions conducive to a comprehensive settlement, such
initiatives, including the work of the technical committees, cannot replace a viable
and comprehensive negotiation process to reach a peaceful settlement in Cyprus. I
echo the call by the Security Council to the sides and all involved participants to
renew their political will and commitment to a settlement under United Nations
auspices. I look forward to renewed dialogue on the Cyprus issue and urge the parties
to find a path towards a comprehensive settlement as soon as possible.
46. I welcome the fact that restrictive measures are being lifted on the island in the
light of the encouraging epidemiological situation, with the number of overall
COVID-19 cases so far remaining among the lowest in Europe, and a public health
situation that continues to improve. Decision-making with respect to addressing the
pandemic and the overall public health response have generally been viewed positively
in both communities, and I commend both sides for their efforts and their diligence.
47. Notwithstanding these efforts, however, opportunities for more tangible
bicommunal appeals and initiatives were missed. Mindful of my global ceasefire
appeal and call for unity and solidarity in these difficult times, I urge the two
communities to engage in additional and mutually beneficial coordination and
cooperation, including through strong political and technical support for the
bicommunal technical committees, such as those working on health-related,
economic, crisis-related and humanitarian issues.

20-08992

11/27

S/2020/685

48. As restrictive measures are being lifted, including at the ports of entry to the
island, it is essential that movement within the island be allowed along with incoming
travel. I encourage the leaders, with the support of the Technical Committee on Health
and cooperation from relevant authorities on both sides, to work together and develop
a comprehensive plan for the full reopening of all crossing points.
49. The COVID-19 outbreak has had a significant economic impact on the island
and, while addressing the effects will be challenging, the crisis recovery period will
also offer opportunities to close certain long-standing gaps and bring positive
changes. I encourage both leaders, as part of their ongoing dialogue, to jointly explore
restructuring and innovating, diversifying and greening the economy, promoting
better and more inclusive social and public services and introducing new forms of
economic consumption, production and cooperation models, including through the
technical committees and as confidence-building measures.
50. The findings of the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment of a
settlement illustrate that advancing gender equality should not, and in fact cannot,
wait. Acting now can strengthen the impact and inclusivity of a future settlement
agreement in Cyprus to the benefit of all. I am encouraged by this work and call upon
the leaders to consider the outcome of the assessment and its recommendations for
supportive policies that could be introduced to address existing gender barriers and
ensure that a future peace agreement can more equally benefit men and women across
the island. I reiterate the readiness of my mission of good offices to continue working
with the sides on this important initiative, to further harness the participation of
women in the peace process and to work towards a gender-transformative outcome
that can achieve greater opportunities for women and men alike.
51. Around the globe, women’s participation in peace and security efforts has
consistently been found to strengthen the sustainability and durability of peace
agreements, and to better reflect the needs and considerations of men, women and
children. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) in 2020, I urge the leaders to heed the call of the Security Council and
empower the Technical Committee on Gender Equality to urgently develop an action
plan supporting the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in peace talks.
This will contribute to ensuring that any future united Cyprus is more sustainable,
safer and more equal, with greater opportunities for all.
52. I would like to once again thank the partners that have continued to provide
support to the work of both United Nations missions, UNDP and the Committee on
Missing Persons in Cyprus. I also note the long-standing cooperation with the
European Union, including through its Commission, in the framework of the Cyprus
settlement talks. This cooperation has been very much appreciated in the past phases
of the peace process, both in terms of the high-level engagement of the European
Union and its support for various confidence-building measures, and I count on its
continuation. I also acknowledge the contribution of the World Bank, both previous ly
to support the negotiations of the sides under the auspices of my good offices and
recently to conduct and launch the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessment
of a settlement. The latter exercise, conducted jointly with my mission of good offices
during the reporting period, was significant, and it is my h ope that it will pave the
way for further constructive efforts to support the Cyprus peace process in the future.
53. Finally, I would like to thank my Deputy Special Adviser and the personnel
serving in my good offices mission in Cyprus for the dedication and commitment with
which they have discharged the responsibilities entrusted to them. I also express my
appreciation to Ms. Lute for conducting consultations on my behalf.

12/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

Annex I
Written update by the Greek Cypriot leader to the good offices
mission of the Secretary-General, pursuant to and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 2506 (2020)
This submission is made in response to the encouragement in UN Security Council
Resolution 2506, to “the leaders of the two communities to provide written updates
to the Good Offices Mission of the Secretary General on the actions they have taken
in support of the relevant parts of this resolution since its adoption, in particular with
regard to paragraphs 5 and 6, with a view to reaching a sustainable and
comprehensive settlement”.
The present update includes all developments relevant to the effort to resume the
peace process in the framework of the Good Offices Mission of the UNSG,
irrespective of their inter-state or inter-communal character. References to
communities are without prejudice to the Republic of Cyprus as a Member State of
the United Nations and references to UNFICYP are made without prejudice to the
Republic of Cyprus as the host country of the Force.
I.

Efforts to resume the peace process.

Reaching a settlement that entails the evolution of the Republic of Cyprus into a bi zonal, bi-communal federation with political equality, as set out in the relevant United
Nations Security Council Resolutions, continues to be an absolute priority for the
Greek Cypriot side. I am keenly aware that the prolongation of the de facto division
and the faits accomplis it entails entrench the status quo and undermine prospect of
reunification. For us there is no alternative but peace.
Despite the systematic effort by Turkey to escalate tensions in and around Cyprus, in
defiance inter alia, of the recent call by the SG for a global ceasefire to diminish
conflicts in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, we remain committed to do our
utmost in order to build upon the joint meeting of the leaders of the two communities
with the UN Secretary-General last November in Berlin, which confirmed our
determination to resume the negotiations process as soon as possible, based on an
understanding on the three basic elements of the Terms of Reference that should guide
the talks.
We therefore, have confirmed in several occasions and in our communication with
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy our readiness to support the Secretary-General
in his efforts to this end. We are particularly encouraged by his expressed commitment
to explore the possibility of convening an informal five -plus-United Nations meeting
at an appropriate stage.
In our view, such a meeting could pave the way for a new Conference on Cyprus
resuming the negotiations process from where they were left off in Crans Montana,
with all elements negotiated interdependently, as a package.
Currently, every effort is being made by the government of the Republic of Cyprus to
maintain the prospects of resuming negotiations. Despite the continuous and
escalating provocations on behalf of Turkey we maintained communication with the
leader of the Turkish Cypriot community and we have undertaken initiatives aiming
at contributing to a positive atmosphere, including via the wor k of Technical
Committees, despite the difficulties created by the current covid -19 crisis.
Throughout the period of the covid-19 pandemic, the government of the Republic of
Cyprus has been facilitating in a number of ways the Turkish Cypriot community,
including via allowing on humanitarian grounds crossings of Turkish Cypriot patients

20-08992

13/27

S/2020/685

to the government-controlled areas and facilitating requests for repatriation of Turkish
Cypriots and for their immediate crossing to their residence in the occupied part.
The government of the Republic of Cyprus has also provided the Turkish Cypriot
community with medications and medical supplies, whilst facilitating the crossing of
Turkish Cypriot patients to the government controlled areas for medical treatment and
will continue responding positively to the needs and requests of the Turkish Cypriot
community. Additionally, the government has immediately responded to requests to
provide aerial means to tackle fires that had erupted in the occupied areas.
At the same time, we are fully aware that in our pursuit to create the right conditions
for the resumption of the negotiations, we should be guided by a combined sense of
urgency and pragmatism. To this direction we are mindful of the fact that
developments are being delayed in view of the internal procedure for the selection of
the leader of the Turkish Cypriot Community due in October 2020. It should also be
noted, however, that the aforementioned procedure in the T/c community has been
used on behalf of Turkey and of those forces in the Turkish Cypriot community who
aspire to undermine the prospect of reunification, as a convenient excuse, for some
time now, to justify their reluctance to engage actively in the peace process and to
continue to pursue a policy of provocations.
It is in this context that the T/c leader stated in early June that it would be unrealistic
to expect any developments before October (“no move shall be made in peace talks
before Turkish Cypriots renew the mandate”); which would bring us already one y ear
after the Berlin meeting. What is most concerning though, is the tendency during this
period to escalate tension through provocative acts that only poisons the political
environment, creates new unacceptable faits accomplis and undermines the prospects
of the peace process.
In this vein, Turkey continues to act in an aggressive manner by, inter alia, turning to
military threats, illegal drilling activities within the exclusive economic zone of the
Republic, threatening to infringe in the fenced-city of Famagusta in contravention to
Security Council Resolutions and proceeding with the signing of an illegal
Memorandum of Understanding on the delimitation of maritime jurisdictions in the
Mediterranean Sea with Libya.
These actions have been condemned in the strongest manner by the international
community and the EU, since they do not comply with the notion of good neighbourly
relations, international law and particularly the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, and infringe upon the sovereign rights of third States.
We have to be clear on this issue: For a peace process to resume with realistic prospects
for success, it is imperative to create an environment that will be conducive for
constructive and good faith negotiations, in the same spirit and conditions that
characterized all previous negotiating rounds, including the two Conferences on Cyprus.
We therefore call on the UN Secretary-General, in the context of his Good Offices
mission on Cyprus and the Secretary Council, as the international body entrusted with
the primary responsibility for international peace and security and as the guardian, of
international law and of the principles and purposes of the UN Charter, to adopt an
assertive stance so as for Turkey on the one hand to terminate its unlawful activities and
refrain from any provocative acts and on the other hand to terminate its unconstructive
policy to interfere in the bicommunal aspects of the negotiating process and concentrate
its efforts towards reaching a comprehensive settlement on the Cyprus Problem.
As we have repeatedly stated, we are ready to move in this direction with unwavering
commitment and resolve. We do hope that our genuine determination for resuming
the negotiating process will be finally matched in practice by the Turkish Cypriot side
and Turkey.
14/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

II.

Factors impeding the resumption of the peace process.

With the sole purpose of a factual presentation of the current situation and of the latest
developments, I am obliged to list a number of factors and activities that undermine
efforts to improve the political climate in Cyprus and the ongoing efforts to resume
negotiations with the aim of reaching a comprehensive solution to the Cyprus Problem.
(a) Irrespective of the pandemic, during the whole reporting period, we continued to
witness in a very revealing manner an enhanced effort by the Turkish occupation army
to alter the military status quo and to gradually extend its military control further sout h
into the buffer zone between the cease fire of the Turkish occupation forces and the
cease fire line of the National Guard of the government of the Republic of Cyprus, and
beyond. These violations of the Turkish occupation forces coincide with an increas ed
provocative and aggressive behavior by Turkey in and around Cyprus, including via
the upgrading of its military capabilities in the occupied part of Cyprus in, but not
limited to, the illegal military bases in the occupied villages of Bogazi and Lefkoni ko.
It is an undisputed fact that violations observed since April 2018 across the whole
stretch of the buffer zone are still ongoing during the current reporting period and
have been further solidified, while new serious violations have been confirmed.
Particular reference should be made to the violations in the Strovilia enclave which
characteristically manifest the Turkish policy to flagrantly disregard repeated calls of
the UN Security Council to lift the continuous military status quo violation, in pla ce
since 2000. These violations not only persist but they have been exacerbated with
additional ones, including through actions aimed at undermining the ability of
UNFICYP to exercise its tasks.
(b) Regarding Varosha, in addition to statements by the occupation regime and Turkey
on their intention to infringe and create new faits accomplis in the fenced city of Varosha,
which have persisted during the reporting period and the continuation of the restrictions
on the freedom of movement imposed on UNFICYP in the area, the occupation regime
has organized a conference on February 15, 2020, with the participation of the Vice
President of Turkey, during which it was announced that a road map will be put forward
for the opening of the fenced city. It is also recalled that yet again, this month, the Turkish
Vice President publicly stated that they will proceed with the opening of the fenced area
of Varosha in the absence of any developments in the peace process.
Let me underline that a possible realization of the af orementioned threats will cause
irreparable damage to the prospects for the resumption of meaningful negotiations. I
expect everyone to respect the special status of Varosha as defined by the 1979 High Level Agreement and relevant Security Council Resolutions, avoiding actions that
might adversely affect the right of return and the property rights of the city’s lawful
inhabitants.
I also recall that Varosha has been included in many CBM proposals of the Greek
Cypriot side over the years and I wish to restate my conviction that the return of
Varosha as a matter of priority and without awaiting the resolution of other aspects of
the Cyprus problem would be a game changer in boosting the prospects of a successful
peace process.
(c) During the current reporting period, Turkey has announced, in April 2020, that
it will deploy its drilling ship "Yavuz" in the EEZ/continental shelf of Cyprus, in order
to conduct illegal hydrocarbon exploratory drilling. This will be the sixth illegal
drilling of Turkey in the EEZ/continental shelf of Cyprus in a period of less than 12
months. This activity will be conducted in parallel to consecutive seismic surveys of
Turkey in the maritime areas of Cyprus, taking place since January 2019.

20-08992

15/27

S/2020/685

Furthermore, the sea around Cyprus is being increasingly militarized by Turkey, as
the drilling and seismic survey vessels are accompanied by numerous warships and
daily patrols of armed, unmanned aerial vehicles, while military naval exercises of
Turkey are increasing.
Cyprus will continue to exercise its sovereign rights in accordance with international
law. The consequences of this aggressive and reckless behavior on behalf of Turkey
are not only detrimental to the sovereign rights of the Republic of Cyprus, but also
constitute a threat to stability, peace and security in the highly volatile region of the
entire Eastern Mediterranean. It is therefore expected that the international
community and the United Nations in particular will take necessary action to defend
international law and the principles of the UN Charter. Let me reiterate at this point,
that for a peace process to have realistic prospects of success it should take place in
the good faith environment and that no genuine negotiations can be conducted under
conditions of threats, violations and intimidation.
As regards the exploitation of the natural resources of Cyprus, I should recall that
there are existing convergences covering all relevant aspects, including the continued
adherence of Cyprus to the UNCLOS and the allocation of revenues. In order to
alleviate any concerns of the Turkish Cypriots, a National Sovereign Fund, based on
the Norwegian model, has been established, in order to manage any future revenues
accruing from hydrocarbon exploration. This, inter alia, ensures that any use of the
revenues either for the repaying of public debt or their utilization by the Government
as a guarantee for securing loans is strictly prohibited.
I have also expressed my readiness to brief regularly the Turkish Cypriot leader on
hydrocarbons related matters, including on revenues, provided of course, that any
unlawful actions by Turkey within the EEZ of Cyprus are definitively terminated.
I have also conveyed the readiness of the government of the Republic of Cyprus to
examine establishing an escrow account for hydrocarbons revenues to benefit Turkish
Cypriots based on their population ratio, provided a meaningful peace process is
resumed and that a delimitation agreement is concluded between Cyprus and Turkey
as already proposed by the Republic of Cyprus and welcomed by the EU. The
conclusion of such an agreement pursuant to the UNCLOS is absolutely vital and the
only way forward which is consistent with international law.
III. Crossing – Points.
Part of the current reporting period falls within the current global pandemic of
covid-19 outbreak, which has compelled governments, across the globe, to adopt
extraordinary measures in order to protect the life and health of their citizens.
In this vein, the government of the Republic of Cyprus on 28 February 2020 adopted
precautionary and temporary measures for the protection of public health, taking into
account the relevant information and guidance from the World Health Organization
(WHO) and reports by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC).
These precautionary measures, amongst others, included the temporary suspension of
the functioning of four crossing points along the ceasefire line (Ledra Street, Derynia,
Astromeritis and Lefka), which operate under EU Regulat ion 866/2004, in order to
exercise more thorough and effective health related procedures at the five crossing
points that remained in operation (Kato Pyrgos, Ayios Dhometios, Ledra Palace,
Pergamos, Strovilia).
The above decision was taken purely on grounds of protection of public health and
safety in the context of the government’s duties and responsibilities.
Furthermore, it should also be noted that the government of the Republic of Cyprus
cannot exercise effective control over the “points of entry” in its occupied territory,
16/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

thus rendering it practically impossible to implement measures to contain the
penetration of the pandemic from countries of high risk whose citizens could enter in
the occupied part via Turkey.
Crossings were allowed for Cypriots (Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriots), persons
legally residing in the government controlled areas and citizens of foreign countries
that are in Cyprus for assigned diplomatic service, including UNFICYP personnel,
under bilateral or international agreements, with the latter category being exempted
from the requirement of having a Covid-19 certificate valid for at least 4 days and to
remain in a 14-day quarantine.
It should be underlined that throughout the period during which these temporary
measures were in force, all humanitarian cases were facilitated, via UNFICYP, by
special permissions granted by the Minister of Interior.
Unfortunately, the occupation regime took the decision to close all the crossing points
and thus fully restrict all crossings. In addition, the movement of UNFICYP's
personnel and of foreign diplomats was prohibited, severely hindering UNFICYP's
ability to implement its mandate. At the same time, the decision of the occupation
regime to impose restrictions on the crossings of ambulances through the Limnitis
and Astromeritis crossing points had endangered human lives.
Despite the aforementioned bad faith disruptive behavior of the occupation regime and
given the positive outcome and encouraging results of the Government's management
of the pandemic and in line with our policy to swiftly re -operate the four crossing –
points whose operation had been suspended, the President of the government of the
Republic of Cyprus, within the context of his regular contacts with the leader of the
Turkish Cypriot community on the fight against Covidl9, communicated to Mr. Akinci
on May 21, the government's decision, after consultation with the epidemiological
team of experts, for the gradual lifting of Covid19 related controls on the functioning
of the crossing points, as of 8 June 2020 for certain categories.
These included Turkish Cypriots who work in the government controlled areas of the
Republic of Cyprus, Turkish Cypriot students attending educational institutions in the
government controlled areas, Turkish Cypriot patients receiving medical care at
medical institutions in the government controlled areas, Turkish Cypriots residents of
the mixed village of Pyla who work in the occupied areas, Greek Cypriots residents
of the village of Pyrgos who work in Nicosia and Greek Cypriots and Maronites
permanently residing in the occupied part of Cyprus, as well as any other individuals
whose crossing is deemed necessary on humanitarian grounds.
On the basis of the above a joint understanding had been reached wi th the leader of
the Turkish Cypriot community and, thus, the government of the Republic of Cyprus
proceeded with the relevant preparations, whilst the Technical committee on health
convened in order to consult on the practical arrangements. During this me eting the
Greek Cypriot members of the Technical Committee presented a thorough report with
the relevant epidemiological data. Unfortunately, the Turkish Cypriot members did
not respond in the same way.
Even more disappointing is the fact that certain political figures in the Turkish Cypriot
community, in pursuit of their own political expediencies, deliberately undermined
the understanding reached between the President of the Republic and the leader of the
Turkish Cypriot community Mr. Akinci, and, hence, the opening of the crossingpoints for the aforesaid categories was not materialized as envisaged on 8 June, except
for a small number of Turkish Cypriot workers who crossed over and decided to
remain in the government controlled areas in order to avoid th e 14-day quarantine to
be imposed by the illegal regime if they had returned back to the occupied areas on
the same day following the end of their work.
20-08992

17/27

S/2020/685

It is regrettable that at a time when the epidemiological conditions are such as to
permit the aforementioned steps and the necessary understanding was attained
between the leaders of the two communities, the prospect has been impeded by
decisions guided by ulterior political motives in an effort to undermine the Turkish
Cypriot leader.
Motives that obviously undermine any action that could potentially contribute in
creating a more favorable climate, for both communities. We need not reiterate the
continuous deliberate provocations followed by the same political figures in the
Turkish Cypriot community, in full alignment with the well-known divisive policy of
Turkey, towards Cyprus.
IV. Support provided by the Republic of Cyprus to the Turkish Cypriot
community during the pandemic.
Health related matters.
The Institute of Neurology and Genetics of the Republic of Cyprus offered to conduct
tests for the detection of SARS – CoV -2 to Turkish Cypriots and we also offered to
conduct, free of charge, tests for the detection of SARS – CoV -2 to 80 Turkish
Cypriots persons residing in the mixed village of Pyla. Both offers were met with a
negative response, purely on grounds of political expediency.
At the same time, following a relevant request by the Turkish Cyp riot leader, the
government of the Republic of Cyprus provided, free of charge, medical protection
equipment and medical drugs to the Turkish Cypriot side. This acceptance by the
Turkish Cypriot leader was met with criticism by the same political figures w ho
orchestrated the closure and non-opening of the crossing – points. We also conveyed
our readiness, at a later stage, to provide even more medical protection equipment
and medications.
Moreover, during the pandemic, we continued:
*
Providing medical supplies to the Turkish Cypriots who were undergoing
treatment at the Institute of Neurology and Genetics and medical drugs both to those
Turkish Cypriots who are registered at our Health System and to those who are not.
*
Facilitating the crossing to the government controlled areas of those Turkish
Cypriots patients who had appointments for medical treatment at the Bank of Cyprus
Oncology Centre.
*
Accommodating the request of Turkish Cypriots who arrived through chartered
flights to Larnaca and wished to be immediately transferred to the occupied area.
Support provided in tackling wildfires.
Following relevant requests by the leader of the Turkish Cypriot community,
Mr. Mustafa Akinci, to the President of the government of the Republic of Cypr us,
Mr. Nicos Anastasiades, the Republic on two occasions immediately provided
assistance to tackle wildfires which had erupted in the occupied areas. On the one
occasion a fire plane and one helicopter were sent and on the other one three planes and
one helicopter.
The support by the Republic had a catalytic role in successfully containing and
eventually eliminating the fires which at the time-being were out of control.
At the same time, on another occasion, assistance was again requested with the
Republic being ready to send the necessary fire means but at the end this support was
not needed.

18/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

The Republic of Cyprus stands ready at any time to provide any assistance deemed
necessary, with any available means and always in line with its capabilities, when
relevant requests are to be yet again conveyed.
Turkish Cypriots working in the government controlled areas of the Republic of
Cyprus.
More than 1.500 Turkish Cypriot workers who due to the extraordinary situation of
the pandemic were unable to work in the government controlled areas of the Republic
of Cyprus, were included among the beneficiaries of the Work Suspension Plan of the
Ministry of Labour, Welfare and Social Insurance, through which they were allocated
a special benefit scheme covering up to 60% of their monthly wages, with their
employers covering the remaining 40%.
V.

Technical Committees.

In our effort to create a political environment that would be conducive towards a
settlement, we have also encouraged the Technical Committees to mainta in their
increased pace in their work and among other things engage with a constructive
approach in further discussion of the 21 CBMs that the President of the Republic of
Cyprus had proposed to the Turkish Cypriot leader on February 2019. At the same time ,
we have engaged at the level of Negotiators in a reflection on how to adjust to the
current needs and identify potential areas were further initiatives can be undertaken.
While we have constantly embraced the Technical Committees’ work, I would like to
particularly recall the three instances during which the President of the Republic with
the Turkish Cypriot leader participated in major activities, namely the conference of
teachers organized by the TC on Education, the exhibition of invaluable artworks a nd
archival material organized by the TC on Culture and a meeting of the TC on Health
on the eve of the COVID-19 pandemic; and grabbed the opportunity to reaffirm our
active support and engagement in what they have been doing.
I should also note that following these successful openings to the broader public,
where the work of the Technical Committees was in prominent display to be
acknowledged and embraced by more people, I have appointed 12 new members
deemed necessary to further reinforce the work of the Committees. It was only
unfortunate that due to the COVID-19 pandemic they were not able to immediately
contribute to the extent we all had expected.
It is natural that the activity of the Technical Committees after March has been
affected by the measures taken for the protection of the population due to the COVID 19 pandemic. Indeed, during the first weeks, the members limited their activity to the
absolutely necessary. When circumstances allowed us all to engage again, they were
encouraged to reactivate their communication and cooperation channels. Thanks also
to the facilitation by the Good Offices mission, the Technical Committees gathered
some pace again, as they started exploring new ways to continue their work.
A particular reference should be made to the keen engagement of young people
through the use of technology. A teleconference of the “Heritage Youth Ambassadors”
under the umbrella of the Technical Committee of Cultural Heritage in April and a
webinar for teachers on challenges in a post-COVID-19 world in the framework of
the “Imagine” programme under the auspices of the Technical Committee on
Education in May were initiatives that should be praised and be used as examples.
Other Technical Committees have also been active, like the Technical Committee on
Gender Equality which called attention to the increasing numbers of domestic
violence amidst COVID-19 pandemic through a joint statement; the Technical
Committee on Economy and Entrepreneurship facilitating “contactless transacti ons”

20-08992

19/27

S/2020/685

(trade of products under a scheme that allowed no physical contact) with the
cooperation of the G/c and T/c Chambers of Commerce.
Special references deserve to be made to the Technical Committee on Health which
was literally on constant call even before the peak of the epidemic and had maintained
daily communication in order to have a real-time exchange of information and
respond, in an efficient way, to continuous requests for the provision of medicines
and medical supplies for the Turkish Cypriot community and the facilitation of
uninterrupted treatment of patients. As soon as the situation allowed, virtual meetings
were also scheduled to provide a platform for experts to exchange vital information
and views on the handling of the epidemic and the lessons learned.
It is also recalled that in the context of empowering the work of the Technical
Committees, the Republic of Cyprus has donated 750,000 euros to the Technical
Committee on Cultural Heritage in order to support more renovation and restoration
works of heritage sites across the island. In fact, from October 2019 till May 2020
across the island 8 restoration works were completed and 13 restoration works began.
It is true that at present the priority remains to establish conditions that would all ow
gradual return to a COVID-19 status quo ante. And to this direction, we will continue
to encourage and support the Technical Committees to enable them for a significant
and substantial contribution.
VI. Effective mechanism for direct military contacts.
The idea for the establishment of such a mechanism originated from the need to explore
measures that could contribute towards addressing the increasing and extremely
worrisome violations of the military status quo by the Turkish occupation forces, in
various sensitive locations along their ceasefire line and beyond, particularly since the
beginning of 2019, continuous provocative illegal activities of Turkey in the sea of
Cyprus, threats as regards the opening of the fenced-off area of Varosha under Turkish
military occupation, as well as through the additional impediments and the restrictions
introduced by the Turkish occupation regime against UNFICYP.
It is also imperative not to lose sight of the overall unpredictable and destabilizing
role of Turkey in the wider region and the negative repercussions of this behavior at
the current juncture. It is therefore essential to approach the issue with a sense of
pragmatism and to be aware that the aforementioned aggressive behavior on behalf
of Turkey will not be reversed unless firmly and decisively refuted by the
international community and the United Nations.
In this regard, let me underscore that a more decisive and effective stance on behalf
of UNFICYP that would effectively deter the provocations of the Turk ish occupation
army across the buffer zone is imperative.
Against this backdrop, and following the call of the UN Security Council in its
Resolution 2483 (July 2019), the government of the Republic of Cyprus has submitted
its proposal to the United Nations Secretary General, through a letter of the Minister
of Foreign Affairs dated 20 December 2019, expressing readiness to discuss the
establishment of a mechanism for direct contacts at military level between the
National Guard and the Turkish occupation forces, i.e. the opposing forces,
comprising their Commanders, as well as the Force Commander of UNFICYP as
facilitator, in accordance with the mandate of UNFICYP as prescribed by the UN
Security Council resolution 186, of 4 March 1964.
In view of the above, I wish to inform and assure that we stand ready to engage with
UNFICYP to this end, at the earliest opportunity.
Pertinent to the above-mentioned, I wish to reiterate that ideas advocating the
establishment of mechanisms on a wide array of issues coupled with extensive
20/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

references calling for cooperation between the two "sides" are counterproductive and
only serve towards deviating efforts away from the fundamental goal of reunification.
Such ideas, in conjunction with the revival of the totally unacceptable notion of
contacts with the secessionist entity "without prejudice to recognition", only serve to
promote the normalization of the status quo and thus the permanent division of Cyprus.
They also reflect a tendency of shifting away from the commitmen t to the solution of
the Cyprus problem on the basis of relevant UN SC resolutions and circumventing
fundamental UN SC Resolutions 541 (1984) and 550 (1984) and portraying the
Cyprus problem as an intercommunal issue, instead of its core nature as an
international problem of foreign invasion and military occupation by Turkey.
This approach is also contrary to the mission of UNFICYP in Cyprus, as it contradicts
the essence of UNFlCYP’s mandate, as prescribed in UN SC resolution 186 (1964)
and subsequent UN SC resolutions, while it is not in the least supportive of the effort
to resume negotiations.

20-08992

21/27

S/2020/685

Annex II
Update by the Turkish Cypriot side provided pursuant to
Security Council resolution 2506 (2020) of 30 January 2020
In its resolution 2506 dated 30 January 2020, the UN Security Coun cil called upon
the two leaders in Cyprus to provide written updates to the Good Offices Mission of
the Secretary-General on the actions taken in support of the relevant parts of that
resolution since its adoption, in particular with regard to paragraphs 5 and 6, with a
view to reaching a sustainable and comprehensive settlement.
This particular period, for which we were called upon to provide written updates as
the two leaders, has been an extraordinary and extremely challenging period for
humanity at large due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. As COVID-19 has
been encountered by the humankind for the first time in history, exponentially
affecting the public health worldwide and resulting in massive losses of human life, it
has proven to be a difficult test for the people of a globalized world who are now more
interconnected than ever on local, regional and global scales. It has been, therefore,
peculiar to witness at such an age of globalization and interconnectedness that
countries have had to close down their borders internally and enter into country-wide
lockdowns in an attempt to contain the pandemic and protect the lives of their citizens.
Because human lives have been at stake, public health has naturally dominated the
agendas and functioning of people’s everyday organizations in every aspect of life.
As the Turkish Cypriot side, since the initial days of the COVID-19 outbreak, we have
acted with utmost diligence and responsibility in order to engage our efforts towards
a targeted action and improve our joint ability to address this common threat together
with our Greek Cypriot counterparts. Cognizant of the fact that the novel coronavirus
does not recognize any border as well as the need for more dialogue and cooperation
between our respective communities in these difficult times, I took an initiative at the
early stages of the outbreak and called upon my counterpart, Mr. Nicos Anastasiades,
to convene the bi-communal Technical Committee on Health and jointly respond to
the emerging crisis. Hence, on 3 February 2020, in its first meeting under our
leadership and the auspices of the UN Secretary-General’s Special Representative in
Cyprus, the Committee “took note that all necessary precautions have been taken by
both sides in accordance with the guidelines of the World Health Organization (WHO)
including screening” and “agreed to remain in close contact, exchanging information
between the two communities and providing assistance, as deemed necessary”.
In the ensuing period, I continued to reiterate my call for more dialogue and
cooperation, especially at the wake of the abrupt unilateral decision of the Greek
Cypriot side on 28 February 2020 to close four of the crossing points, despite the fact
that there was no single case of COVID-19 reported on both sides of the island. In
my letter addressed to the UN Secretary-General on 5 March 2020, I highlighted the
necessity for an island-wide collaboration leading to the adoption of common
measures between the two sides and expressed my readiness to coll aborate towards
reducing existing barriers to intercommunal contact as well as emphasizing the
importance of effective communication for risk-mitigation and trust-building between
the two communities, as called for by the Security Council in its latest res olution
dated 30 January 2020. Moreover, in another letter to the Secretary -General dated
28 March 2020, I again stressed my commitment and readiness for collaboration to
focus together with our Greek Cypriot counterparts on “the true fight of our lives”, as
the UN Secretary-General rightly stated in his appeal for a global ceasefire, and to
jointly counter the risks and threats emanating from the outbreak.
In an attempt to overcome the burden created due to the outbreak of COVID -19 in
our health sector and the economically and socially affected sectors in the Turkish
22/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

Cypriot side, I wrote letters to and sought for technical and financial assistance from
the Presidents of the European Commission, the World Bank, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development on 27 March 2020 as well as the SecretariesGeneral of the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic Conference on
28 March 2020. I also wrote a letter to the Director-General of the World Health
Organization on 23 April 2020 and expressed the fact that despite the isolation
imposed upon them, the Turkish Cypriot people is not immune from COVID -19 just
like the rest of the world that can only be tackled by joint efforts and that we are ready
to collaborate with the organization. Needless to say, I deemed it necessary to make
these contacts with a view to contributing to the overall objective of promoting social
and economic development in the Turkish Cypriot community, thereby preventing
further socio-economic disparity between the two sides and supporting the efforts of
the United Nations for the comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem.
During this period, we, as the two leaders, have also exchanged phone calls with my
counterpart as needed, and the Technical Committee on Health has held videoconference meetings as necessary, to share information and tackle urgent individual
matters on a case-by-case basis. Hence, our dialogue during the pandemic has enabled
the two sides to respond together to an environmental catastrophe that occurred w hen
a large-scale forest fire erupted at multiple points in the north on 17 May 2020. Upon
my request, in addition to Turkey, the Greek Cypriot side under the leadership of
Mr. Anastasiades extended its help immediately by sending a fire plane and a
helicopter, which happened to be a first in our long history. Same collaboration and
solidarity were extended again on 5 June 2020 upon our call and three fire planes and
a helicopter were sent by the Greek Cypriot side.
On 21 May 2020, we held another phone call with my counterpart and reached an
understanding in principle for the gradual lifting of restrictions at the crossing points.
In this respect, we discussed as a first step the crossing of the Turkish Cypriots who
work, study and receive medical treatment in the Greek Cypriot side, the Turkish
Cypriot workers who reside in Pyla as well as the Greek Cypriots and Maronites who
permanently reside in the Turkish Cypriot side, provided certain necessary conditions
and requirements are met. As the leader of the Turkish Cypriot side, I strongly support
a phased and coordinated approach to be put in place to lift the restrictions at the
crossing points in general as long as the epidemiological situation allows. The
members of the Technical Committee on Health also agreed to remain in close
contact, continue exchanging information between the two communities in response
to COVID-19 and explore ideas to gradually lift restrictions at the crossings.
In general, it was my genuine wish that we were able to do more as th e two sides
during this testing period by establishing a sustainable dialogue for cooperation to
jointly battle the pandemic as well as to plan and prepare for the next steps ahead of
us in easing the restrictions imposed due to the pandemic. Rather than o nly
responding to requests under critical circumstances and at critical times, I deem it
essential for trust-building between the two communities and enhancing the prospects
for a comprehensive settlement that the two sides are able to break long -standing
taboos and open up channels for effective cooperation on various matters of island wide significance, such as environment protection and crime prevention, as also
called for by the Security Council in its latest resolution dated 30 January 2020.
Mechanisms of Direct Contact for Effective Cooperation:
Having said that, I wish to reemphasize the readiness of the Turkish Cypriot side in
developing and enhancing effective and direct cooperation between the two sides as well
as the two communities on all aspects to help ease the practical problems arising f rom
the status quo and to address island-wide matters. In this respect, the Turkish Cypriot
side has worked in close collaboration with UNFICYP to formalize an ad hoc
20-08992

23/27

S/2020/685

arrangement to facilitate the handover of third country nationals sought for criminal
proceedings from either side through the already existing Technical Committee on Crime
and Criminal Matters. The Turkish Cypriot side has reached a certain level of
understanding on the modalities, with the facilitation of UNFICYP, for the handover in
the buffer zone. Once the Greek Cypriot side gives its consent, the formalized modalities
will be another example for the joint efforts on criminal matters that produce concrete
results, in this case, smooth, safe and confidential handover of the concerned indivi duals.
The Turkish Cypriot side has also been working with UNFICYP on the establishment
of other mechanisms, including at military level, and has been conveying its views
on what could be feasible to help address island -wide matters that affect all on the
island. In this context, we welcome the initiative taken by the UNFICYP and its
submission of a proposal for the consideration of both sides on the establishment in
Cyprus of a mechanism for direct military-level contact.
Moreover, I believe it is high time for the two sides to enter into effective contact and
dialogue on the issue of hydrocarbons with the aim of creating an area of cooperation
and interdependency which will also provide a strong incentive for reaching a
comprehensive settlement in Cyprus and bringing stability and peace in the Eastern
Mediterranean. In this context, I hereby wish to call upon my counterpart to revisit the
proposal of the Turkish Cypriot side dated 13 July 2019 on this issue in yet another
attempt to avoid any further escalation and diffuse tensions as also called for by the
Security Council. As may be recalled, the Turkish Cypriot side offered in its proposal to
establish a joint committee, with the facilitation of the UN, and the EU as an observer,
to plan, decide and implement future hydrocarbon activities, including an agreement on
the revenue-sharing percentage for the exploration and production of off-shore oil and
gas resources of the island. Without challenging the licences that have already been
issued, either side would refrain from issuing licenses and authorizing exploration and
exploitation activities in overlapping maritime jurisdiction areas with a view to de escalating the tension in the region. To this date, I remain convinced that this proposal,
which continues to be on the table, carries the potential of triggering effective
cooperation not only between the two sides but on a wider scale, and also creating
interdependence among the contending parties in the Eastern Mediterranean and beyond.
Contact and Cooperation through Technical Committees:
As the Turkish Cypriot side, we give utmost importance for the effective functioning
of the bi-communal Technical Committees as they were established to enable
cooperation between the two sides with the aim of enhancin g intercommunal contacts
and improving the daily lives of people. It is my long -standing firm belief that the
Technical Committees have to be empowered even more to further contribute to the
dialogue and cooperation between the two communities as well as the two sides.
Although the works of the Technical Committees have also been hindered by the
COVID-19 pandemic, I constantly urged the Turkish Cypriot members of the Technical
Committees to reach out to their counterparts to deliver as best as they could for the two
communities to be able to respond to each other’s needs and challenges. In this respect,
the members of the Technical Committees from both sides remained in contact and
adjusted their works according to the existing conditions generated by the pandemic.
Apart from the pressing matters over the COVID-19 pandemic, the Technical
Committee on Health has continued to work on a project, which was initiated upon
the proposal of the Turkish Cypriot side, against the threat posed by mosquitos. It is
imperative for the Technical Committee to cooperate effectively on this matter as joint
collaboration is the only way to combat the risks posed by mosquitos island -wide.
On the day when we convened the bi-communal Technical Committee on Health
together with my counterpart, Mr. Anastasiades, on 3 February 2020, we also conducted
24/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

the official opening of an exhibition composed of the paintings by the Greek Cypriot
artists as well as the visual and audio recordings of the Turkish Cypriot artists that were
exchanged between the two sides on 3 September 2019 at Ledra Palace under the
guidance of the Technical Committee on Culture. As may be recalled, as a gesture of
good will, I conveyed the decision of the Turkish Cypriot side to return paintings by
Greek Cypriot artists that remained under protection on the Turkish Cypriot side since
1974 and the Greek Cypriot leader reciprocated similarly in relation to the visual and
audio recordings of Turkish Cypriot artists that existed in the archives of the CyBC,
belonging to the pre-1963 period. Moreover, the Technical Committee on Culture
prepared a catalog of the paintings and recordings which was also presented to the
leaders. Keeping in mind the fact that culture unites people, I am pleased to observe that
the letter and the spirit of the works of the Committee serve this purpose well.
The Technical Committee on Environment has been active during the pandemic and
continued to meet online regularly to advance their efforts in creating a network of
communication and collaboration among all environmental stakeholders in Cyprus.
To that end, the Committee is working on establishing an online platform to bring all
stakeholders together where environmental experts from both communities will
exchange experiences and information with the aim of identifying key environmental
needs and acting together. The Committee has also planned to organize 12 field visits
on 6 thematic areas, in collaboration with key technical consultants and
environmental experts from the two communities, in order to assess certain
environmental issues and produce field reports with action plans and policy
recommendations addressing environmental needs in priority areas. These thematic
areas are: biodiversity and nature protection, water resources management,
wastewater treatment, solid waste management, mining and quarrying, and air quality.
The Technical Committee on Education has been another actively working committee
during the reporting period despite the COVID-19 pandemic. I sincerely value the
further empowerment of this committee, which has a special significance for the
Turkish Cypriot side as it is aimed at promoting peace education across the island as
a cornerstone of trust-building and reconciliation between the two communities. The
Technical Committee on Education was one of the three technical committees along
with the Technical Committee on Culture and the Technical Committee on Gender
Equality which were established upon my proposal to enhance collaboration between
the two communities on various important subject matters. Hence, during the event
on “Transformational Leadership for Peace” at the Buffer Zone on 16 December 2019,
attended by both leaders, I had the opportunity to highlight the value of education in
cultivating a culture of peace in Cyprus.
The Technical Committee on Education successfully completed the “Imagine”
program for the school year 2019-2020 on 28 May 2020, which took place under the
auspices of the Technical Committee on Education and implemented by the
Association for Historical Dialogue and Research (AHDR) and the Home for
Cooperation (H4C) with the support of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany and
UNFICYP. It addressed primary, lower and upper secondary and vocational schools
and managed to bring together 1285 students and 162 teachers from Turkish Cypriot
and Greek Cypriot schools from all areas of Cyprus during the school year 2019 2020, promoting the culture of peace and non-violence.
Due to the hardships created by the COVID-19 pandemic, the envisioned part of
teacher training sessions of the ‘Imagine’ program had to be postponed to the
beginning of the next school year. However, the Committee was able to hold an online
webinar called “COVID-19 Changes Our World – What’s Our Response as
Educators?” with 34 teachers from both sides on 28 May 2020, in collaboration with
the German NGO Gesicht Zeigen!

20-08992

25/27

S/2020/685

I wish to reiterate the commitment of The Turkish Cypriot side to further deepening
the efforts of the Technical Committee on Education, and our readiness in
implementing the recommendations contained in its joint report of 2017 as well as
addressing the impediments to peace in school materials, including text books, as
called for by successive Security Council resolutions.
It is also envisaged that through a new project called ‘Edu-bites’, online lesson plans
will be published in a trilingual website promoting democracy, human rights, anti racist education, peace education as well as education for sustainable development
which targets the students aged between 6 and 18 years old. As the Turkish Cypriot
side, we are enthusiastic to see how this project will develop with its first package of
educational resources that planned to be available online in August 2020, given the
importance of the education of children and youth towards peace culture, starting from
now, both for the prospects of a comprehensive settlement and in a future federation.
During the reporting period, the activities of the Technical Committee on Cultural
Heritage have also been affected from the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, as
all of the construction work had been closed on both sides of the island. Therefore,
the Committee had to stop all its work on the cultural heritage sites. However, I am
pleased to stress that the Committee has adapted quickly to the new normal enforced
by the pandemic and continued their regular weekly meetings via video-conferencing.
In March and April 2020, the Committee continued to prepare new designs and
tenders, and also launched new tenders for two cemeteries and for the Pha se 2 of the
Apostolos Andreas Monastery Conservation works. Lastly, the Committee organized
an online presentation for 40 Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot Heritage Youth
Ambassadors who will be acting as the youth voice of the Committee.
Furthermore, I deem it necessary to specifically mention the activities of the Technical
Committee on Gender Equality as the pre-existing inequalities and in particular domestic
violence have further deepened throughout the world since the outbreak of the COVID 19 pandemic. In this respect, the Technical Committee on Gender Equality, upon the call
of the Turkish Cypriot members, prepared and published a statement in a timely manner
on the gendered effects of the prevailing health crisis on 6 May 2020 and had an online
meeting on 13 May 2020 to address this structural matter.
Although not visible to the public, other Technical Committees have continued to
function during this period to tackle some arising problems on a daily basis. For
example, a radio interference problem was dealt with by the Technical Committee on
Telecommunications and Radio Frequency-Broadcasting.
The Technical Committee on Crime and Criminal Matters has also remained in
contact and elaborated on some issues related to the missing persons. Furthermore, a
very important joint educational project on “Cyber-Bullying” was developed by the
Committee in collaboration with the Technical Committee on Education.
At the wake of the recent extremist and irredentist attacks at the mosques in the Greek
Cypriot side, Köprülü Hacı İbrahim Ağa Mosque in Limassol and Tuzla Mosque in
Larnaca, I deem it necessary for all Technical Committees to further reinforce their
activities and continue more powerfully to respond to such attacks against our cultural
heritage, common history and shared values in the strongest means with the aim of
fostering tolerance, diversity and reconciliation and enhancing the prospects of a
united island fully integrated through stability and peace for all its inhabitants.
The Activities of the Committee on Missing Persons:
The operations of the Committee on Missing Persons were also interrupted due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. After 27 March 2020, CMP members resumed their weekly
meetings online and the investigation teams continued their archival wor k to locate
possible burial places for excavation to be ready when the bi-communal teams resume
26/27

20-08992

S/2020/685

their activities. CMP’s remaining work continues to be on hold due to the outbreak as
bi-communal teams cannot work on the ground.
Settlement Efforts and the Way Forward:
As recalled, the efforts towards finding a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus
problem had been deadlocked by the conclusion of the Conference on Cyprus without
a result in Crans-Montana in July 2017. Nevertheless, during the two and a half y ear
period ensuing Crans-Montana, the Turkish Cypriot side unwaveringly continued its
consistent stance in favour of a solution based on the established UN parameters and
insistently called for the preservation of the UN body of work that has come into
existence after decades-long negotiations on the Cyprus problem as a compromise
between the two sides.
Despite all the setbacks in relation to the established basis of a solution in Cyprus and
regressions from the jointly achieved convergences during that pe riod, the continued
involvement of the UN Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres, his appointment of
the senior UN official, Ms. Jane Holl Lute, our subsequent consultations on terms of
reference that would constitute a consensus starting point for meaningful negotiations
leading to a settlement within a foreseeable future, and finally the invitation of the
Secretary-General for an informal trilateral meeting with the two leaders, led the
process to Berlin, Germany on 25 November 2019.
In Berlin, we, as the two leaders under the auspices of the Secretary-General, took
stock of efforts reaching a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus problem and
reaffirmed our commitment and determination to achieve a settlement based on a bi zonal, bi-communal federation with political equality as set out in the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including OP4 of UN Security Council Resolution 716
(1991). Acknowledged that this time must be different and motivated b y a sense of
urgency, we also agreed that achieving a comprehensive and durable settlement to the
Cyprus problem within a foreseeable horizon is of utmost importance to the future
well-being of both communities and that the status quo is unsustainable. We affirmed
our commitment once again to the Joint Declaration of 11 February 2014, the prior
convergences, and the six point framework of 30 June 2017 with a view to achieving
a strategic agreement paving the way forward for a comprehensive settlement. As a
result, the Secretary-General agreed to extend his efforts to achieve terms of reference
to serve as a consensus starting point for phased, meaningful, and results-oriented
negotiations at the earliest feasible opportunity, and committed himself to explore
with the two leaders and with the Guarantor powers the possibility to convene an
informal five-plus-UN meeting at an appropriate stage.
The outcome in Berlin cleared the confusion that dominated our efforts in bringing a
solution to the Cyprus problem and opened up the prospects for the way ahead in
designing a properly structured and results-oriented process. Hence, our engagement
in Berlin was also welcomed by the UN Security Council in its latest resolution dated
30 January 2020. In line with the call of Security Council in the same resolution, I
wish to reiterate that the Turkish Cypriot side is committed to the outcome of the
Berlin meeting and to reaching a sustainable and comprehensive settlement under UN
auspices, including by engaging actively and with a sense of urgency with the
Secretary-General and senior UN official, Ms. Jane Holl Lute. In this respect, the
Turkish Cypriot side also stands ready, as continuously expressed, for the realization
of an informal five-plus-UN meeting to be called by the Secretary-General when the
time is ripe.

20-08992

27/27
