NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
. . . . . . . . . . .. . , . . . .. . . ... .

Page
1

. . . .. , .. . .. .. . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . .. . . ... .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
fa) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(6) Report
of the Secretary-General
under Security
Council
resolution
331 (1973) (S/10929)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . *. . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l734/Rev.

Adoption

of the agenda

1)

s/w. 1734

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security CouncZ The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND ‘THIRTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday,25 July 1973, at 10.30 a.m.
Bwident:
Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

Ghorra (Lebanon) took the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

&esei?t: The representatives
of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kellya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, Unitccl Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

3. The PRESIDENT:
The consultations
to which 1
referred on Friday at the close of the Council’s last meeting
have been in progress since then among members of the
Council. As a result of those consultations, a draft
resolution has been prepared which is sponsored by the
delegations of Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya, Panama,
Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia IL!+,I09 741.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l734/Rev.
1. Adoption
2.

1)

of the agenda.

4. Mr. SEN (India): Our pleasure in seeing you back at the
United Nations, even if only temporarily, is all the greater
because you have come to preside over one of the most
important series of meetings of the Council when your skill
as a diplomat, your modesty and sensitivity as a man, and
your understanding and experience of complicated problems as a life-long student of international politics have all
been placed at the disposal of the Council. With disarming
simplicity you said the other day that this was the first time
in your long career at the United Nations you could use the
gavel at the Security Council, but all of us who know you
are aware that this symbolic and open exercise of authority
is backed by your most valuable contribution
to the
Council’s work in a variety of ways. We did not have ar
opportunity to render our tributes to you in the Councii
when you left us a few weeks ago, but were gratified to
learn that your Government had awarded to you one of
the highest honours of the Realm-the Grand Companionship of the Order of St. Michael and St. George-in recog
nition of your devoted service to your country. Al1 our
good wishes go to you on your retirement from a most
active and useful career in diplomacy.

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
f/j) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/10929).
Tile meetirig was culled to order at 1 I a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The situation iu the Middle East:
(fl) Security Couucil resolution 33 1 (I 973);
(h) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
tnken previously by the Security C0~mci.l
in the course of
the discussion of the item before us, I shall proceed now,
with the conscnl: of the Council, to invite the 19 representntivcs participating in the discussion to be seated in this
chamber in conformity with the established practice.

5. The intractable problem of the Middle East i? Lln: most
urgent and the most serious of the problems the Council
has before it. Years of efforts, decades of agony, bloodshed
and misery and frequent introduction of new factors in a
complex situation have not brought a solution any nearer.
We had a most thorough review of the problem last month,
and when we met here last Friday, the important question
was what the Council could and should do to make some
slight progress towards a solution. We had over a month to
think about a suitable course of action.

as I hear no objection, I invite the
-.7 Accordingly,
representatives
of Egypt, Israel and Jordan to take places at
the Council table, and the representatives of the Unitccl
Republic
of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Nigeria,
Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab Emirates,
Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia,
Lebanon, Iran and Bahrain to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber OG the understanding
that they will be invited to be seated at the
Cnuncil table when it is their turn to address the Coumcil.

6. On the one hand, we were aware of the strong views
held by the parties about their rights an4 duties, their own
appreciation of their national future and national interests
alid finally an expression of their human dignity, worth and
pride. On the other hand, the members of the Council, the
supreme organ of the United Nations, with prime responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and

At ,+/lc i/lvitation of’ the Presidmt, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
/r;g,tjlt),
Mr. Y. Tekoalz (Israel) and Mr. A. H. Sharaf
(J~J&u~)
took places nt the Swurity
Council table, and
JW. I/. G. Ouangnzotchitzg (Chad), Mr. H. Kelani (Syrians
nf&
Rc/mblic),
Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigeria) and Mr. E.
1

security, have the duty to place their combined wisdom at
the disposal of the parties so that they may know in what
direction, in our opinion, they should move.
7. The draft I am about to introduce on behalf of eight
members of the Council does not seek to do more than this.
Our basic consideration has been that it should reflect the
greatest common measure of agreement among the I5
members of the Council, that it should confine itself to the
facts as they are today and express the Council’s views on
them in most moderate language without affecting or even
discussing the legal rights of the parties or pronouncing on
the various principles of international law and of our
Charter and of our resolutions which may apply in the
situation in the Middle East.
8. Before making further general comments, I think it
would be useful at this stage to introduce the draft
resolution in document S/10974 and read out its full text. I
have been asked to do so, and I have the honour to do so,
on behalf of the delegations of Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia. The text
of the draft resolution is as follows:
[i%e speaker read out the text of the draft resolution,]
9. This texl has been arrived at after most intensive
consultation and any delegation which wished to contribute
its views for such consultation had ample opportunity to do
so. This draft resolution will not, I am afraid, bring much
satisfaction to any of the parties directly involved, but it
will, we believe, inform them of the general thinking of the
Council and instruct them of the ways in which they
should, in the opinion of the Council, move and make
progress.

attitude towards the mission undertaken by Ambassador
Jarring as a result of his mandate from the Council.
Operative paragraph 4 simply gives the views of the Council
repeatedly expressed over the years and without dissension
on the validity of Ambassador Jarring’s aide-mbmoire of
8 February 1971 /S/10403, annex I/. Operative paragraph 5 expresses the Council’s strong view that the States
and peoples in the area, including the Palestinian people,
have both the right and the duty to live in peace inside their
own national territories. Operative paragraph 6 emphasizes
that so long as the occupation continues nothing should be
done in the occupied territories which may obstruct a
settlement or which reduces or tends to reduce the rights of
their inhabitants. Operative paragraph 7 renews the mandate of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative and requests them to continue with the unfinished
business of promoting a solution. Operative paragraph 8
simply shows the Council’s determination to give all help to
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative in all
their worthy and legitimate efforts. Operative paragraph 9
asks the parties for full co-operation in the work of the
Secretary-General and his representative. Operative paragraph 10 implies that the Council does not believe that by
adopting this draft resolution it has done all it could or that
progress has automatically been achieved. The problem will
require continuous attention.
13. I believe that this brief introduction will establish
beyond all doubt that the sponsors are interested neither in
polemics nor in attempting to bring the Council to support
the conflicting principles which divide the parties. What we
have attempted to do, and with utmost moderation but
with firm conviction, is to enable the Council to do its
work by expressing itself on the current and significant
facts of the situation in a manner which might bring about
some progress in the deplorable and potentially dangerous
stalemate.

IO. I should like now to offer a few brief comments on
some of the preambular and operative paragraphs of the
draft resolution.

14. We have worked for unanimous support and have
every hope it will be forthcoming. Indeed, we do not see
that this draft resolution, which is entirely based on facts
and their objective consideration, can invite any rescrvations or criticisms. Such reservations or criticisms can be
valid only if we wish to support, wholly and totally and
without questioning, one side or the other. The sponsors
could not have adopted such an attitude, nor did they ever
have the slightest intention or inclination of doing so. We
hope, therefore, that the Council will accept this draft
resolution unanimously and thus encourage the parties to
move towards a solution with the able and devoted
assistance of the Secretary-General and his Special Representative.

11. The first, second, third and fourth prearnbular paragraphs are self-explanatory and do not require any comments. The fifth preambular paragraph is a reaffirmation of
a resolution which the Council adopted unanimously and
which contains some of the basic principles which apply to
the problem of the Middle East. The sixth preambular
paragraph refers to the problem of the Palestinians, which
cannot be ignored in any soIution and which has repeatedly
been referred to inside and outside the Council in numerous
forms and with varying emphasis. No comments are
necessary on the seventh preambular paragraph.
12. Operative paragraph 1 sums up the views of the
Council on the report which the Secretary-General submitted to us at our request. It also states the fact that a just
and lasting solution of the problem has not been found
during the long six years and deeply regrets this fact.
Similarly, operative paragraph 2 states the fact that, contrary to the Charter, Israeli armed forces continue their
occupation of all the territories they occupied in the June
1967 conflict and strongly deplores this fact. Operative
paragraph 3 once again reflects the views of the Council
based on the Secretary-General’s report and also on his and
others’ ora statements before the Council on Israel’s

Is. Mr. ODERO-JOWI (Kenya): Mr. President, my deputy
has already had occasion to congratulate you on your
accession to the high office of President of the Council
and
to assure YOU of tny delegation’s support and co-operation
in the discharge of your duties. Similarly, he has had
occasion to congratulate the Ambassador of the Soviet
Union for the able way in which he presided over the
Council’s deliberations during the month of June. I wish to
renew these sentiments at this meeting.
16. Turning to the subject under discussion, I am pleased
to state that my delegation is a sponsor of the draft
2

resolution contained in document S/10974, so ably introduced by the representative of India on behalf of the eight
sponsoring Powers. My delegation, which along with other
members of the Council has participated in the process of
consultations on this draft resolution, is happy that it takes
into account the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/ 10929 and the views of the members of the
Council and of other Members of the United Nations which
took part in the debate.

could, in the near future, yield a framework
which we can all rejoice.

of peace in

20. It thus appears unnecessary for me to emphasize the
special role of the parties in being instrumental toward a
permanent solution. It goes without saying that, when
peace is inaugurated in the area, the parties, more than
anyone else, will fully reaIize what they have missed in the
past. I trust, therefore, that a constructive beginning will be
made-and shortly, it is to be hoped-starting with the
special visit of the Secretary-General to the capital cities of
the principal parties in the Middle East.

17. We note that the preamble embodies uncontroversial
aspects and is indeed as objective as it can be in the light of
the debate and the report of the Secretary-General. I should
like to underscore the importance of the fifth preambular
paragraph, which .rightly reaffirms resolution 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967. There is no doubt that that resolution
is the corner-stone pointing to the solution of the Middle
East problem, and I am happy that that resolution is not
tampered with in the thrust of the present draft resolution.

21. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, allow
me to express my delegation’s great satisfaction on seeing
you presiding over the meetings of the Security Council. We
are glad to see you back in New York and we congratulate
ourselves on having you in the Chair to guide us in our
deliberations on the difficult and sensitive problem of the
Middle East.

18. Another important preambular paragraph is the sixth,
which reads as.foIlows:

22. It is with great pleasure that my delegation has joined
those of Guinea, India, Kenya, Panama, Peru, the Sudan
and Yugoslavia in sponsoring draft resolution S/10974.
After the admirably concise and lucid introduction of the
draft resolution on behalf of the sponsors by my colleague
Ambassador Sen of India, followed by the equally clear
statement of the representative of Kenya, Ambassador
Odero-Jowi, it seems to me unnecessary to repeat their
arguments, especially as the Indonesian position with regard
to the problem of the Middle East and its solution was
already made clear in my statement during the first round
of the Council’s debates on the Middle East last month
[I 725th meeting]. I should like, however, to dwell briefly
on some points of the draft resolution and say a few words
in explanation of our sponsorship thereof.

“Conscious that the rights of the Palestinians have to be
safeguarded”.
, This is an acknowledgement of the thrust of the debate and
of the fact that the solution to the Middle East problem has
duly to respond to, and to reflect, the rights of the
Palestinians as well as those of the States in the region. This
is also recognized in operative paragraph 5, and appears to
embrace fully the sentiments expressed in the section
entitled “Middle East” in the joint United States-Soviet
communiquk, part of which reads as follows:
“Both parties agreed to continue to exert their efforts
to promote the quickest possible settlement in the Middle
East. This settlement sl~oulcl be in accordance with the
interests of all States in the area, be consistent with their
independence and sovereignty and should take into due
account the legitimate interests of the Palestinian
people .” (see S/I 0964.1

23. First, I shall refer to operative paragraph 2, which
“Strongly cleplores Israel’s continuing occupation of the
territories occupied as a result of the 1967 conflict,
contrary to the principles of the United Nations Charter”
and of international law. My delegation would have liked a
stronger formulation for this paragraph. The continuing
occupation of Arab territories by Israel constitutes, in the
opinion of my delegation, a barrier to the peaceful solution
of the Middle East problem; and we cannot insist strongly
enough that that barrier be lifted. The withdrawal of Israel
from the occupied territories is an essential factor for the
establishment of secure and rccognized borders between
Israel and its neighbours. Recognized and secure borders are
directly linked to the withdrawal of Israel from occupied
Arab territories. The principle of non-acquisition of territory by the use of force, to which we all adhere, should be
respected. Any attempt to acquire territory under the guise
of wanting to establish recognized and secure borders will
be self-defeating, as it cannot be expected that such borders
will be recognized or secure. As I said in my statement
during the last debates:

I would like to emphasize the term “Palestinian people”.
19. Many of us share a feeling of deep regret that the
Secretary-General
was unable to report any significant
progress in the implementation of resolution 242 (1967).
Little, therefore, in spite of the wish of the Council, has
been realized toward the goal of a just peace in the Middle
East. The Council must, therefore, stress the imperative of
making progress toward a permanent and peaceful settlement of the problem. Indeed, it is only with such a peace
that the valuable resources now deployed toward military
goals could be usefully diverted toward the economic and
social needs of the peoples of the area and the development
of that area. The Council must encourage the principal
disputants to search their souls seriously in an effort to
usher in an era of mutual respect and of hope and peace.
After all, they are, basically, a people of one region, with
deeply shared historical and cultural roots. With the
goodwill
of the permanent members of the Security
Council involved and of all the other members of the
international
community, renewed efforts by the parties

“My delegation is of the view that really secure borders
can in the long run only be effectively guaranteed not in
the first place by soldiers and guns but by peace and
mutual goodwill. In the case of the Middle East, the
return by Israel of all occupied Arab territories to their
3

;
rightful owners will pave the way toward a situation
where boundaries will be secure because there is peace.”
[ibid. para. 95.1

leading to a peaceful solution of the conflict which has
been at the centre of the Council’s attention for many
years. Your exceptional qualities as a diplomat and as a
man, your noble attitude towards interlocutors both when
you agree and when you disagree with them, represent a
rare example of the co-operation, tolerance and mutual
understanding, of which we are in such great need in the
United Nations in our efforts aimed at finding agreed
solutions for the numerous important issues with which we
are confronted.

24. My delegation attaches great importance to operative
paragraph 5, which underlines respect for the rights of the
Palestinians. It is unrealistic to expect that peace can return
to the Middle East without justice being done to the
Palestinians who are now living in the occupied territories
and in the neighbouring countries, as refugees and in
miserable conditions. Lasting peace cannot be based upon
injustice. It is in conjunction with respect for the rights of
the Palestinians that my delegation reads operative paragraph 6. In view of continuing Israeli efforts towards the de
facto integration into Israel of the occupied territories, this
paragraph is most relevant in. avoiding the creation of
situations of fait accompli which will very much complicate
any solution of the problem.

29. I now wish to say a few words about the draft
resolution, sponsored by Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Panama, Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia, in addition tr,
what has already been stated in such a detailed and
competent manner by my colleagues the Ambassador of
India, Mr. Sen, the Ambassador of Kenya, Mr. Odero-Jowi,
and the Ambassador of Indonesia, Mr. Anwar Sani.

25. In conclusion, my delegation would also like to
comment briefly on operative paragraph 4, which we read
in conjunction with operative paragraph 7. The Secretary
General has submitted a report of his activities and those of
his Special Representative, Ambassador Jarring, since the
adoption in 1967 of resolution 242 (1967) and up to 1973.
The Council, in the view of my delegation, has to express
itself on the initiatives that have been taken, if we want the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to continue their efforts to promote a just and peaceful solution
of the Middle East problem. The least the Council can do is
to express its opinion on the efforts that have been made
by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative.
Especially with regard to the Special Representative, the
Council has to keep in mind that his task is not only to act
as a go-between, but, in the words of paragraph 3 of
resolution 242 (1967), “to promote agreement and assist
efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement in
accordance with the provisions and principles in this
resolution”.
To be effective, however, he will need the
concrete support of the Council for his ideas.

30. 1 do not deem it necessary to revert to an analysis and
appraisal of the situation in the Middle East which has led
to the Security Council being seized of the Middle East
problem and to presentation of the draft resolution now
before us. This subject was amply dealt with during the first
phase of the debate in the Security Council, which revealed
the existence of an almost unanimous approach regarding
the following points. First, it is not possible to tolerate any
postponement of the solution of the Middle East ciisis
without jeopardizing peace and progress in this region and
more widely. Secondly, that the solution must be based on
the principle of the unacceptability of acquisition of
territories by force. Thirdly, that there can be no lasting
solution without ensuring respect for the legitimate right%
of all the peoples of this_ region, including, of course, the
Palestinian people. Lastly, that the United Nations is an
irreplaceable forum within the framework of which it is
indispensable to search for a solution based on the platfom~
provided by the resolutions of the Security Council and the
General Assembly-primarily,
Security Council resolution
242 (1967) of November 1967 and General Assembly
resolution 2949 (XXVII).

26. Though my delegation would have preferred a more
strongly worded draft resolution clearly demanding the
withdrawal of Israel from occupied Arab territories we have
been prepared to go a long way to accommodate the
viewpoints of other representatives who are not entirely in
agreement with our views in the hope that the draft
resolution may obtain the votes necessary for its adoption
by the Council. My delegation thinks that the draft
resolution presented to the Council is balanced and takes
into account the views expressed during the debate and the
report of the Secretary-General.

31. The draft resolution of which my delegation is a
sponsor reflects the common denominator that has been
endorsed by almost all the representatives who have spoken
during the discussions in the Council. None of the
principles embodied in resolution 242 (1967) arc brought
into question by the present draft, Consequently, every one
of the paragraphs of the draft we are now considering is
inspired by the statements made before the Council and by
opinions expressed during our intensive consultations in
connexion with presentation of the draft resolution. That is
why the wording is so balanced and the whole text SO
moderate.

27. I should like to conclude by expressing my sincere
expectation that all the members of the Council will find it
possible to support the draft resolution as a concrete
contribution to the solution of the Middle East problem.

32. The draft resolution in fact refIects the situation
prevailing in the region at the present moment and tlte
efforts aimed at finding a political solution of the problen~
through the United Nations. It does not deal with prhciples, but, taking what has already been adopted by the
Security Council as a starting point, it embodies all
enumeration of the facts characterizing the current situ*
tion and also points out the responsibilities and tasks OftlIe

28. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, before dealing with the problem on our agenda may I, too, express my
deep satisfaction at the fact that you are among us, even
though for a short time, in your capacity as President of the
Council at these important meetings. Your arrival and
presence encourage us in our search for ways and means

c0u11cil.

4

1
1

33. Such a state of affairs--which,
in fact, renders the
situation incomparably more difficult than has been the
case at any time in the past--is characterized by the
following
elements, which have been duly taken into
account in the draft resolution.

40. That is, in our view, the minimum to be expected of
the Council. The failure to take such minimal action could
have lasting consequences amounting to an acceptance of
the present state of affairs which is in contradiction of the
Charter of the United Nations.

34. First, all the efforts of the United Nations to
implement resolution 242 (1967) have failed exclusively
because of Israel’s refusal to co-operate with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the basis of his
initiative, set forth in his aide-mCmoire of 8 February 1971,
which was endorsed by four permanent members of the
Council.

41. It hasbeen clearfor a long time that two diametrically
opposed policies are pursuedin the region of the Middle
East. The first is endeavouringto face the international
community, the United Nations and every one of us, with
the fait accompli of occupation and annexation,while the
second policy, basing itself on the Charter and adopted
resolutions, is striving to assistthe United Nations in
finding a political solution, a stable and lastingsolution,
which can be founded only on the basisof the principlesof
non-acquisition of territory by force, withdrawal of the
Israeli armed forces from all occupiedterritories and on
respect for the rights and interestsof all peoplesand States
in the area. There is no doubt in the mind of my delegation
asto the road that shouIdbe followed.

35. Secondly, the occupation of the territories of three
States Members of the United Nations continues, in
violation of adopted principles and obligations assumed
under the Charter and United Nations resolutions.
36. Thirdly, the changes of a demographic, economic and
other character carried out by Israel in the occupied
territories
in contradiction of all the principles of international law not only are liable to prejudice or at least
render more difficult a definitive solution but actually
endanger the fundamental rights of the inhabitants of those
areas, in some cases amounting to systematic colonization
of occupied areas.

42. It is high time for the Security Council to devote its
efforts to search for such a solution insteadof using its
energiesto extinguish fires and searchfor palliative measureswhich do not eliminate the causesof frequent and
dangerousexplosions. The maintenanceof the fallacious
situation of “no war, no peace” is not an aim in itself.
Closing one’s eyes to the fundamental problemsof the
Middle East does not benefit anyone. The situation could
rapidly get out of control, which would jeopardizenot only
peace, but also the role of the IJnited Nations in general,
and this would have catastrophicconsequences.

37. Fourthly, developments not only have confirmed the
existence of the Palestinian factor but have also revealed
the utter failure of all attempts to destroy it or to conceal it
under the cloak of anonymity by means of force or all
kinds of manoeuvering. The Palestinian political movement,
as an expression of the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people, has imposed itself as an active factor in
the Middle East without which no definitive solution of the
crisis is possible. Its role is beginning to be recognized even
by the forces which have ignored it so far for different

43. The Middle East crisis can endanger the results
achieved in other fields of international relations as well.
The question of the situation in the Middle East is part of
broader security, Mediterraneanand European,and this is
being recognized to an increasingextent as an irrefutable
fact. African countries, Asian countries, Europeancountries, non-aligned countries and Latin American countries
are devoting increasedattention becauseof all that to the
Middle East. The awarenessof the interdependenceof
European security and the situation in the Middle East is
constantly gainingground in Europe.

K!RSOIlS.

38. Those are all persistentand generally recognizedfacts
to which no one wishing for a lasting and just solution of
the Middle East problem can shut his eyeswithout thereby
participating-consciously or unconsciously, directly or
indirectly-in
efforts designedto perpetuate the statusquo
created by force. The draft resolution we are discussing 44. In such a situation, every action barring the road to a
solution sounds anachronistic.Our draft resolution,which
does nothing but take this actual position into account.
we hope will be adopted by a large majority, if not
unanimously, points to the only road along which the
39. What should, or rather what must, the Security
Council, which is entrusted with the primary responsibility Security Council should direct its action. It constitutes,at
the same time, a contribution to the generalorientation
for the maintenance of international peaceand security, do
in such a situation? In our opinion, the Council hasno towards a political solution of the crisisandto all concrete
other option but to exert active efforts for the imple- efforts directed towards that end.
mentation of its own resolution; to ensurerespectfor the
45. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and security of all
speakersis that of the representativeof Israel,on whom I
the States in the region of the Middle East; to thwart
annexation and occupation; to protect the legitimaterights now call.
and aspirations of the Palestinianpeople; to proclaim all
changes in the occupied territories null and void; to request 46. Mr. TEKOAll (Israel): In recent years our Organization has come under increasingcriticism. Governments,
the Secretary-General and his Special Representativeto
renew and to continue their efforts to find a solution and statesmen and scholars, international organizationsand
to give all the necessaryassistance
to them. And finally, the media of information have all expresseddisappointment
Council must deal with the problem actively and meet and concern with the manner of our work and its results.
Growing scepticism and even lack of interest have set in
whenever its decisionsare not carried out.
5

j

everywhere. Attempts to explain, to justify or to laud are
met more and more often with smiles of incredulity. How
could it be otherwise when developments such as those now
taking place in the Middle East debate are not uncommon?

style of Arab propaganda, the draft focuses on the
vilification of Israel. It is such a rehash of Arab distortion
and calumny that is suggested as the Security Council’s
contribution to the Middle East situation.

47. The very initiation of the debate was a substitute for a
serious peace-making effort. Egypt asked that another
round of public polemics be held because it was not ready
for quiet constructive talks with Israel. President Sadat and
Foreign Minister El-Zayyat made it clear that the debate
was to advance the cause of continued confrontation with
Israel, and not agreement with it. In any event, whatever
the motivation for the debate, the Council might have at
least tried to work towards an outcome that would not
prejudice the interests of peace. Instead, several Member
States which identify themselves unreservedly with the
Arab position in respect of Israel took it upon themselves
to be the architects of the discussion’s outcome and to
prepare a draft resolution in accordance with Egyptian
specifications. In conditions of the welI-known
parliamentary imbalance obtaining in the Security Council on
Middle East questions, the authors of the draft know, of
course, in advance that whatever they may produce there
will be an automatic majority ready to join them in
sponsorship or support.

51. The essence of the search for peace in the Middle East
is the effort to reach agreement between Israel and the
Arab States. This is the corner-stone
of resolution
242 (1967) and the basic goal of the peace-making process
it set in motion. However, out of deference for Arab
sensitivities, there is no mention in the draft resolution of
the need for agreement between the parties. It is security,
the right to live in peace and security, that resolution
242 (1967) sought to introduce and to ensure in an area
torn by strife and insecurity for two decades. The draft is
silent on this objective.
52. Could there be a clearer subversion of resolution
242 (1967) than the omission of its very foundationsagreement between the parties and security? These have
been brushed aside to give place to one-sided interprctations, sharpened differences and heightened confrontation. The draft does not stop there. It distorts resolution
242 (1967) by selectively taking out of context some
principles, such as territorial integrity. It misquotes and
misinterprets it while ignoring other principles. It deals in a
similar manner with the numerous ideas put to the parties
since 1967 by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative. One of these, the suggestion contained in the
aide-m8moire of 8 February 1971 that Israel should accept
the Egyptian diktat on the restoration of the old line, is
singled out, thus undermining the concept of secure and
recognized boundaries as it appears in resolution
242 (1967). It is amazing tbat of all the initiatives by the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative the one included
in the draft should be the initiative that has caused the
paralysis of the Jarring Mission since 197 1.

48. What would be thought of a situation in which the
advocates of one party set themselves up as judges and
formulate a judgement in conformity
with their own
clients’ views? The absurdity of such a situation in the
present instance is accentuated by the international conduct of the advocates of the Arab cause who formulated
the text submitted to the Council. What is it that makes
States such as India and Yugoslavia feel that their
authorship of a draft resolution on the Israel-Arab conflict
could be considered proper? Is it the fact that they have no
diplomatic relations with Israel? Is it that both decided to
bow to Egypt’s demand for the expulsion of the United
Nations Emergency Force in 1967 and announced the
withdrawal of their contingents even before the SecretaryGeneral had time to consider the matter, thus contributing
to the outbreak of hostilities? Or is it, for example, India’s
record in the United Nations in questions of peace and
security that qualifies it to play the role of arbiter on these
questions in the Middle East?

53. The draft further distorts resolution 242 (1967) by its
references to Israel’s occupation of territories. It is clear
from that resolution and from the Security Council’s
cease-fire resolutions that the present cease-fire lines are to
be replaced by secure and recognized boundaries which will
be determined in the peace agreements between lsraei ancl
its neighbours. Until then the cease-fire lines continue to
delimit the Israeli presence, and to speak derogatorily of
the situation created by them is to make a mockery of the
Security Council’s own resolutions.

49. When the Security Council puts itself in the hands of
such States on an issue as complex and as delicate as the
Middle East situation and votes on a text prepared by them,
can it expect its activities to be regarded with the
confidence and esteem due to a high international organ?
A mere glance at the draft is sufficient to realizc how
one-sided and destructive an attitude it reflects.

54. The draft also contains an unwarranted assertion
concerning the force of Security Council resolutions. in
fact, only resolutions under Chapter VII can be said to be
mandatory-and
even that has been denied by some
Member States, and in particular by Egypt.

50. Egypt seeks support for its continued belligerency
against Israel. The draft provides such support. In its
wording and in its entire spirit it is an act of political
hostility which disregards fact and law and maligns IsraeI
simply to please Egypt. Egypt’s persistent refusal to
negotiate with Israel, its rejection in the last six years of
numerous peace proposals made by Israel and by the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Egypt’s resort
to force in violation of the cease-fire and its support for
terror warfare are all completely ignored, while, in the usual

55. As if all that were not enough, the draft introduces the
element of Palestinian rights and aspirations, which does
not appear in resolution 242 (1967). All are aware of the
meaning of references to the issue of Palestinian rights. All
are aware that such references have been and are being used
to support the demand for Israel’s destruction and the
dismemberment of the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan. All
know that such references play into the hands of the
Palestine terror organizations which have, in the name of
6

I5
j:

the so-called Palestinian rights, brought about bloodbaths
of barbaric atrocities. This was conlfirmed only the day
before yesterday by President Sadat, who, in his speech on
the occasion of the Anniversary of the Revolution, pledged
unreserved support for the terrorist organizations in their
sanguinary campaign. At the very time when the entire
world remains in shock over the ordeal of the hijacked
Japanese aircraft and its hapless passengers and crew, the
draft resolution would have the effect of giving succour and
encouragement to hijackers and to murderers such as those
of Lod, Munich and Khartoum.

speakers-but
I think I owe it to this Council, after the
enlightening statement that has just been made, to put
before the Council some more enlightening statements from
Israel.
62. I have with me here this week’s issue of Time
magazine, dated 30 July 1973, containing an interview
between Time diplomatic editor Jerrold Schecter and the
head of the military establishment in Israel, Mr. Moshe
Dayan. Let me read from it verbatim, because I do not
want to go into an exercise of distortion of declarations of
the sort that has been indulged in here. Speaking about the
occupation lines that are going to stay until agreement
between Israel and Egypt through negotiations or dialogue
or whatever else will indeed effect the liberation of
Egyptian territory, Mr. Dayan says: “The next 10 years will
see the borders frozen along present lines-but there will
not be a major war.” About the United Nations, whose
Charter and duties were just mentioned, Mr. Dayan says the
following:

56. The implications of a resolution of such a nature
would be destructive. It would mean the end of resolution
242 (1967) as an agreed basis for settlement of the conflict.
It would make futile whatever effort the Secretary-General
might have planned to undertake in the cause of peace.
Indeed, it would cripple the ability of the United Nations
to play a role in the Middle East situation. It would
constitute a serious setback for the prospects of initiating
negotiation and agreement.

“Nobody has faith in the United Nations: first of all,
because it has no power, and its composition”-the
whole
of the United Nations-“is
absolutely against us. It can
never have any positive decisions for us, so how can we
rely on it? It is powerlessand it’s againstus. All those
Communist countries and Arab countries and African
countries. It is the worst place for us to go and put our
case.”

57. The question that poses itself is: why should Egypt be
acting in a way that makes such a development inevitable?
The answer must be sought in the peculiar character of
Egyptian policy regarding Israel. In Egypt’s attitude and
acts on the Middle East situation there seems always to
have been an undercurrent of courting disaster. Peace
between Israel and Egypt could have been attained long ago
if Egypt had charted its policies and decided on its actions
with due deliberation. Instead, by continuous war and
hostility
it has followed a course that has led to unavoidable disaster time and again. That was what happened in
1948, in 1956 and in 1967. Today, it is evident that the
position Egypt has adopted in the present debate cannot
advance a settlement of the conflict. Egypt itself knows
this, and even says so openly. Yet it pursues this course,
though it can only lead to an aggravation of the situation.
This is a sad fact, but not necessarily a surprising one in the
light of past experiences.

As to Palestinehe hasthis to say:
“There is no more Palestine.Finished. I should have
said I’m sorry, but I’m not sorry. There are Palestinians,
and there was a country namedPalestine.That Palestine
was divided between Israel and Jordan so there are
Palestinianpeople but there is not any PalestinianState.
The country called Palestinevanishedin 1948. Palestine
should be a part of the State of Jordan. Call it the
Palestinezone in the Federation of Jordan, call it what
you like, but not an independentState.”

58. What is surprising is that Egypt’s friends, instead of
encouraging and assisting it to modify its position, simply
watch Egypt hurling itself against a wall of its own creation.
It is surprising that Egypt’s friends do not indicate that this
is both harmful to its interests and unnecessary. There is an
opening in the wall. Egypt could pass through it and move
toward a solution of the conflict and genuine peace. This
opening is provided by the possibility to enter into a serious
dialogue with Israel. This opening is one of the most
important
and hopeful factors in the Middle East situation,
a factor completely ignored by the present draft.

And this is what Mr. Dayan hasto sayabout other occupied
territories:
“
Israel must stay in the Golan Heights;. . . Sharmel
She’ikh. . . is not essentialin any way for Egypt. We
should stay there. Sinai shouldbe divided by one line or
another.”
Lastly, with regardto the super-Powers,
Mr. Dayan says:
“I think the most important thing is the armswe got
from the Americans. Becausewe are strong, then the
problem for the Russiansis how to dealwith uswithout
getting much more deeply involved militarily. Hadwe not
been militarily strong, we would not have been able to
oppose all kinds of pressure,and the Egyptianswould
have tried exerting military pressureon us.”

59. Under the Charter of the United Nations the responsibility of the Security Council is to promote international
peace and security. It would be lamentable if the Security
Council, by adopting the text presented to it today, were to
contribute
to an aggravation of the situation in the Middle
East.

63. The last sentence,with which I endmy quotation and
my statement, is the following, which I hope the representative of the United Statesof America will hear:

60. The PRESIDENT:
The next name on my list of
speakers is that of the Foreign Minister of Egypt, on whom
I now call.
61. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT
(Egypt): I had not intended to
speak today-indeed
1 had not put my name on the list of

“We can even allow ourselvesto disagreewith our
friends”-which means:“With the military power we have
7

in our hands, we not only defy the United Nations, we
not only defy Egypt, but indeed we can defy the United
States of America.”

71. Tunisia feels that the solution of the Middle East
problem can be achieved by negotiation, which, incidentally, is not the only means of settling a conflict. An
objective analysisof past events and our own experience
have confirmed us in this conviction. Nevertheless, we
consider that negotiation should not constitute an end in
itself. In this case, negotiation, a judicious meansof
peacefully resolving disputes,is onIy useful and desirableif
it is undertaken in clarity and to the extent that it makesit
possible to achieve something positive. For that, it is
necessaryfor negotiation to take place in a climate of
tranquillity, open to no possible misunderstandingor bad
faith.

64. The PRESIDENT:
I have just received a letter from
the representative of Tunisia in which he risks to be allowed
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote.
As there is no objection, I accordingly invite him to take
part in our discussion.

At the invitation of the fiesident, Mr. R. Driss (Tunisia)
took a place at the Council table.
65. Mr. DRISS (Tunisia) (ih’terpretation from French):
Mr. President, the Tunisian delegation would first of all like
to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. This is all the more noteworthy because you
returned to New York, after having bid us farewell,
expressly to assume the presidency. We regretted your
departure, and we welcome you back.

72. Unfortunately, we have to note that this is not the
intention of Israel. President Bourguiba has clearly stated
this. He stated it on Saturday, 7 July 1973, when he stated

in Le Monde:

66. I should like also to thank all representatives of
member States of the Council who were kind enough to
permit us to speak in the extremely important debate for
which we are assembled today. My delegation, of course,
would like to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of the Soviet Union, Ambassador Ma& for th.e
expert way in which he presided over the Council last
month.
67. We had not intended to speak in the Council debate
on the Middle East question but since the name of my
country and that of our President were repeatedly mentioned at the 1733rd meeting, on 20 July 1973, it seemed
to me worth while to make a statement in order to make
certain clarifications necessitated by the statement of the
representative of Israel.
68. The Middle East conflict is the result primarily of a
seriousinjustice which was done to the people of Palestine
and also of a series of misunderstandings and acts of
aggressionwhich have onIy served to complicate further a
problem which was very complicated at the outset. It is a
secret to no one that the unfortunate development of
events in this grave problem has now reached a deadlock.
However, Tunisia remains firmly convinced that peace.in
the Middle East can be restored, becauseour attachment to
the principles and ideals of the United Nations Charter is
unswerving.
69. It is within this framework that we view the most
recent initiative of President Bourguiba, who, in his concern
for peace and justice, thought it was his duty to make a
seriesof propo& that could lead to a peaceful solution to
the conflict.
70. In his statement the representative of Israel mentioned
the appeal of President Bourguiba that the conflict be
resolved by the best peaceful means, which is that of
negotiation. The representative of Israel, however, quite
deliberately cast doubt upon the Tunisian concept of
negotiation. It is our duty to set matters straight so that no
misunderstandingcan remain in the minds of membersof
this CounciI.
8

“What I can say doesnot constitute a response,but I do
think it useful to make even clearer what I think about
the gulf which divides us and which makesimprobable, if
useless,a meeting with the leaders of Israel, becauseit
could not lead to anything worth while; it emergesfrom
the statementsof the Israelis that they want to impose
prior conditions to any meeting, to a recognition of the
status qwo, a maintenanceof the new frontiers. It is for
two reasonsthat I am making my proposal. First, because
I considerthat to maintain the status quo is a bad thing
which can only lead to hatred and complicate the
problem even further, and also becauseI have noted a
changedattitude on the part of Arab leaderswith regard
to the existenceof Israel. For example, I quote the words
of the Foreign Minister of Egypt Mr. El-Zayyat, who said
that the Arab countries were ready to recognize Israel and
to makepeace.
“This change on the part of the Arab leaders is an
extremely important fact, and if reason prevails over the
superiority complex and the pride of some and the
humiliation of others, then the future can lead to a
solution which will be good for everyone: Israelis,
Palestinians, and Arabs. Mr. El-Zayyat talks of recognizing Israel, but it is not the greater Israel which he is
talking about, but the Israel of 1947, which was
legitimized by the United Nations.
“The change in attitude on the part of the Arabs
completely transforms the elements of the problem.
Previously, when the Arabs were unwilling to recognizc
the decision of the United Nations, which created Israel
and which delimited its frontiers, the problem existed in
terms of life and death for Israel. Israel felt itself in
danger of elimination, of extermination, of being thrown
into the seaby all the Arab countries, which did not wish
to recognize its existence in spite of the vote of the
United Nations. It was then that the problem of Israel’s
security aroseand Security Council resolution 242 (1967)
attempted to clarify this by mentioning secure and
recognized frontiers. Mr. Eban confirmed this thought,
when he mentioned the lapsingof the decision of 1947.
But this argument can be used against Israel, becauseif
the decision is no longer valid, Israel itself is no longer
valid, becausethis is, as it were, its birth certificate.

Bayan has said that ‘we shall not give up an inch of soil, it
is a question of security’. Mr. Eban was more subtle and
abandoned that argument, but the attitude of Israel is
nevertheless just as intransigent.”
73. Thus it emerges clearly that a possible meeting with
the Israelis has proved impossible -and I stress this word
“impossible”.
While Tunisia considers that it is necessary
that Israel should recognize the resolution of 1947 as the
positive basis for negotiation, the lsraeli Government replies
by an attitude of obstructionism
and negativism, as
indicated by its refusal to withdraw from the occupied
territories,
territories occupied in the 196’7 war. This
attitude on the part of Israel is also clearly confirmed in the
reply to the representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Jarring.
74. The position of Tunisia in the face of the grave
problem of the Middle East is well known and has been
known for a long time. But we should Iike to take this
opportunity
here to reaffirm once again our total support
for the Arab Republic of Egypt and the Arab countries
whose territories have been occupied and our profound
conviction
that any agreement providing for the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East should
necessarily proceed through withdrawal from all occupied
territories
and the restoration to the Palestinian people of
their national rights.
75. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of lsrael
in exercise of his right of reply.
76. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have listened carefully to the
statement
made by the representative of Tunjsia and take
note of his elaborations regarding President Bourguiba’s
proposal
for negotiations between Israel and the Arab
States. I am certain that all agree that the central, most
important
element in that proposal is the support for the
only method that could bring about, in our view and in the
light of international experience, genuine peace between
Israel and its Arab neighbours. Consequently, this is the
thought,
this is the conclusion that those who are actively
engaged in the search for peace in the Middle East should
retain. The conditions, the circumstances are secondary to
this fundamental and central premise, that negotiations
between
Israel and the Arab States are essential, are
inevitable, are being supported even by distinguished voices
in the Arab world.
‘77. The Foreign Minister of Egypt chose to comment on a
number of remarks made by Israel’s Minister of Defence. I
could not see exactly the purpose of repeating these
publicly circulated observations by General Dayan until the
Foreign Minister of Egypt reached the real point which he
wanted
to make. He started out by quoting General
Dayan’s
views on the border. In fact, the Minister of
Defence of Israel did say that in his view the borders would
rcrnain frozen for 10 years. But why? Why? That is the
question. The answer is because Egypt refuses to negotiate
pace with Israel, because Egypt refuses to agree on secure
and recognized boundaries that would replace the present
cease-fire lines on which Israeli armed forces are deployed.
The key is in Egypt’s hands. We are still waiting for an
indication on the part of the Government of Egypt that it is

ready to initiate, to enter into a serious dialogue with us
that would hopefully and, we believe, surely lead to
agreement between the two States.
‘78. Minister El-Zayyat referred to General Dayan’s comments on the United Nations. In my statement earlier at
this meeting I expressed similar views. Mr. Hasanin Heykal,
an adviser and close confidant of Egypt’s President,
expressed exactly the same views in Al-.4lzrum when he said
that the United Nations is “a mere stage of free deliberations, without any difference between what is going on
there and what visitors can see on the corners of Hyde Park
in London”. Apparently, General Dayan’s views, the Israeli
views, regarding the LJnited Nations are shared by distinguished Egyptian leaders,
79. But I think I should take this opportunity to put on
record a very interesting comment, a frank, realistic
appraisal of how we the Ilnited Nations appear in the eyes
of outside and objective observers. I quotr from an article
which appeared in the prestigious New Statesman on 4 May
1973. It was written by Paul Johnson, a former editor. He
says:
“ . _ . the United Nations has become an arena for
nation-State behaviour at its worst: hypocritical horsetrading, the formation of voting blocs united not by
common principles but by the backstage bargains of
real-politik, and the triumph of collective might over
individual right. Moral issues have been settled by
head-counting, and the claims of the guilty but well
connected have been preferred to those of the innocent
but friendless. The operations of the Arab bloc . . . have
shown United Nations politics at its most disreputable,
and most damaging to the institution itself. And the most
frequent victim of the system has been Israel.”
Apparently, the assessment which Minister El-Zayyat
quoted from the interview with General Dayan is wideIy
shared all over the world.
80. I said that I understood what the real purpose of
Minister El-Zayyat’s intervention here was as he went on
quoting from the statement by Israel’s Minister of Defence
and reached the point at which he expressed his unhappiness with General Dayan’s remarks regarding Palestine. All
that Israel’s Minister of Defence said is borne out by
history. All of us are aware of the fact that the geographic
area known as Palestine first came into being after the
destruction of the Jewish State by the Romans and in an
attempt to eliminate any reference to Jewish names. The
political entity known as Palestine, which came into being
artificially as a result of agreements between what the Arab
delegations freclucntly call here the imperialist Powers in
1917-l 918 after the First World War, was in fact partitioned, divided into two-Trans-Jordan
and the West
Bank--and disappeared as a political entity in 1948 when
the State of Israel declared its independence. What is
wrong, what is incorrect in this statement of historic fact?
81. But Minister El-Zayyat understandably is unhappy
with this description because he is not satisfied with the
fact that jn the area of Palestine there are today two
independent States-the Palestinian Arab State of Jordan

and the sovereign Jewish State. He has made it clear from
t.e very beginning of this series of meetings that Egypt’s
intention, Egypt’s objective, his own aspiration is to see the
dismemberment of one of those independent States established within the area of Palestine, and perhaps the
destruction of the other. @bviously, a comment by an
Israeli reflecting known historic facts but contrary to the
sinister designs of Egypt regarding the future of the area of
Palestine, regarding Israel’s sovereignty and independence,
regarding Jordan’s sovereignty and independence cannot be
to the satisfaction of the Egyptian Foreign Minister.

85. Now, it is true-and we are all aware of the fact-that
there is probably more light in this chamber,perhaps,than
in any other hall in any other part of the world. But to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt 1 would say: Thisis
artificial light. The real light is there in the area,and if you
are looking for the key, if you really want to find the way
to peace with Israel, you will fiid it not here in the
artificial light of the Security Council chamber,but in the
Middle East, in contacts, in negotiation, in joint construction of peacewith Israel.

82. The d.ay before yesterday, OP 23 July, President Sadat
of Egypt made a speech on the occasion of the anniversary
of the Egyptian revolution. The most important points in it
were: one, a reaffirmation of the Khartoum resolution of
1967-no peace, no agreement, no recognition of Israel;
two, a reaffirmation of the view that there can be no
political solution of the Middle East conflict and that war is
the only way to resolve it; three, a reaffirmation of Egypt’s
unreserved support for the terrorist organizations; four, a
reaffirmation of the notorious Egyptian two-stage doctrine,
namely, first Israeli withdrawal to the pre-June 1967 lines
and then the continuation of the struggle till the Palestinians achieve their aims-and these are well known: the
destruction of Israel, the annihilation of its people.

86. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof
Jordan.
87. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): I wish that the disagreement
of Jordan with General Dayan was a semanticone or an
academicone with regard to the geographicalextent of
Palestineand the application of the name,or with regardto
the nature of the people. That, again, could have been
ascertainedby ohjcctive observers.Unfortunately, however,
the fundamentaldisagreementisone basedon the existence
of General Dayan’s troops on Jordanian territory, on
Palestinianterritory, on Arab territory. The solution to that
is not academic and is not semantic. It can be brought
about only by an act of will, by action, and if this is not
done willingly by General Dayan’s Government it will
certainly be the responsibility of this Council to seeto it
that this matter, which is not semanticand not academic,is
settled on the ground.

83. I believe that not only the Israeli Government but all
Governments attach particular importance to official statements by the Head of State of Egypt and consider them
even more important than the statements delivered by
Egyptian representatives to score tactical points in a
Security Council debate, though these statements do reveal
to a sufficient degree Egypt’s true attitude and intentions.
Indeed, if any documents can be considered as authoritative
enunciations of the Egyptian position, they are the statements by Egypt’s President. There can be no mistake about
it in view of these facts. Support for Egypt in the present
debate is in fact support for the war1ik.e views and the
sinister designs reflected in President Sadat’s statement two
days ago.

88. The PRESIDENT: There are no further nameson the
list of speakers.Th? Council now has before it the draft
resolution contained in document S/10974, sponsoredby
the delegations of Guinea, India, Indonesia, Kenya,
Panama,Peru, the Sudan and Yugoslavia. This was circuIated last night and has just beenintroduced, as members
have heard, by the representatives of India, Kenya,
Indonesiaand Yugoslavia. I understandthat it is the wishof
the sponsorsthat, before the draft resolution is put to the
vote, the Council should adjourn for 24 hours to pennit
delegationsto receive instructions. I trust this period will
also be usedfor further consultationsin the hope that this
debate may have a positive outcome. Needlessto say, if
there is anything I can do as President to help in SUCII
consultations,I am at the disposalof the membersof the
Council.

84. There is a story about how a man saw Nasr Ad-Din
searching for something on the ground “What have you
lost, Mullah? “, he asked. “My key”, said the mullah. So
they both went down on their knees and looked for it.
After a time, and not being able to find the key, the man
asked, “Where exactly did you drop it? ” “In my own
house”, was the reply. “Then why arc you looking for it
here? ” “You see”. said the mullah, “there is more light
here than insidemy own house”.

‘171e
meetingme at 12.35 p.m.

10

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price: $U.S. 1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)
