S/PV.7824

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7824th meeting

Friday, 2 December 2016, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Okamura
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Taula
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Fesko
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Coleman
Mrs. Carrión
Mr. Méndez Graterol

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Special report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (S/2016/968)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-41112 (E)
*1641112*

S/PV.7824

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): As this is the first
public meeting of the Security Council for the month
of December, I should like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute, on behalf of the Council, to His Excellency
Ambassador Fodé Seck, Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Senegal, for his service as President of
the Council for the month of November. I am sure I speak
for all the members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Seck and his delegation for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Special report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (S/2016/968)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Liberia to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Per Thöresson, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden and representative of the
Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
Ms. Victoria Wollie, National Coordinator for the
West Africa Network for Peacebuilding — Women in
Peacebuilding Network in Liberia.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/968, which contains the special
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to present to the Security Council
the Secretary-General’s special report on Liberia
(S/2016/968). I would like to begin by expressing my
2/9

02/12/2016

deep appreciation for the long-standing support that
the Council has given Liberia, in particular through the
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL).
As members are aware, the strategic assessment
of Liberia is the third and final such exercise we
conducted in West Africa this year, which collectively
have resulted in what I think is a reshaping of the
peacekeeping footprint in the region. As the report
indicates, the political environment in Liberia is
dominated by preparations for the presidential and
legislative elections scheduled for October 2017. That
should lead to the inauguration of the next President in
January 2018, which will mark a historic milestone for
Liberia’s democracy. Peaceful and successful elections
and post-election leadership transition will be key to
ensuring Liberia’s stability. What happens next year,
therefore, will be critical. It will demonstrate whether
the foundations of peace that we have been building
since the conflict ended 13 years ago are strong enough
to be sustained. It is incumbent upon the people and
the Government of Liberia, with support from their
partners, to ensure that measures are put in place now
to deliver free, fair, transparent and credible elections,
the outcomes of which are accepted by all.
There have been some promising developments
on the political front since September, when we
undertook the assessment that provided the basis for
the report of the Secretary-General. At that time, an
ongoing standoff within the House of Representatives
had effectively stalled the legislative agenda, including
reforms that were essential for sustaining peace. As
it happened, however, on 5 October, the House of
Representatives elected a new Speaker, who announced
that he would focus on improving the relationships and
coordination with Government so as to make progress
on the development agenda.
On 8 November, the legislature reconvened for a
one-month extraordinary session, in the midst of its
annual recess, in order to advance work on critical
legislation. For instance, it adopted the Land Authority
Act and ratified 32 Economic Community of West
African States protocols and conventions, including
on democracy and good governance. The legislature
also considered constitutional amendments submitted
by the President more than a year ago, as well as
a package of legislation on land reform, economic
and financial frameworks and counter-terrorism. I
think that demonstrates the commitment of elected
16-41112

02/12/2016

The situation in Liberia

representatives to deliver results to their constituents.
We look forward to seeing further concrete progress in
advancing the legislative agenda.
There was also some realignment among the
political parties. In November, three major opposition
parties formed the Coalition for Democratic Change in
order to challenge the ruling Unity Party in the October
elections next year.
In a nutshell, Liberia remains stable. Since the
conclusion of the security transition in June, there
have been no serious incidents that have warranted
the intervention of UNMIL. Indeed, there have been
no incidents that have justified an armed response
from UNMIL in the entirety of 2016. The assessment
team, led by my colleague Mr. El-Ghassim Wane,
was particularly impressed by the commitment and
determination of the national security personnel. Despite
facing serious constraints with respect to finances,
logistics and basic equipment, the women and men that
make up the national security personnel demonstrated
resolve in performing their sovereign responsibilities of
protecting the population and securing the State.
The security agencies have continued to develop. The
Liberia National Police has increased its strength since
the assessment was conducted. The Drug Enforcement
Agency has conducted important operations in
partnership with INTERPOL. The national police and
immigration services are considering new legislation
that, if implemented, will help consolidate professional
law enforcement institutions with strong civilian
oversight mechanisms to protect the public against any
abuses. However, sustaining those gains that have been
made will require continued and greater investment
in the security sector, as well as commensurate
improvements in the justice and corrections sectors.
The Government of Liberia has many priorities to
address in the final year of the present Administration
in order to ensure that it hands over to the next
Administration a country that is truly on the path of
transformation. There are many political and institutional
reforms that must be adopted and implemented.
Security and defence institutions require continued
development. Democratic oversight mechanisms must
be established and equipped to effectively perform their
roles. A human rights institution must be established
with an expanded mandate, which requires that there
be adequate capacities and resources in order for that
institution to perform its mandate. Citizens continue

S/PV.7824

to expect to receive the most basic services from their
Government. Let us not forget that there is a major
electoral process on the horizon, which will require
considerable resources.
All of those, and other, priorities must be taken
forward in a very limited fiscal space. Eighty-seven per
cent of the approximately $600 million national budget
is earmarked for recurrent expenses. We know that the
economic environment is one of complete austerity
that features negligible growth projections. Since the
Secretary-General’s special report was published, the
Government has instructed all ministries, agencies and
other governmental bodies to save an additional 5 per
cent from their approved budgets.
Two years ago, the Council set a deadline for the
full assumption of UNMIL’s security responsibilities
by national institutions. That decision was a remarkable
demonstration of confidence that the country had
overcome the instability and dependency of the past.
It was no small challenge for a fragile country that was
freshly emerging from the devastation of Ebola, which
the Council recognized as a threat to international
peace and stability. However, the Liberian institutions
rose to that challenge and met the 30 June deadline for
the security transition.
After a careful assessment of the progress and
remaining challenges, the Secretary-General’s special
report outlines three possible options regarding the
future of UNMIL, taking into account the parameters
provided by the Council, namely, the security situation
in the country and Liberia’s overall capacity to maintain
stability. Those options are as follows: first, there is
the option of withdrawing UNMIL and establishing
a successor mission; secondly, there is the option of
maintaining the status quo; and, thirdly, there is the
option of continuing the drawdown of UNMIL.
Irrespective of the Council’s decision, it would,
in our view, be important that Liberia remain on the
Council’s agenda through the establishment of the
next Administration. We will engage closely with that
Administration in developing recommendations on
the future of the engagement of the United Nations in
Liberia beyond June 2018. Over the next 18 months,
it will be necessary to retain a mission that is able
to provide strong good offices and political support,
mentoring of the security and rule-of-law institutions,
as well as human rights monitoring and capacitybuilding. Although we have full confidence in the

16-411123/9

S/PV.7824

The situation in Liberia

02/12/2016

ability of the national security services, we consider it
essential that there remain some capacity to respond,
in extremis, should there be a deterioration of stability
that entails a strategic reversal.

resources; a nation fully responsible for its own destiny,
with institutions and a Government that provide the
basic guarantees of security, protection and services to
its citizens.

Therefore, for each of the three options outlined in
the Secretary-General’s special report, a crucial aspect
of our contingency planning is the quick reaction
force, which is presently in Yamoussoukro, Côte
d’Ivoire. That unit will transfer to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali when the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire ends early next year. As the Council is aware,
that unit has a mandate to provide over-the-horizon
support for Liberia in support of the front-line response
of the Liberian security and defence forces. The Council
may also recall that part of that unit was deployed to the
Central African Republic last year, where it provided
remarkable and essential support during the visit of His
Holiness the Pope, to Bangui, as well as in preparation
of the country’s presidential elections.

Clearly, we are now in the final stretch of the life
cycle of UNMIL. Both the Liberians and their partners
would stand to gain by ending this cycle as soon as
possible so that Liberia can fully take upon itself the
responsibilities of a sovereign State. But precisely
because it is the final stretch, it must be handled with
delicacy and prudence. We must keep in mind that the
success of UNMIL will be assessed not only on the
basis of the impressive results achieved in just under
13 years, but also on the way UNMIL withdraws from
Liberia and, maybe above all, on the perception that the
Liberians will retain after its has left.

The assessment team also heard the call made by
members of Liberian civil society that we undertake
serious introspection about our failures in Liberia
with a view to moving forward on the basis of mutual
accountability through the elaboration of a compact,
as we have just done on an experimental basis in
the Central African Republic. That compact would
establish a framework of mutual accountability,
which would strengthen the partnership and future
engagement between the Government of Liberia and
the United Nations.
Throughout its history, Liberia has been a country
that has demonstrated remarkable resilience and a
great ability to overcome seemingly unsurmountable
adversity. Liberians are a people who have
endured — and are still enduring — the devastation
wrought by more than a century of systemic exclusion,
decades of dysfunction and 14 years of successive,
brutal civil wars. Not so long ago, they were confronted
with the national tragedy of Ebola for over a year. And
yet, the country continues to transcend adversity. It
must continue on its path of positive transformation.
The people and the Government of Liberia
must take forward the essential work of building
a nation — a unified, reconciled nation with an
accountable Government committed to addressing
corruption within its ranks; a nation where all citizens
share the benefits of Liberia’s abundant natural
4/9

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
To that end, let me take this opportunity to remind
speakers that the presidency will use the flashing lights
on the collars of the microphones to prompt speakers to
bring their remarks to a close. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate the texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to Mr. Thöresson.
Mr. Thöresson: I thank you, Mr. President, for
the invitation to brief the Security Council on behalf
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Let me also
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of December.
We meet at a pivotal point in time, ahead of the
Security Council’s decision on the future of the
United Nations peacekeeping presence in Liberia.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to present the
conclusions and recommendations emanating from a
recent trip to Liberia and a multi-stakeholder forum on
sustaining peace through transition in Liberia, hosted
by the Peacebuilding Commission and the Government
of Liberia.
The objective of the visit was to identify
peacebuilding priorities during the transition and
beyond the peacekeeping presence in the country, and
to complement the atrategic assessment mission led
16-41112

02/12/2016

The situation in Liberia

by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The
Chair met with the President of Liberia, several senior
representatives of the Government, civil society, the
United Nations leadership, members of the international
community and political parties. The written report
from the trip has been shared with the Security Council.
Two main questions guided the deliberations in
Monrovia: first, what must be done to address remaining
root causes of conflict in Liberia and, secondly, what
should international support look like after the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)? Let me highlight
the key conclusions.
First of all, while no one seems to believe that
Liberia is facing an imminent risk of relapsing into
conflict, there was general agreement that the root
causes and potential triggers of conflict in Liberia
remain unresolved and demand concerted attention.
Reconciliation has not yet fully taken place — which
was also acknowledged by the President himself. The
nation has yet to address the grievances of a large
marginalized majority, and must also go back to
implementing the road map for national reconciliation.

S/PV.7824

the forum is that critical gaps remain in institutional
capacity. The rule of law remains weak and access to
justice constitutes an ongoing challenge.
The large disenfranchised youth constitutes a
real risk factor. Making jobs available for youth,
engaging them and ensuring meaningful channels
for participation is important — not least now in the
run-up to the elections. The right support should be
provided to ensure that the youth can play an active role
in peacebuilding.
That leads me to another key point of discussion
during the PBC visit — the presidential and legislative
election in October 2017. The election was described as
a defining moment for Liberia, as the first democratic
transfer of power from one living president to another
since it became a republic. A successful election
and peaceful transition would further consolidate
democracy and good governance.

Strong political leadership is required to fully and
comprehensively address reconciliation in Liberia. In
that connection, the need to forge a common national
identity was identified and stressed repeatedly at the
multi-stakeholder forum. That tells us that reconciliation
in Liberia goes beyond coming to terms with what took
place during the civil war. Building social cohesion
requires addressing historical inequalities and unequal
access to resources and power. That, in turn, relates to
the need of extending State authority beyond Monrovia,
providing basic social services in rural communities,
forging a stronger relationship between the State and
its citizens and building trust in security institutions.

As is often the case, the running of an election is
fraught with the risk of tensions. More than 20 candidates
are running for President. Efforts to establish solid
mechanisms for dispute resolution early on, as well as
drafting joint codes of conduct and managing run-offs,
should be supported and prioritized. We understand
that UNMIL is heavily involved in such efforts, along
with the National Election Commission, both providing
crucial support. Other priorities in preparing for a
successful election are civic education, awarenessraising and outreach to a largely disenfranchised
population. A special focus on the active participation
of women is needed. Several interlocutors in Monrovia
noted that it would be premature to withdraw the
peacekeeping Mission before the elections. Even a
smaller presence, with police contingents could play an
important role.

It is encouraging to note some degree of progress
on legislative reforms essential to peacebuilding and
State-building, including those concerning land rights,
decentralization and governance. However, while some
progress has been made in the legislative process,
certain regulations still need to be passed, and we must
continue to monitor the situation. The passing of the
Land Rights Act would not only address crucial property
rights, but would also help reform the agricultural sector
in Liberia, which is falling short of delivering on its
potential. Government leadership is needed to promote
structural reform as a critical preventive measure
before the elections. Another message emanating from

It is important to be aware of the current
socioeconomic situation in which the election and
transition will take place. The Liberian economy is under
considerable stress, in the aftermath of both Ebola and
the downturn in prices of iron ore and rubber. Economic
growth has not increased at all over the past three
years, and the International Monetary Fund projection
for 2016 is -0.5 per cent. That limits the fiscal space
available for taking forward critical peacebuilding
reforms under the current Administration. Economic
growth is dependent upon economic diversification,
but the foundation is weak. The economy faces huge
challenges, such as the decline in Government revenue,

16-411125/9

S/PV.7824

The situation in Liberia

overreliance on concessions, social exclusion in the
governance structure and the need for structural
reforms to improve the business environment. During
the visit, daunting statistics regarding education were
presented: 63 per cent of Liberian children are not
attending school. This is a key challenge today with
real implications for the future.
Where does that leave us? Liberia is facing an
incredibly important year in 2017, with a defining
election. Many root causes remain unaddressed. After
the peacekeepers withdraw, there will be residual
peacebuilding tasks — some of which address root
causes of conflict that remain unresolved in Liberia
and require sustained international support. Those
factors should be borne in mind when the future of
the United Nations presence beyond December 2016
is decided. Given 13 years of massive investment in
UNMIL, it will be important to ensure a responsible
and careful drawdown that safeguards the gains and
achievements made and sends Liberia on a stable and
robust path towards the further consolidation of peace.
The United Nations leadership in Monrovia still plays
a key role. Preserving the function of its good offices
will be useful during the period when there will be a
heightened risk of tension in the lead-up and during the
elections next year.
In conclusion, it is crucial to maintain international
attention on Liberia at this critical time. An immediate
task is to ensure that the remaining United Nations
presence is set up and resourced to respond to the
continuous need for peacebuilding support. The PBC
therefore encourages the entire United Nations system
to intensify collaborative and strategic planning, and
looks forward to engaging in a regular dialogue with
the stakeholders on how that is proceeding and to offer
further support.
For its part, the Commission stands ready to
continue its political accompaniment by ensuring
continued international attention on Liberia, in the
event that Liberia leaves the agenda of the Security
Council, and assisting by drawing attention to gaps. The
PBC is committed to making substantive contributions
to the Council’s deliberations, and those of us who have
dual membership in the Council and the PBC will make
sure to play our part in strengthening our advisory and
bridging role. The PBC will also undertake continued
advocacy on the importance of pursuing reforms that
are central to State-building and sustainable peace
in Liberia.
6/9

02/12/2016

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Thöresson for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Wollie.
Ms. Wollie: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council and
speak on behalf of Liberian women and women’s
organizations. I would like to thank the Spanish
Ambassador in particular, not only for opening up
this space for the voice of civil society, but for Spain’s
leadership in the Security Council on the women and
peace and security agenda over the past two years.
Liberia is at a critical junction as the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) continues its
drawdown. That coincides with the upcoming 2017
electoral processes. UNMIL played a major role in the
2005 and 2011 elections, providing up to 70 per cent of
security and logistical support in many ways, such as
airlifting ballot boxes where there was no road access
and augmenting security.
As I speak to the Council today, I am expressing the
fears of the women of Liberia regarding security and
logistical gaps without UNMIL, which could present
challenges that could be exploited by unscrupulous
politicians to question the credibility of the elections,
thereby triggering unwanted violence. On behalf of the
women of Liberia, I call on the Security Council to take
that into consideration when discussing the future of
the United Nations presence in Liberia, especially for
the 2017 election and the period immediately following.
Another major security concern for women and girls
is the proliferation of illicit drugs in the country, which
especially affects young people and ex-combatants.
Many of those young people are involved in various
crimes, such as sexual and gender-based violence, armed
robbery and mob violence. That is a serious security
threat as UNMIL draws down. It requires support for
an effective national response to those problems, from
enhancement of law enforcement capacity to better
programmes for treatment and rehabilitation. Those
will contribute to peace consolidation.
As the international community prepares to assist
Liberia in the conduct of presidential and legislative
elections, please remember that women’s representation
in the national legislature and in local districts is
extremely low. While the lack of major security
incidents is proof that UNMIL has completed its
mission and can leave, please remember that sexual and
16-41112

02/12/2016

The situation in Liberia

gender-based violence continues to be the number one
crime reported to the police. As the report (S/2016/968)
of the Secretary-General notes, in the more than 1,500
cases of rape registered in 2014 and 2015, less than
4 per cent of the alleged perpetrators were convicted,
and that trend has continued in 2016.
In Liberia women and girls are victims of harmful
traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation,
child marriage and abductions and forcible initiations
into secret societies. As we place our hopes in meeting
the Sustainable Development Goals, please remember
that less than 9 per cent of Liberian girls complete
secondary education, and that part of the reason for
that is because they are exposed to alarming levels of
violence, abuse and exploitation in schools.
Liberian women need the Peacebuilding Commission
to fill any gaps left by the possible departure of the
peacekeeping Mission. In the past few years, the
Peacebuilding Fund has invested in the work of women’s
organizations in Liberia. With its support, women-led
peace huts have served as a safe spaces for women and
contributed to resolving local conflicts for years. We
hope that that type of support will be scaled up so that
women can participate in peaceful elections and help to
strengthen national reconciliation, the rule of law, the
security sector and an equitable management of natural
resources. Those are the kinds of investments that will
secure Liberia’s path to peace consolidation.
With support from the Peacebuilding Fund,
Liberian women, over the years, have developed the
resolve to stand up for their rights, and have seen a show
of solidarity in the passing of the rape law, domestic
violence act and the affirmative action act. That
kind of solidarity is also being exhibited as Liberian
women review the 2005 manifesto and update the 2017
manifesto, identifying and making recommendations on
issues that are important to women and girls in Liberia.
Increased funding to women and women civil
society organizations will maximize the potential
of Liberian women and the efforts being made by
the international community and the Government to
consolidate peace in Liberia. Inclusive communitybased early-warning initiatives that engage women
as early-warning monitors will enhance conflict
prevention in Liberia during the transition and beyond.
We can build on the Economic Community of West
African States Conflict Prevention Framework, which

S/PV.7824

includes the National Early Warning System and
National Response Mechanism.
A landmark study that looked at 70 countries over
four decades concluded that the most effective way
to reduce violence against women was the strength
of women’s organizations or women’s movement in
any given country. The international community has
celebrated, in this forum and many others, the heroic
contribution of Liberian women to ending the civil war,
helping disarm the armed groups, conduct peaceful
elections, prevent a relapse into conflict and defeat
the deadly Ebola epidemic. I represent those women
here today. I can tell the Council that there is no more
meaningful tribute to Liberian women than the longlasting and sustained partnership of the international
community. I hope that we will not be forgotten and
that the Council will continue to partner with us. If we
are strong, peace in Liberia will be strong.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Wollie for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the member of the
Council who wishes to make a statement.
Mrs. Carrión (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous for his briefing, and the Department for
Peacekeeping Operations for the strategic assessment
carried out in the Republic of Liberia. We are also
grateful to the Vice-Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission and to Victoria Wollie.
Uruguay is troubled by the situation in Liberia, not
just the current situation but also what could happen
in the future with high indicators of school dropout,
youth unemployment, an inefficient State aparatus and
economic crisis — open wounds from the past.
The results of the strategic assessment present us
with a range of options for the future regarding the
presence of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). However, we understand that the challenges
Liberia is currently facing will likely remain and
befall UNMIL or, sooner or later, befall the presence
of the United Nations. In that regard, we believe that
the Government and the people of Liberia should
focus efforts on building capacities to create better
opportunities in the long-term with a view to building
their own capacities and putting an end to their
dependency position.

16-411127/9

S/PV.7824

The situation in Liberia

However, the presidential and legislative elections
to be held in October constitute be a major landmark,
during which time the international community will
need to keep close watch over the process and be present
in supporting the Liberian people. To that end, Uruguay
believes it is necessary to maintain the presence of
UNMIL at least until after the upcoming elections. The
Mission will need to maintain some kind of structure in
order to act in the event of a deterioration of the situation.
For example, we are inclined towards option 3, but after
Council members reviewed the Secretariat’s assessment
to outline a presence that would achieve peace in the
country and protect, uphold and defend human rights,
it would ultimately have to act in a scenario of dire or
imminent instability. Therefore, it is important for the
Council to continue working closely with the Swedish
Ambassador as Chair of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure the
implementation of the recently adopted resolutions on
the review of the peacebuilding architecture.
Finally, we believe that peace in Liberia can be
achieved and sustained only through improving the
institutions guaranteeing national stability with a truly
inclusive process and national ownership, thereby
addressing the root causes that divide the population
with a view to achieving national reconciliation.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liberia.
Mr. Brown (Liberia): I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity to participate in the briefing.
Essentially, the defining question of the current
engagement of the Council is how and, importantly,
when can a transition from full peacekeeping operations
occur so that Liberia’s progress and the success
achieved at such high costs in lives and treasure are not
unnecessarily risked and regrettably undermined. As
to the important question of how, a number of measures
have been recommended by the Secretary-General in
defining the possible mandate of a successor mission.
The Liberian Government finds those measures to be
largely favourable. In response to the critical question
of when, the Liberian Government is proposing an
extension through a period of one year. Only one more
year to continue the phased withdrawal. One more year
to enable our recovering and reforming institutions
to continue to stand up as United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) draws down. One more year of
the presence of UNMIL, which represents to many
8/9

02/12/2016

Liberians a brand of confidence that would assist in
mitigating, if not deterring, the real risk of a disruption
during the country’s most sensitive political period.
Only one more year of working together in what for
Liberia is a successful partnership to properly prepare
for a successor mission and a democratically elected
Government to continue the useful partnership and
build upon the progress we have already made.
We understand the many concerns associated with
our request for an extension. There are concerns about
increasing dependencies by national institutions on the
international community. There are concerns that a
request for an extension may become recurring. There
are concerns that the resources contributed to UNMIL
are needed elsewhere, including in more troubled
spots in Africa and around the world. Those truly are
reasonable concerns.
The failure of the Liberian State, which necessitated
the deployment of UNMIL, also occasioned the greatest
collapse in the productive capacity of any nation since
the Second World War — an estimated collapse of
more than 90 per cent. Corroded over time, national
institutions were not simply defaced and rendered
dysfunctional, they were effectively eviscerated.
Dwindling public confidence was altogether lost, and
hope in a democratic future was non-existent.
Of course we have come a long way, thanks
to the continued support of those present. That
notwithstanding, we intend to meet our target of an
8,000-strong police force, fully deployed all across
the country from its current strength of 5,100, and to
ensure a continuous commitment of the police and all
other security institutions to training, including on the
important element of safeguarding human rights and
improved professional standards. The nearly 2,600
immigration officers will be further strengthened with
the completion of training facilities in northern Liberia
with a training capacity of 1,000 officers. And we
are proud that our military is growing in professional
competence with support especially from the United
States and other friendly Governments, and with
mentoring from Economic Community of West African
States. Access to justice, which was non-existent in
many parts of the country, is improving. Our security
institutions are demonstrating signs of increasing
readiness to stand up as UNMIL stands down.
To have UNMIL, such a confidence brand, walk
with Liberia for only one more year through this last
16-41112

02/12/2016

The situation in Liberia

mile is an added guarantee and priceless insurance,
which completes the United Nations Mission of keeping
the peace not only by the separation of belligerents,
but, importantly, also through a more meaningful
transformation of Liberia from a failed State to a
thriving democracy.
Indeed resources are finite. And yes, there are
growing needs in other parts of the world, including
on the African continent, for the resources of UNMIL.
We continue to consider the situation seriously and
take the needed steps within the limits of our means
to be removed from a dependence on UNMIL. And the
truth also is that the lack of resources, or the growing
need in other parts of the world for the resources of
UNMIL, must necessarily compel all of us — the
Liberian Government and the Security Council — to
bring this successful Mission to an end in a way that
may not require a return to the Security Council, nor
will the Security Council perceive a reason to redeploy
peacekeeping resources to Liberia in the foreseeable
future. In that regard, the potential risks, especially
pertaining to the conduct of unprecedented elections,
to which the recent assessment report (S/2016/968) of
the Secretary-General refers and the Peace Building
Commission alludes, should be avoided.
Whatever decision the Council takes, the truth
is that today Liberia is a better country — a more
peaceful and secure nation. We intend to keep it that
way. Again, we are grateful to the Security Council,
the other agencies of the United Nations as well as
our many bilateral and multilateral partners for their
continued support. We know that, because of their
priceless investments in Liberia’s peace and security,

S/PV.7824

today Liberians are increasingly hopeful and imbued
with a growing desire and a more realistic impulse,
at home and across the diaspora, to be the builders of
our future and the masters of our destiny. We know we
were brought to our knees by the prolonged tragedies of
self-implosion. But no nation has been more desperate
to recover. Again, we were recently ravaged by Ebola,
and are currently shackled by an economy under severe
stress. But the resiliency of our Liberian character — our
will to overcome — must never be taken for granted.
Even so, Liberia cannot afford another major shock
to our recovery. We simply cannot afford to ignore
the possibility, however remote, of another risk to our
ongoing recovery efforts. One more year is all that we
believe we will need to deter the looming risk: one more
year to afford a new Administration of the Liberian
Government the security it would need to continue the
recovery and reform processes without the baggage of
an inherited sense of insecurity.
We are really at the end of a long walk together
through UNMIL. We know it has been difficult, but
it has been worthwhile. It has lifted spirits, rekindled
hope and brought a country back from the depths of
its own self-destruction. That may not have been the
mandate per se, but no one can deny that this United
Nations Mission has been successful. Let us now end it
as sustainably, as responsibly and as successfully as we
know we possibly can.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

16-411129/9
