A/75/917–S/2021/562

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2021
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-fifth session
Agenda item 66 (b)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support: causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa

Security Council
Seventy-sixth year

Promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 74/302
of 3 September 2020, in which the Assembly requested the Secretary-General to
continue to monitor and report to the Assembly on an annual basis on persistent and
emerging challenges to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa. The title of the report has been adjusted to “Promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa” to reflect its forward-looking orientation.
Across the world, but notably in Africa, instability and conflict continue to
generate and exacerbate poverty and institutional fragility, which in turn decrease
resilience and the prospects for peace. Conflict has many different causes, drivers and
triggers. The present report examines the challenges of conflict prevention and
sustaining peace in Africa from a perspective that is often overlooked, na mely, the
role of weak or failed public service planning and delivery as a source of instability
and potential driver or trigger of conflict.
In the report, this challenge is explored through four main fault lines in public
service delivery observed in Africa, but which are not unique to the continent, namely,
inequality in access to services; planning processes and service delivery that do not
promote the inclusion of all segments of the population; corruption in service
delivery; and the delivery of services in areas where there are challenges to
governance.

21-07818 (E)

290621

*2107818*

A/75/917
S/2021/562

The report also contains examples of how the United Nations system makes use
of its diverse range of capacities to support prevention-focused development.
Measures are proposed to strengthen the collective efforts towards accelerating the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union during the decade of action for the Sustainable Development
Goals following a prevention-oriented approach.

2/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the request made by the General
Assembly in its resolution 74/302 of 3 September 2020, in which the Assembly
requested the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and report to the Assembly on
an annual basis on persistent and emerging challenges to the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, including the root causes of conflict and
conditions to promote sustainable development, as well as on the approach and
support of the United Nations system.
2.
Considerable efforts have been put in place by the United Nations to prioritize
conflict prevention and sustaining peace in order to remove the greatest obstacles to
the implementation of both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
Agenda 2063 of the African Union. Progress has been made in ensuring that all the
pillars of the United Nations system work together coherently to support Member
States in promoting sustainable peace and development.
3.
Across the world, but notably in Africa, instability and conflict continue to
generate and exacerbate poverty and are a key driver of the fragil ity of institutions,
which in turn decrease resilience and the prospects for peace. Conflict has many
different causes, drivers and triggers. The present report examines the challenges of
conflict prevention and sustaining peace in Africa by considering the role of weak or
failed public service planning and delivery as a source of instability and a potential
driver or trigger of conflict. The report also contains examples of how the United
Nations system makes use of its diverse range of capacities to suppo rt preventionfocused development, and measures are proposed to strengthen collective efforts to
accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063 during the
decade of action for the Sustainable Development Goals.
4.
In the preparation of the report, the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa
engaged with Member States, the General Assembly and the Peacebuilding
Commission. United Nations system entities were consulted through the
interdepartmental task force on African affairs. In particul ar, the Development
Coordination Office, the Africa Divisions of the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations, the Peacebuilding
Support Office, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Of fice
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the United
Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the World Food Programme and the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women),
contributed to the desk review. Thirty United Nations country teams based in Africa
provided field assessments that constitute the basis for the analysis. Representatives
from academia and experts were also consulted.

II. Conditions for durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa
5.
In the 22 years since the first report of the Secretary-General on causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa, the United
Nations has gained a deeper understanding of the various factors that fuel conflict in
Africa and the complex interrelationships that bind them. Yet, questions still remain
concerning how instability, conflict and development intersect and affect each other.
6.
African countries have achieved important socioeconomic gains in recent
decades. Between 2000 and 2018, Africa recorded an average annual gross domestic

21-07818

3/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

product (GDP) growth of 4.6 per cent, with 11 countries attaining middle -income or
higher-income status. 1 In a joint report issued in 2019, the African Union and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) highlighted the
convergence of several positive factors in the region that made this possible, including
significant infrastructure improvements, increased foreign investments, capacity
strengthening, the mobile phone revolution, growing entrepreneurship and innovation,
the progressive empowerment of women and the adoption of regional quality standards.
7.
In 2013, the African Union adopted an ambitious initiative entitled “Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020”. The initiative, which has been extended to 2030, was
supplemented by the African Union Master Roadmap of Practical Steps to Silence the
Guns in Africa by Year 2020, aimed at addressing the multiple factors that define the
interrelationship between sustainable development and conflict, such as weak governance
and socioeconomic inequities. By focusing on that interrelationship, the initiative
recognizes the need to address conflict to realize sustainable development and the vision
of Agenda 2063. The African Continental Free Trade Area, a major achievement for
Africa that came into operation in January 2021, is expected to create better conditions
for sustainable economic growth, job creation and improved living standards, thus
contributing to greater stability and peace (see S/2020/1310). In addition, the General
Assembly and the Security Council, in their recently adopted twin resolutions 75/201 and
2558 (2020), respectively, on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, reaffirmed that
effective peacebuilding must involve the entire United Nations system.
8.
In view of those developments, the annual report of the Secretary -General on
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa will take a
more multidimensional approach based on systematic monitoring and analysis of the
dynamic nature of the diverse and interconnected drivers of conflict, drawing on data,
research and consultations.
9.
The Office of the Special Adviser on Africa will approach the annual report as
a series dedicated to the analysis of a taxonomy of drivers of conflict, with each
annual report focused on one of the following broad clusters:
(a) Politics and governance, such as the state of democracy, including the role
of women, young people and the media; electoral systems; corruption; weak,
underperforming, politicized or non-inclusive administrative systems and processes;
trust in State institutions; and boundary disputes;
(b) Social issues, such as access to basic services; the status and rights of
minorities and discrimination based on ethnicity, language, gender or religion; asylum
and migration; and trafficking in drugs, including across State borders;
(c) Justice and security, such as weak judiciary and the state of the rule of law;
a lack of effective protection of human rights; the role of the military and the police;
a lack of accountability; and external dynamics;
(d) Livelihoods, such as a lack of access to economic opportunities, resources
and employment; economic policies; ownership, use and benefits of land, water and
extractive resources, including across State borders; and pollution and other
environmental factors.
10. The present report is focused on the social issues cluster, and more specifically
on the delivery of public services as a factor in the dynamics of conflict and
instability.
__________________
1

4/20

African Union Commission and Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development,
Africa’s Development Dynamics 2019: Achieving Productive Transformation (Addis Ababa;
Paris, OECD Publishing, 2019).
21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

A.

Conflict and instability landscape in Africa
11. While most conflicts in Africa are intra-State in nature, over the past few
decades, many have become more complex and regionalized. Increasingly, they
involve non-State armed groups with links to criminal interests or terrorist networks
that operate across borders, as well as self-defence and militia groups, which are often
formed along ethnic lines and fuel intercommunity violence. As a result, peace has
become more challenging to sustain and protracted and recurring conflict more
difficult to prevent or resolve, often because their underlying causes are not well
understood or addressed. Peace agreements, rarely fully implemented, typically cover
proximate causes and seldom address the deep-rooted factors that cause or sustain
conflict. Furthermore, many countries in Africa continue to face multiple challenges
to societal stability and national cohesion, which have been exacerbated by the
ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.

1.

Conflict and instability trends
12. Instability and conflict continue to be major challenges in Africa. Data on active
conflict, instability and conflict incidents show a clear upward trend across the
continent over the past five years. 2
13. According to one database, in 2019 there were 27 active conflicts in 19 countries
in Africa and 8,855 known fatalities as a result of those conflicts. 3 Since 2015, the
number of conflicts has slightly increased. 4 In addition, from 2015 to 2020, the
number of incidents related to civil unrest nearly doubled.
14. Despite decreases in Eastern, Northern and Southern Africa, the continent as a
whole still experienced a 30 per cent increase in violent wars and conflict from 2015
to 2020, 5 owing to a large extent to a major rise of conflict events in Central and
Western Africa in 2015–2020 and a notable increase in both civil unrest and war in
Eastern Africa in 2019–2020 (table 1).
Table 1
Trends in civil unrest and violent conflict-related incidents in African
subregions, 2015–2020
Trends in civil unrest incidents
Region

Eastern Africa

2015–2016

2016–2017

2017–2018

2018–2019

2019–2020

203

(237)

(211)

(201)

115

2015–2020 2020 (Total)

(331)

1 246

Central Africa

20

19

5

572

94

710

1 092

Northern Africa

158

189

66

3 976

(556)

3 833

5 262

Southern Africa

(74)

(453)

91

437

160

161

1 862

Western Africa

(222)

257

(1)

623

1015

1 672

3 014

__________________

Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project database, 2020; Uppsala Conflict Data Program/
Peace Research Institute Oslo Conflict Dataset.
3
Uppsala Conflict Data Program/Peace Research Institute Oslo Armed Conflict Dataset version 20.1
and Uppsala Conflict Data Program Battle-related Deaths Dataset version 20.1. The fatality indicator
used is the Uppsala Conflict Data Program best estimate for battle-related deaths in the given year.
4
Uppsala Conflict Data Program/Peace Research Institute Oslo Armed Conflict Dataset version 20.1.
5
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project database, 2020.
2

21-07818

5/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562
Trends in violent conflict and war incidents
2015–
2016

2016–
2017

2017–
2018

2018–
2019

2019–
2020

Eastern Africa

100

284

(212)

(387)

Central Africa

127

236

359

(93)

Northern Africa

(251)

(596)

(244)

Southern Africa

(17)

7

1

Western Africa

(7)

271

195

Region

2015–
2020

2020
(Total)

208

(7)

2 578

439

1 068

1 560

608

(80)

(563)

1 584

(1)

(9)

(19)

9

249

612

1 320

1 949

Source: Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project database, 2020.

2.

Conflict and instability drivers
15. While the following elements are not exhaustive and might include some
overlaps, they help to illustrate the multidimensional and complex nature of the
causes and drivers of instability and violent conflict in Africa:
(a) Disputes over political power and resources among political elites sometimes
drive intergroup competition and ethnic, religious or linguistic mobilization. These
disputes are frequently exacerbated by flawed and contested political processes, weak
institutions, ethno-geographic biases, and the zero-sum nature of political rivalries,
wherein the loss of control of power means political marginalization;
(b) The lack of shared visions within ethnically diverse polities and the
weaponization of identity for political ends continue to drive instability and conflict
on the continent, fuelling fear, mistrust, feelings of exclusion and historical
grievances, both real and perceived, which are further amplified through social media;
(c) The lack of access to justice, widespread impunity and the real or
perceived partiality of justice systems, nepotism and corruption, combined with the
curtailment of freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly, frequently
drive social unrest and instability. The absence or weakness of remediation tools, such
as formal ombudsperson services, national human rights institutions or complaint and
conflict resolution mechanisms can exacerbate the situation;
(d) The scarcity or the unequal distribution of, or the lack of access to,
financial resources and assets can result in inequalities in opportunities and
livelihoods. Discontented segments of political elites and extremist and terrorist
groups often exploit those disparities and reinforce divisive ethno -regional and ruralurban dynamics;
(e) The lack of access to, and competition over, limited and often diminishing
natural resources in rural communities, including farming and grazing land a nd water,
combined with weak or unequal land and resource governance, can drive
intercommunity tensions aggravated by the impact of climate change on
cohabitational arrangements, such as transhumance;
(f) The weak presence of the State, in particular in peripheral regions, can
drive conflict and instability. Limited infrastructure, essential services and security
weaken the legitimacy of Governments and can create fertile ground for instability,
criminal activities, violent extremism and terrorism;
(g) A lack of clarity and inclusivity in peace agreements and their poor
implementation, the splintering of signatory parties and the incomplete
transformation of conflict economies tend to perpetuate or reignite conflict. The
involvement of young people and women is critical to the implementation of peace

6/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

agreements, in particular through the youth, peace and security agenda and the women
and peace and security agenda, respectively.
3.

African Union and United Nations peace and security response
16. Preventing conflict and sustaining peace remain key priorities for African
Governments and institutions, the United Nations and other partners. Given the strong
recognition of the interdependence between peace and development, there is a clear
commitment by both the African Union and the United Nations to tackling the
continent’s challenges on both fronts.
17. The Security Council, as the principal organ for the maintenance of international
peace and security, has a key role and responsibility in the prevention, con trol and
resolution of conflict. In its resolution 2282 (2016), the Council recognized that
development, peace and security, and human rights were interlinked and mutually
reinforcing and that sustaining peace should be broadly understood as a goal and a
process that includes, inter alia, addressing the root causes of conflict. By working
collaboratively with the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and
strategically focusing on the root causes of conflict, the Security Council is well
placed to mobilize international support to address instability, prevent violent conflict
and sustain peace in Africa.
18. The African Union and the United Nations have developed mechanisms for
collaboration on both peace and security and sustainable development. The joint
frameworks in those areas 6 have contributed to the growth of coordinated action by
both organizations to prevent conflict, sustain peace and strengthen resilience. The
Peace and Security Council and the Security Council have met annually since 2007
to consider issues of peace and security in Africa, enabling the two bodies to act
jointly and to offer joint recommendations. The Peace and Security Council also
meets annually with the Peacebuilding Commission to strengthen African UnionUnited Nations partnerships for peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction in
Africa. The two organizations discuss cooperation in peace and security, development
and human rights, and review the progress made in the implementation of their joint
commitments through the African Union-United Nations annual conference, as well
as through annual desk-to-desk meetings between the African Union Commission and
the United Nations Secretariat and regular coordination th rough the United Nations
Office to the African Union. As a follow-up to the independent assessment of the
African Union-United Nations partnership conducted in 2020, the United Nations is
currently conducting a mapping exercise of the existing African Unio n-United
Nations cooperation and coordination mechanisms to determine areas for
streamlining and simplification. Additional steps are being taken in line with the
agreement by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the need to reinforce coordination mechanisms to implement the
2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063 following the fourth African Union -United Nations
annual conference, held virtually on 9 December 2020.
19. In 2020, the United Nations had seven Security Council-mandated peacekeeping
operations in Africa. Similarly, 12 special political missions, 2 of them regional and
1 with an institutional focus on the African Union, supported political processes
across the continent. The missions, some of which are operated jointly with the
African Union, constituted approximately half of the United Nations peace operations
globally. Similarly, the African Union maintained active peace support operations and

__________________
6

21-07818

The Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security; and the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda
2063 of the African Union and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
7/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

ad hoc security initiatives, and its Peace and Security Council had seven country
situations on its agenda in 2020.
20. The agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission in 2020 included discussions on
10 African countries and regions and the Commission has designated 17 African
countries as eligible to access the Peacebuilding Fund, out of a total of 24 countries
globally. The Joint Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs -UNDP
Programme on Building National Capacities for Conflict Prevention comprised
25 African countries, with dedicated capacity deployed to the Resident Coordinator
offices. In addition, the United Nations has developed prevention strategies in the
Horn of Africa, the Great Lakes and the Lake Chad basin regions, as well as the United
Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
21. In their efforts to ensure a well-grounded understanding of underlying drivers,
the United Nations peace and security pillar and the country teams systematically
track instability and conflict drivers, including through the common country analyses
and the UNDP crisis risk dashboards. Similarly, the African Peace and Security
Architecture focuses on the prevention and resolution of crises and conflict, including
through the Continental Early Warning System, which undertakes data collection and
analysis to advise the Peace and Security Council.

B.

Sustainable development landscape in Africa
22. On average, African countries have made steady, albeit limited, progress
towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, as assessed by the
United Nations and by the African Union in its first continental report on the
implementation of Agenda 2063. The 2020 Africa Sustainable Development Goal
Index and Dashboards Report 7 showed that moderate improvement and stagnation
were the most frequently observed trends in the continent’s efforts to reach the
17 Goals (table 2). While three quarters of African countries recorded moderate
improvements towards Goal 3 (good health and well-being), more than half remain
stagnant in their efforts to provide quality education (Goal 4), clean water and
sanitation (Goal 6) and sustainable cities and communities (Goal 11). The majority of
African countries are on track with respect to climate action (Goal 13), many are
making moderate advancement towards achieving zero hunger (Goal 2) and
preserving life on land (Goal 15). The emergence of the COVID -19 pandemic,
however, has hindered progress globally as Governments face declining revenue,
shortfalls in development financing and the need to reallocate resources to manage
the public health emergency.
23. With respect to Goal 16 (peace, justice and strong institutions), there has been
limited progress across the continent towards creating peaceful and inclusive
development, access to justice and effective institutions, as reflected in the stagnation
in two thirds of African countries.

__________________
7

8/20

The database is compiled using various United Nations sources, including from the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Joint United Nations Programme on HI V/AIDS, the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, the International Labour Organization, the Statistics Division of the
Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and the World Bank .
21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

Table 2
Number of African countries with different trends in the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals
On track or maintaining
achievement

Moderately
improving

Stagnating

Decreasing

↑

➚

→

↓

Average
regional
index score

Goal 1: No poverty

13

10

18

7

44.08

Goal 2: Zero hunger

–

23

29

2

43.89

Goal 3: Good health and well-being

–

41

13

–

48.46

Goal 4: Quality education

1

13

33

6

48.35

Goal 5: Gender equality

2

23

28

–

51.82

Goal 6: Clean water and sanitation

5

22

27

–

53.18

Goal 7: Affordable and clean energy

1

22

28

3

46.76

Goal 8: Decent work and economic growth

6

31

13

3

57.21

Goal 9: Industry, innovation and infrastructure

1

16

35

2

24.29

14

26

13

46.49

Goal 11: Sustainable cities and communities
Goal 13: Climate action

44

Goal 14: Life below water

6

1

2

91.22

15

18

4

63.02

9

70.38

Goal 15: Life on land

13

20

12

Goal 16: Peace, justice and strong institutions

2

13

36

3

53.50

Goal 17: Partnerships for the Goals

5

15

16

16

52.51

Source: 2020 Africa Sustainable Development Goal Index and Dashboards Report database. Time series data not available for
indicators under Goal 10 and Goal 12.

24. In fact, analyses linking the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and recent
conflict and instability related incidents 8 in 48 African States revealed that countries
that experienced more conflict-related incidents from 2015 to 2020 scored lower in
the 2020 Africa Sustainable Development Goal Index. As illustrated in the figure
below, a higher number of conflicts is generally correlated with lower Sustainable
Development Goal achievement rates. The OECD “States of Fragility 2020” report
also identified clear interrelationships between fragility and sustainable development.

__________________
8

21-07818

Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project database, 2020.
9/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

Sustainable Development Goal Index Score and recent conflict and
instability incidents

Note: Analysis does not include the following countries owing to insufficient data: Cabo Verde,
Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Mauritius, Sao Tome and Principe and Seychelles.
Source: 2020 Africa Sustainable Development Index and Dashboards Report database and t he
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project database, 2020.

25. It is therefore crucial to prioritize conflict prevention and the systematic resolution
of the underlying causes and drivers of conflict in order to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals and the aspirations of Agenda 2063. This requires a
multidimensional perspective to understand what fuels instability and conflict in Africa.
26. The question of instability and conflict in Africa is explored in the following
section through the lens of public service delivery, with a focus on how the absence
or non-inclusive delivery of public services can drive instability and conflict.

III. Public service delivery as a conflict driver in Africa
27. Service delivery is central to everyday life. People’s basic needs are essentially
the same everywhere. They include safe and sufficient housing, access to nutrition,
clean water and sanitation, health care and education. These simple needs are
universal and embedded throughout the Sustainable Development Goals. Yet, every
day, hundreds of millions go without having those basic needs met.
28. As highlighted in the joint study by the United Nations and the World Bank
Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict , while
service delivery is not the only determinant of State legitimacy, it is the primary way
by which citizens directly encounter the State, thus shaping their ov erall perception
of it. In Africa, where Governments grapple with a myriad of challenges, including
resource and capacity constraints, rapidly rising urbanization, corruption and, in some
instances, protracted conflict, exclusion from service delivery has been shown to have
a clear link to conflict as a driver, trigger or fertile ground for instability.
29. Most often, exclusion from services tracks exclusion from political and
economic power, opportunity and security, conditions that negatively affect Stat e
legitimacy and create opportunities for mobilizing group grievances and violence. In
certain instances, the way in which services are delivered, such as with a lack of

10/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

inclusivity or transparency in planning processes or perceptions of unfair or unequal
treatment, can result in unrest and possible conflict. 9
30. The emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic has put a spotlight on the fragility
of service delivery across Africa, including strained budgets, inadequate or
overstretched medical systems, inability to provide economic relief to citizens, and
prolonged school and business closures. African Governments are being pressed to
provide more at a time when their financial situations have been severely affected by
falling exports, lower tax revenues, lower foreign exchange earnings and slow foreign
direct investment, among other factors. In many countries, the impact of the pandemic
on service delivery has been immediate and exposed and reinforced the major
structural inequalities that drive conflict in the first place. Marginalized groups have
been disproportionally affected, often aggravating long-held grievances. Women and
girls in particular have borne the brunt of poor public service delivery through unpaid
care work, which has been further exacerbated by the pandemic.
31. In addressing public service delivery as a driver of conflict, the services listed
below are considered among basic human rights.
1.

Housing
32. Africa is currently facing a major housing crisis owing to rapid urbanization and
to growing slum populations. The majority of African countries still face major
challenges in reducing the proportion of urban populations living in slums, a key
indicator for Goal 11. Sub-Saharan Africa alone is expected to have as many as
1.2 billion urban dwellers by 2050 and adds 4.5 million new residents in informal
settlements each year. The proliferation of slums and informal settlements has had a
profound effect on large parts of the continent’s population, with conditions
characterized by inadequate water supply, a lack of proper sanitation, overcrowded
and dilapidated housing, increased incidence of violence against women and
vulnerability to health risks. In sub-Saharan Africa, 59 per cent of the urban
population resides in such settlements, 10 many of which are known for high crime
rates and violence. In recent years, many violent protests and clashes across the
African subregions were caused by a lack of adequate housing or by overcrowded
housing, as well as crime and overcrowding in slums.

2.

Education
33. Few sectors illustrate and perpetuate socioeconomic, cultural, ethnic, racial,
linguistic and other divides as strongly as education. With an estimated 364 million
young people between the ages of 15 and 35 years, the continent has the world’s
youngest population, creating both a challenge and an opportunity for investing in the
next generation of African leaders and entrepreneurs. Africa’s current primary school
enrolment rate is, on average, above 80 per cent; 11 the continent must overcome
considerable deficiencies in reaching Goal 4 targets related to secondary, tertiary and
vocational education, often with marked disparities along gender, ethnic,
geographical and linguistic divides. In the wake of the COVID -19 pandemic, school
closures have exacerbated previously existing inequalities, in particular the digital
divide, which mostly affects children who were already most at risk of being excluded
from a high-quality education. Grievances around access to and the quality of
education have a tendency to escalate tensions and lead to violence. In 2020, there

__________________

United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., 2018), pp. 158–159.
10
United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), Slum Almanac 2015/2016:
Tracking Improvement in the Lives of Slum Dwellers (Nairobi, 2016).
11
UNICEF, Primary education data (2019).
9

21-07818

11/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

were over 1,300 incidents of protests, violent demonstrations, abductions and attacks
in Africa related to educational institutions, educators and students, with more than
100 education-related cases of violent demonstrations and mob violence. 12
3.

Health care
34. Achieving equitable and sustainable health outcomes impacts virtually all the
Sustainable Development Goals. African countries are still faced with moderate to
significant hurdles in reducing mortality from non-communicable diseases
(target 3.4) and realizing universal health coverage (target 3.8). In addition, health
expenditure as percentage of GDP (target 3.c) averaged only 5.6 per cent across the
continent as at 2017. Health outcomes are also significantly influenced by the
economic, social and environmental determinants that shape the conditions of
people’s lives. Inadequacies in health care most heavily burden the vulnerable in
society, in particular women and girls, who are often the most affected by the demands
of unpaid care work. Given the essential nature of health care for the preservation of
life, the lack of access to health-care services can engender powerful grievances and
tensions, in particular during health crises. In 2019, there were approximately
230 protests by health-care workers in 13 African countries, centred around poor
working conditions, shortage of qualified staff, violence against health -care workers
and payment arrears. 13 In 2020, the number of protests by health-care workers
increased to approximately 400 in 22 African countries, a 78 per cent increase
compared with 2019, with more than 15 resulting in violence or requiring police
interventions. 14 The increase was mostly related to the COVID-19 pandemic.

4.

Water and sanitation
35. Access to safe water and sanitation is essential for life, health and nutrition, as
well as for quality of life, economic growth and productivity. As at 2017, however,
only 27 per cent of the population in sub-Saharan Africa had access to safe drinking
water (target 6.1) and only 18 per cent had access to a safely-managed sanitation
service, and the inadequate delivery of those services often borne most heavily by
women and girls (target 6.2). In 2020, approximately 500 protests related to water
and sanitation took place in 28 African countries, including protests over the lack,
interruption, poor provision or price increase of potable water, often alongside the
lack of access to electricity. 15 Approximately a quarter of the protests were violent.
Conflict over access and ownership of water points was also prevalent.
36. A review of service delivery challenges in Africa reveals several factors to be
associated with the resulting conflict and destabilization, namely: (a ) inequality in
access to services; (b) exclusionary planning processes; (c) corruption; and
(d) delivery of services in areas where there are challenges to governance.

A.

Inequality in access to services
37. Non-inclusion (both vertical and horizontal) in service delivery has been a
significant source of inequality on the continent. Vertical non -inclusion centres
around differences between individuals and largely manifests in socioeconomic
disparities between households. Horizontal non-inclusion involves grievances that are
linked to group allegiances, such as race, ethnicity, religion, language, regional
identities, gender identity, age and other affiliations. The latter type of non -inclusion

__________________

Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project database, 2020.
Ibid., 2019.
14
Ibid., 2020.
15
Ibid.
12
13

12/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

is linked to a significantly higher risk of armed conflict, as violent conflict is typically
fought between groups – either between an organized group and the State or between
organized identity groups. 16
1.

Exclusion based on vertical factors
38. Exclusion based on vertical factors exists primarily along socioeconomic lines,
often set against a broader context of socioeconomic marginalization. This type of
exclusion has generated discontent among disadvantaged populations in Africa, giving
rise to protests that have occasionally escalated to violence. For example, in 2020,
protests over housing grievances took place in Namibia, South Africa and Uganda,
where disadvantaged communities took to the streets to demand permanent housing and
improved living conditions. 17 In South Africa, there have been a number of protests and
riots in recent years related to service delivery as an increasing number of rural residents
move to urban areas, placing greater service delivery pressures on already overstretched
local government capacities. 18 In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, several protests
were organized after the presidential elections in 2018 to demand improvements in the
provision of public and private services and better working conditions.
39. In the past five years, there have also been multiple violent student protests
related to service delivery on the continent, forcing some universities to suspend
classes. The protests generally share similar underlying causes, namely, economic
inequalities and government deficiencies, compounded by risi ng tuition costs and
costs of living that outpace students’ ability to pay, in particular those from
marginalized communities. In Senegal, for example, protests driven by education
funding issues made up more than one-third of protests in 2014 and 2015, and more
than half of protests in 2018. 19
40. In many countries, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has increased tensions
over access to resources, and recently implemented policies have worsened
instability. In 2020, pandemic-related demonstrations were reported in countries
across Africa, some of which were violent. 20
41. In Sierra Leone, the pandemic has exacerbated poverty, which, coupled with
underlying inequality, has heightened grievances, in particular among young people.
There has also been an increase in violence between local communities, young people
and security forces. In 2020, several incidents of water-related conflict were reported,
as a large part of the population in marginal urban areas lacked access to water as a
result of the COVID-19-related lockdown.
42. In several instances, conflict-related disruptions of basic services, such as
health care and water and electricity supply, have generated significant emergency
humanitarian needs and further exacerbated conditions for conflict-affected populations.
In 2020, for example, there were conflict-related disruptions to water and electricity
supply in Ethiopia and Libya, placing great strains on people’s coping capacities during
the pandemic, while also affecting the operations of health-care facilities and the ability
of communities to follow COVID-19 preventative protocols. In the case of Libya, the
lack of service delivery and resulting deterioration of living conditions triggered
thousands of Libyans to take to the streets during the second half of 2020.

__________________

Leaving No One Behind: The Imperative of Inclusive Development – Report on the World Social
Situation 2016 (United Nations publication, 2016).
17
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project, 2020.
18
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project, “South Africa: service delivery at the centre of
violent protests”, 4 June 2018.
19
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project, “Senegal education protests”, 25 May 2018.
20
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project, 2020.
16

21-07818

13/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

2.

Exclusion based on horizontal factors
43. In many African countries, significant inequalities exist between groups in terms
of political power, wealth and social status, a situation made more perilous when
group affiliation is seen to determine access to social, economic or political goods,
including the delivery of services. 21 In Ethiopia, for example, a wave of protests from
2016 to 2018 was prompted by claims of unequal access to resources and services, as
well as claims of political exclusion. While initially articulated around local
grievances, many of the protests soon took on an ethnic nature, leading to tension and
violence and resulting in an increased number of internally displaced persons. In
Cameroon, the perceived marginalization of the English education system spiralled
into localized violence and, ultimately, armed conflict. Although there were efforts to
address grievances through decentralization, the conflict has resulted in civilian
casualties, displacement, damage to infrastructure and reduced access to education
affecting hundreds of thousands of children.
44. Protests triggered by linguistic, racial and ethnic inequalities in education have
also occurred in countries across the continent. In South Africa, demonstratio ns over
the escalating cost of university education in recent years have highlighted frustration
at enduring racial inequalities. 22 In its voluntary national review in 2019, the country
identified the challenge of having “the most unequal school system in the world”
owing to the historic impact of apartheid. 23
45. Horizontal non-inclusion can also arise along situational lines in contexts such
as those involving refugees or internally displaced persons and cohabitation with host
communities, and the scarce availability of resources and facilities. In Uganda, over
1.5 million refugees share educational facilities with host communities, leading to
rising tensions due to overcrowded classrooms and the insufficient availability of
teachers and learning materials. Similarly, in the Hodh ech Chargui region of
Mauritania, the presence of refugees has affected scarce water resources, leading to
tensions with the host communities. Such situations are increasingly common on the
continent and their impact could be significant, given that Africa hosts over 25 per
cent of the world’s refugee population, despite its resource constraints.
46. Recognizing the role of inequality in fuelling conflict and hampering
development, the United Nations system continues to support African Governments
in their efforts to ensure adequate provision of services to poor and underserved
communities. The African Union and the United Nations have coordinated positions
on the north-west and south-west regions of Cameroon and have called for an
inclusive dialogue process to forge consensus around long-term governance solutions
and contribute to addressing grievances.
47. In the Republic of the Congo, the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Population Fund have supported the Government in expanding health -care
services to underserved and conflict-affected communities, helping to reduce related
grievances. To ease growing tensions between refugees and host communities over
refugees’ access to subsidized health-care services, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has subsidized health-care services for both groups.
Similar interventions have been implemented in Rwanda, where the United Nations has
supported refugees from Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
their host communities, with comprehensive free reproductive health and HIV services.

__________________

Background paper on Sustainable Development Goal 10: reduced inequality within and among
countries (ECA/RFSD/2019/4).
22
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project, “South Africa: 2015 update”, 11 Decem ber 2015.
23
South Africa, South Africa’s Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development:
Solving Complex Challenges Together – Voluntary National Review Report 2019 (2019).
21

14/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

48. In northern Mali, the Peacebuilding Fund has funded initiatives by the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to support State authorities in providing access
to quality education to vulnerable children in remote areas of Gao and Timbuktu, as
well as promoting inclusive community dialogues to support social cohesion.
49. In Mauritania, where competition over scarce natural resources has led to
tensions between the host communities and refugees, the Peacebuil ding Fund has
funded initiatives by UNDP, UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and OHCHR to prevent conflict by strengthening local governance
and community engagement processes. The United Nations country team also
continues to work with the Government to promote social inclusion through
programmes that directly address housing issues for vulnerable groups, in particular
the Haratine, who are among the most vulnerable ethnic groups in the country.

B.

Exclusionary planning processes
50. The process through which services are planned and delivered, including
transparency and meaningful inclusion in decision-making, the availability and
effectiveness of oversight and accountability mechanisms, and the existence of
grievance redress mechanisms, has a significant impact on perceptions of government
legitimacy and fairness.
51. Non-inclusive or non-responsive governance, combined with a lack of
accountable institutions, can create major obstacles to effective public service
delivery and a negative perception of Governments. 24
52. The lack of transparency, for example, has not only enabled corruption in
service delivery but also created perceptions of unfairness or corruption, which have
a destabilizing effect. In Guinea, for instance, the level of teacher salaries and the
irregularity of service bonuses in remote rural areas, coupled with a perceived lack of
transparency in the management of the country’s education resources, led to teacher
strikes and demonstrations in 2019 and early 2020 over wages.
53. A lack of transparency also led to the looting of warehouses storing COVID -19
palliatives in Nigeria in October 2020. The warehouses were a source of criticism
owing to a belief that local governments were storing relief items that should have
been distributed. The ensuing controversy reinforced the polarization between the
Government and the public, worsening the overall security situation.
54. The United Nations has worked to promote stronger inclusion of communities
in service delivery processes, both by African Governments and development
partners, with a focus on several mutually reinforcing entry points, including:
(a) direct participation in public budget cycles, including planning, formulation,
monitoring and analysis; (b) performance monitoring, whereby citizens can monitor
and evaluate public service planning, delivery and reform; and (c) public engagement
in the enforcement of the rules that govern public services, including grievance
redress mechanisms.
55. In Burundi, for example, UNDP is supporting the country’s efforts to address
housing issues and reduce related conflict by promoting public access to
administrative documents and conflict resolution mechanisms. In Nigeria, UNICEF
is facilitating an inclusive decision-making process in the design and deployment of
water systems and sanitation infrastructure, including through the creation of
community-led committees. In Sierra Leone, the United Nations country team and
development partners, in collaboration with the Government, have adopted a conflict-

__________________
24

21-07818

United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace, pp. 160–161.
15/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

sensitive approach in the development of projects, with the aim of ensuring equal
ethno-regional participation.
56. In Somalia, the Peacebuilding Fund funded the Pilot Project to Strengthen
Service Delivery through Federal Government Systems, which selects pilot projects
through community consultations. In Madagascar, the Fund has supported the
adoption of new transparency and accountability measures within public services. In
Mali, UNDP and UNICEF are supporting a project aimed at improving State
performance in the delivery of high-quality basic social services through enhanced
transparency, efficiency and accountability in budget management, including by
supporting the participation of citizens in budget processes .

C.

Corruption
57. In several African countries, weak institutions, fragile governance and weak
accountability mechanisms continue to provide fertile ground for corruption.
Countries with the highest levels of corruption generally rank among the most f ragile
States. 25 With respect to service delivery, the Global Corruption Barometer – Africa
2019 found that more than one in four people had paid a bribe for public services,
including water and electricity supply, health care and education. This is equivalent
to approximately 130 million citizens in the 35 countries surveyed. 26
58. In Kenya, residents of informal housing settlements are often forced to rely on
small-scale private water vendors who often do not adhere to the formal tariff
structure and charge higher prices. In Nigeria, two experience-based corruption
surveys conducted in 2019 by the National Bureau of Statistics with support from the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime revealed that recurring requests for bribes
across a range of services, including water and electricity supply, sanitation, health
care and education, significantly reduced access to public services, eroding the
confidence that citizens have in the State and its institutions.
59. Corrupt practices are deeply intertwined with conflict and State fragility.
Corruption has been found to worsen poverty and impede peacebuilding efforts. In
general, the worst consequences of corruption on the continent have been borne by
poor, marginalized and vulnerable populations, exacerbating inequitable wealth
distribution and social, gender and identity-related divisions. 27 For example, service
delivery in Africa has increasingly been marred by “sextortion”, which manifests
itself in various forms, such as the solicitation of sex in exchange for good grades for
female students, the sexual exploitation of women seeking medical care or school
placement for their children and the solicitation of sex in exchange for basic services
in the context of humanitarian emergencies. 28
60. While corruption related to service delivery might not directly cause conflict, it
frequently creates the conditions for criminality and widespread public disaffection
to thrive, with the potential for protests and even uprisings. According to the

__________________

Fund for Peace, Fragile States Index database and Uppsala Conflict Data Program/Peace Research
Institute Oslo Conflict Dataset.
26
Coralie Pring and Jon Vrushi, Global Corruption Barometer – Africa 2019: Citizens’ Views and
Experiences of Corruption (Berlin, Transparency International, 2019).
27
United Nations, “The United Nations common position to address global corruption challenges –
towards UNGASS 2021”, August 2021.
28
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), The Time is Now: Addressing the Gender
Dimensions of Corruption (Vienna, 2020); Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
Global Humanitarian Overview 2021 (Geneva, 2021), p. 51; Hazel Feigenblatt, Breaking the
Silence around Sextortion: The Links between Power, Sex and Corruption (Berlin, Transparency
International, 2020).
25

16/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan, corruption in the country in service
delivery and other areas, alongside political competition, has fuelled human rights
abuses and is a major driver of ethnic conflict, depriving millions of South Sudanese
civilians of access to basic services. In areas of high instability, proceeds from
criminal activities can be channelled to armed or extremist groups and militias, further
fuelling instability.

D.

Challenges to governance
61. Service delivery, like all areas of governance, exists not as a static constant, but
more as a spectrum. The challenges that hinder Governments from providing services,
such as lack of resources and capacity, corruption and conflict, are often the same
factors that hamper the fulfilment of other core governmental duties. In more extreme
cases, Governments may fail to provide any governance in certain locations, owing to
circumstantial, geographical, demographic, infrastructural, security or other factors. It
is precisely in those areas that violent extremism and criminality can take root. 29
62. Violent extremism in Africa typically burgeons not in major cities but in remote
areas, often in borderlands connecting two or more States, that have experienced
political, economic and social marginalization. Northern Mali, north-eastern Nigeria
and the Kenyan coastal region, for example, all exhibit conditions of insecurity and
underdevelopment, which are exploited by extremist groups to target such
undergoverned regions through compelling narratives that speak to the grievances of
the communities. 30
63. Similar scenarios play out elsewhere on the continent, in areas where
underdevelopment and neglect, manifested in a lack of access to basic services,
livelihood opportunities, personal safety and security, and trust in authorities, provide
opportunities for criminal and extremist groups to take root and gradually gain
influence.

1.

Non-State armed groups as service providers
64. Non-State armed groups in Africa often exploit fragility to further their political
goals, frequently providing “security”, “justice” and services, such as health care,
electricity, water and sanitation, education and infrastructure in the territories under
their control in order to gain legitimacy, build credibility and recruit members. 31
65. In the Lake Chad basin, the lack of public service delivery and the weak
connection between the populations of the basin and their respective Governments
have helped extremist groups such as Boko Haram and the so-called “Islamic State in
West Africa Province (ISWAP)” to recruit and grow. Both groups have exploited the
shortcomings of the regional States in dealing with their peripheral areas and
intercommunal conflict over limited resources, such as water. For example, the
so-called “Islamic State in West Africa Province” has reportedly filled gaps in

__________________

United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace, pp. 160–161; United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), Regional Bureau for Africa, Journey to Extremism in Africa: Drivers,
Incentives and the Tipping Point for Recruitment (New York, 2017); UNODC, Urban Safety and
Good Governance Initiative, Safety Governance Approach in Urban Environments for Safe,
Inclusive and Resilient Cities, (Nairobi, 2016).
30
UNDP, Journey to Extremism in Africa.
31
United Nations, Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, “The impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on terrorism, counter-terrorism and countering violent extremism”, June
2020; Mthuli Ncube and Basil Jones, “Drivers and dynamics of fragility in Africa”, African
Economic Brief, vol. 4, No. 5 (2013).
29

21-07818

17/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

governance and service delivery, including digging wells and providing basic health
care and Islamic education. 32
66. In Somalia, mutually reinforcing factors, such as chronic State fra gility, a
challenged central authority, fragile governance and political violence, have provided
conditions for Al-Shabaab, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other groups to
flourish by filling the governance gaps. The groups exploit local (clan) gr ievances
and take advantage of the authorities’ inability to provide basic services and enforce
the rule of law in areas under their control, thus strengthening their influence and
credibility. 33
67. In a study conducted in 2017 on the dynamics of recruitment of violent extremist
groups in Africa, UNDP found that a sense of grievance towards, and limited
confidence in, Government are widespread in the regions of Africa associated with
the highest incidence of recruitment into violent extremism, with a stro ng correlation
between negative experiences of service provision and the likelihood of individuals
voluntarily joining a violent extremist group. For example, respondents who thought
that the provision of education by their Government was either “excellent ” or
“improving” were between 16 and 26 per cent less likely to join an extremist group
voluntarily. 34
68. Non-State armed groups have also used the provision of services as a means of
generating income to support their activities. In some communities in Burkina Faso,
the Central African Republic, Mali and the Niger, for example, such groups are
collecting “taxes” and fees from communities in exchange for services. For example,
in the north-east of the Central African Republic, the Front Populaire pour la
renaissance de la Centrafrique has continued to provide “security services”, including
those deemed essential for the delivery of health and education services, while also
imposing illegal taxes and economic activities, depriving the State of much needed
revenue (see S/2017/639 and S/2019/608).
69. In the Lake Chad basin, UNDP has established the Regional Stabilization
Facility for Lake Chad to scale up the range of stabilization interventions in
Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria. The facility will serve as a rapid response
mechanism to support government efforts to curtail the Boko Haram insurgency by,
inter alia, improving the delivery of basic services, w ith the aim of reducing poverty
and combating the radicalization and recruitment of young people. In parallel, the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel have provided support for the i mplementation of the
Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for Areas Affected by Boko
Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region of the Lake Chad Basin Commission.
2.

Criminal groups as service providers
70. Africa, which is the continent urbanizing at the highest rate in the world, faces
an increasing prevalence of slums and informal housing settlements, which present
threats to its urban stability and, by extension, to overall political stability. The less
developed regions of East Asia, South Asia and Africa are estimated to concentrate
96 per cent of future urban growth. Cities are faced with poverty, as well as new and

__________________

African Union Commission and UNDP, “The impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on governance,
peace and security in the Sahel”, Regional Brief (November 2020); International Crisis Group,
“Facing the challenge of the Islamic State in West Africa province”, Africa Report No. 273 (May
2019); Malik Samuel, “Economics of terrorism in Lake Chad basin”, Institute for Security
Studies, 10 July 2019.
33
United Nations Somalia, Progress Towards the 2030 Agenda in Somalia: A Companion to the
United Nations Common Country Analysis 2020 (September 2020), pp. 113, 116–117, 121.
34
UNDP, Journey to Extremism in Africa.
32

18/20

21-07818

A/75/917
S/2021/562

pervasive risks, including terrorism, violence, crime, different forms of conflict,
urban warfare, heightened securitization and the spread of diseases, all of which
challenge the ability of local governments to deliver. 35
71. As a result of the unmet challenge of providing essential services, many slums
have seen alternative forms of governance taking root. In Kenya, for instance, more
than 60 per cent of the country’s urban population resides in slums. 36 As local
governments struggle to provide basic services for those rapidly growing populations,
slums in the country have experienced a growing trend of urban -based criminal
groups profiteering from the provision of public services, leading to increased
criminality and, in some instances, violent conflict.
72. The ability of Governments to fill service delivery gaps in slums and informal
settlements will be vital for improving the lives of residents and reducing the influence
of criminal groups in those areas. In that context, the UN-Habitat Participatory Slum
Upgrading Programme addresses the living conditions of millions of slum and
informal settlement dwellers worldwide, including in major urban centres in Africa,
by focusing on the biggest deprivations for slum communities: a lack of adequate and
safe housing conditions, clean water supply, sanitation and secure land tenure.

IV. Conclusions
73. The present report contains examples illustrating how exclusion in service
delivery may reinforce underlying structural inequalities, with the potential to
aggravate grievances and even trigger conflict. Exclusion from vital, everyday
services, such as access to water and sanitation, education, health care and housing,
amplifies disparities and can exacerbate the sense of hopelessness generated by
poverty and marginalization. Given the upward trend in conflict and instability in
Africa, the collective efforts of the United Nations, the African Union, subregional
organizations, international partners and civil society are more pertinent and needed
than ever for effective conflict prevention and sustaining peace.
74. Failure to address those issues in Africa risks sowing seeds of further divisions,
frustrations and instability. The United Nations will support efforts towards enhanced
service delivery and distribution across the continent, anchored in the accelerated
implementation of the Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063, guided
by the principles of people-centred approaches and of leaving no one behind. The United
Nations will also continue to encourage innovation in cross-pillar activities addressing
the interrelationship between development and instability, in line with its commitment
to enhancing the delivery of more integrated and multidimensional analysis across the
three pillars of the United Nations system, of which the present report is an example.
75. The Secretary-General will continue to advocate inclusive and sustainable
development in Africa with the support of Member States in strengthening capacities
in order to ensure the prevention-oriented planning and delivery of development
outcomes and a better understanding of the linkages betwee n socioeconomic
dynamics and the aspiration for sustained peace in Africa. In that regard, the
Secretary-General invites Member States to join efforts to:
(a) Include all sectors of society at all stages of the planning and service delivery
process with increased transparency and accountability in public service delivery;
__________________

UN-Habitat, World Cities Report 2020: The Value of Sustainable Urbanization (United Nations
publication, 2020); Marcella Guarneri and others, UN-Habitat: Sub-Saharan Africa Atlas
(Nairobi, UN-Habitat, Regional Office for Africa, 2020).
36
World Bank, Kenya Economic Update: Housing – Unavailable and Unaffordable, No. 15 (April
2017).
35

21-07818

19/20

A/75/917
S/2021/562

(b) Ensure that planning and service delivery are organized on the basis of
robust and disaggregated data;
(c) Promote equitable access to functioning, impartial and responsive
grievance redress mechanisms to empower all segments of the population, in
particular those in vulnerable or traditionally marginalized groups; expand the
coverage of services to those groups to prevent criminal groups from taking advantage
of the lack of service delivery;
(d) Empower and strengthen local governments and administrations to play a
critical role in ensuring that services are delivered in a just, inclusive and effective
way, including during conflict and heightened instabilities. As Africa continues to
urbanize rapidly, active measures are also needed to prevent a deepening of the urban rural divide and the widening of inequalities;
(e) Ensure that sustained COVID-19 response and recovery efforts, including
vaccine distribution, in the short term, are fair, inclusive and transparent.
76. The decade of action for the Sustainable Development Goals and the efforts of
Africa in realizing the aspirations of Agenda 2063 will require concrete and bold
actions to reduce inequalities. Sustained, equitable and inclusive service delivery is a
key element for reducing various forms of inequalities that requires adequate and
predictable financial resources for implementation. Localized understanding of
interrelationships between inclusive service delivery and thre ats to sustained peace
will also guide strengthened multisectoral and multi-stakeholder partnerships, under
strong coordination and prioritization, to realize the vision of “the Africa we want”.

20/20

21-07818
