A /77/PV.79*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

79th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 14 June 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/614)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.74)
The President: Peace and respect for humankind
across its great diversity are the central mission of
the United Nations. Peace is elevated in Article I of
the Charter of the United Nations as both a goal of
our collective efforts and an essential tool for settling
international disputes. It is at the heart of our 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and inherent
to our ultimate sense of safety and well-being. This
Agenda is designed to strengthen peace and requires
peace for its successful implementation.
But today our core mission is under threat.
Dozens of conflicts are raging around the globe. One
in six of the world’s 1.8 billion young people lives in
a conflict setting, the highest number in 20 years. A
staggering 100 million people have been displaced by
violence — more than double the number a decade
ago. Not one of us is spared from the effects of today’s
cascading crises — whether around food and climate,
or energy and security.
It is therefore on all of us to work towards
transformation. The arc of humankind is at an inflection
point, and we simply must shift course — away from

confrontation to dialogue, from force to reason, from
war to diplomacy and towards full respect for the United
Nations Charter principles we have pledged to uphold.
As Dutch philosopher Baruch Spinoza wrote
in 1670,
“Peace is not an absence of war, it is a virtue — a state
of mind, a disposition for benevolence, confidence,
justice”.
It is also “a set of values, attitudes, traditions, modes of
behaviour and ways of life” that Member States agreed
to cherish when they adopted the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. Those values
recognize our common humanity, respect sovereignty
and independence, reject violence and uphold human
rights. These are values of tolerance, solidarity and
inclusion that help our societies concentrate the
necessary resources on transformation — back at home
and in our multilateral system. And let me confirm
this — whoever thinks that war is a better way to
achieve a country’s ambitions than cooperation has no
rightful place in our global community.
What will it take to forge peaceful coexistence
among peoples, nations, cultures and religions? We
need a renewed approach to peace that recognizes the
epic scale of the challenges at hand. We must broaden
our vision, breaking away from the old, narrow
interpretation of interests. We need a vision where
interests, rights and responsibilities go hand in hand.
We should consciously work on rebuilding lost trust.
And we need everyone to participate.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16861 (E)

*2316861*
*Reissued for technical reasons 16 January 2024

A/77/PV.79

That means the full inclusion of women in all
processes to help prevent, mediate and resolve conflict,
and to rebuild societies. It means critical investments in
young people, in education and the fight against racism
and intolerance. In the General Assembly, it means not
allowing short-sighted views to get in the way of vital
breakthroughs. It means opening our doors to those
who can meaningfully contribute to our mission — civil
society, scientists and experts.
The United Nations is an institution that embodies
the notions of cooperation, understanding, good faith,
and tolerance. It is where inclusive, open and genuine
global dialogue should take place in order to give peace
a chance and to create a just, equal, safe and sustainable
world for all of us.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.74.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I thank the President of
the General Assembly for his very insightful remarks.
Today I have the honour to introduce draft resolution
entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace” (A/77/L.74).
This year the draft resolution was negotiated
during the resumed session, allowing more time to the
delegations to engage fully on a number of substantive
updates. Those updates reflect the continued relevance
of a culture of peace in the present-day context, which
is defined by complex challenges and unlimited
opportunities. Indeed, it is more urgent today than ever
to promote a culture of peace and to prioritize dialogue
and rapprochement over violence and confrontation.
The text before us represents a careful balance
between comprehensive updating and modest
streamlining, which my delegation intends to continue
in the coming years. While presenting substantive
language for this year’s text we remained mindful of
the need to advance actions in all eight areas of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace.
We sincerely thank all delegations for their
active and constructive participation in the informal
consultations. We deeply appreciate the spirit of
flexibility shown by all and the valuable inputs, which
have certainly enriched the draft resolution before us.
Some major additions introduced in this year’s text
include the following.
2/25

14/06/2023

First, there is a recognition of collective efforts
in addressing global risks and challenges, with the
United Nations playing the central role in accordance
with its Charter and other key multilateral frameworks,
such as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Taking into account the ongoing efforts to advance a
multilateral solution to present and future problems,
the text has included a reference to the report of the
Secretary-General entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and its follow up processes, which offer new
momentum to multilateralism.
Secondly, importance has been accorded to the
promotion and strengthening of preventive diplomacy.
In that regard, an open, constructive and respectful
debate of ideas, as well as interreligious, interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, have been encouraged at the
local, national, regional and international levels with
a view to advancing human fraternity, solidarity and
tolerance. In doing so, the draft resolution has taken
note of a number of initiatives that are taken by the
United Nations, its entities, Member States, regional
organizations and civil society.
Thirdly, there is reaffirmation of the invaluable
role of women in the prevention and the resolution
of conflicts and in activities promoting a culture of
peace. The text stressed the importance of ensuring
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, with the aim of advancing their full, equal and
meaningful participation in such processes. The text
has also recognized the role of youth in advancing
peace through their meaningful participation across all
pillars of the United Nations work.
Fourthly, there is a recognition of a gap in promoting
a culture of peace in the context of the current digital
sphere and its ongoing transformation. That has been
included as an important area for global action in the
field of the culture of peace.
Finally, the importance of addressing the
underlying drivers of violence and conflict has been
stressed. In order to free those who are languishing in
protracted conflicts and through the cycle of violence,
the text has encouraged Member States, the United
Nations and other relevant actors to adopt a holistic
approach to the cross-cutting dimensions of peace,
development, humanitarian action and human rights in
order to prevent the recurrence of conflict and build
lasting peace.
23-16861

14/06/2023

In addition to those substantive updates, the
text this year has proposed the biennialization of the
report while maintaining annual consideration of
the resolution.
The draft resolution welcomes the High-level
Forum convened by the President of the Assembly,
on 6 September 2022, on the theme “The Culture of
Peace: Importance of justice, equality and inclusion
for advancing peacebuilding”, which involved the
participation of Member States, civil society and
other stakeholders.
And, in keeping with past tradition, the draft
resolution requests the President of the General
Assembly to convene the annual high-level forum on the
culture of peace in 2023. We look forward to working
closely with the Office of the President of the General
Assembly to make the event yet another success.
The initiative on the culture of peace began in 1999
as a set of values, attitudes, traditions and modes of
behaviour and ways of life based on efforts to meet the
development and environmental needs of present and
future generations. A modest venture, it has over time,
with the mandate of the Assembly, grown in relevance
and evolved into a dominant theme finding larger
footprints and recognition in all major United Nations
discourses. In the rapidly changing global situation,
it has proved to be a useful means to complement the
obligations of the Charter of the United Nations of
maintaining peace in the world.
The Assembly has endorsed, over the past 23 years,
the enduring value of a culture of peace and adopted this
flagship resolution by consensus. And today we expect
the same strong endorsement from the Assembly.
We sincerely thank those delegations who have
already sponsored the draft resolution, and we look
forward to more delegations sponsoring from the floor
ahead of its adoption, in order to send a strong message
to the world of the United Nations abiding commitment
to peace, to a culture of peace.
I wish to conclude by expressing our sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and your Office for
your continued support to the follow-up to the Declaration
and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace.
Mr. Jackman (Barbados): I have the honour to
deliver today’s statement on behalf of the 14 members
States of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). We
thank you, Mr. President, for placing the focus squarely

A/77/PV.79

on agenda item 14, “Culture of Peace”, and promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and cooperation.
At the outset, the Caribbean Community wishes to
express its full support to Bangladesh for its continued
dedication and its holistic, integrated and comprehensive
approach to the follow-up to the Declaration of Action on
the Culture of Peace. This is the epitome of the universal
mandate of our international community, particularly
the United Nations system — the promotion of a culture
of peace and non-violence that benefits all humankind.
Given today’s global context, it is even more critical
than before for us to build on the existing culture of
peace and enshrined international cooperation and a
functioning rules-based international order to combat
global threats.
As a region of cultural diversity, CARICOM
recognizes that there is a need for us to build a grand
alliance for a culture of peace among all, particularly
with proactive involvement and participation of women
and youth. Furthermore, we believe that global efforts
towards peace and reconciliation can be sustained only
with a collective approach built on trust, constructive
dialogue and collaboration.
As stated in the Declaration on a Culture of Peace,
education at all levels is one of the principal means to
build a culture of peace. The most significant way of
promoting a culture of peace is through education.
CARICOM believes that premise remains true. In
addition, when women and youth are engaged, peace
is possible. Through our Caribbean Youth Advocacy
and Action Agenda on Violence Prevention, we have
actively engaged and empowered our youth across our
region. That has allowed our youth to effectively work on
specific issues related to crime and violence, including
the prevention and the reduction of crime, to foster social
inclusion and to promote reintegration.
CARICOM sincerely believes that peace is a
prerequisite for us to achieve prosperity and sustainable
development. It is much more than simply the absence
of war.
A comprehensive and coordinated approach to
the promotion of a culture of peace is an imperative
dimension of international commitment towards
promoting mutual understanding and cooperation to
achieve global peace. CARICOM remains committed
to being part of that process.

23-168613/25

A/77/PV.79

14/06/2023

Mr. Pérez Ayestarán (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela has the honour to take the floor on behalf
of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter of the
United Nations.

usher in a new world order in which people live in
ongoing harmony with nature, in which cultural
diversity is both embraced and granted the status of
a historically valuable entity because it enriches and
strengthens our societies.

What remains of 2023 looks set to be a year of
immense challenges for the global agenda, given the
current multifaceted crisis the world is facing: the
economic and financial crisis, inflation on a global
scale, unequal food production and distribution, rising
energy prices, the high cost of reconstruction after the
coronavirus disease and the threat of new pandemics
and the increase in natural catastrophes due to climate
change, all of which only exacerbates human suffering
and increases poverty and exclusion. Added to that is
an alarming increase in the application and expansion
of the scope of unilateral coercive measures, which
ultimately threaten multilateralism as a whole.

The culture of peace is synonymous with and
encompasses, inter alia, the self-determination and
sovereignty of our peoples, egalitarian economic
and social development, and respect for human
rights without distinction made based on class or
categories. It involves working without politicization,
instrumentalization or double standards of any kind.
It also includes universal social justice, health care
and education for all, non-interference in the internal
affairs of States, cultural diversity and the creation of
a world based on the values and ideals that inspired the
establishment of the United Nations, values that today
are at risk of being watered down by the proliferation of
extremist tendencies.

All those tragedies have human origins, with a
lack of dialogue and cooperation at the core and with
selfish interests prevailing. The only possible way to
overcome those challenges is to strengthen a robust
tradition of a culture of peace and solidarity. That will
lead to peaceful coexistence, respect for differences
and mutual attempts to accommodate one another in
the fight against common challenges.
The States members of our Group of Friends
believe that the promotion of a culture of peace must
consequently be an absolute priority in our common
endeavours.
The meaning and intrinsic values of that culture
compel States and other global actors to actively
promote and encourage the creation of spaces in which
we can build political trust and foster truly inclusive
economic development.
We must also actively promote dialogue based
on mutual respect, tolerance, peaceful coexistence,
active non-violence and intercultural and interreligious
dialogue, and we must implement policies that foster
more egalitarian and equitable societies — societies in
which policies of inclusion that benefit those potentially
most vulnerable are put into place. We must guarantee
greater access to health care and education, which must
always be viewed as a human right, not as a commodity.
We must bring about a world without hunger and achieve
a truly just and equitable new international order, one
without racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia,
extremism or any other form of intolerance. We must
4/25

Against that backdrop, we take this opportunity to
reject hegemonistic and unilateral policies that affect
international peace, security and stability. Those
policies represent a clear attempt to undermine the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations and the efforts under way towards
the democratization of international relations and the
strengthening of multilateralism and of a multipolar
system, which are based, inter alia, on mutual respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all
States and respect for the principles of the equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, the rule of
law, diplomacy, political dialogue, tolerance, peaceful
coexistence, respect for diversity, inclusion, a culture
of peace and non-violence and due consideration for
existing differences.
All those values are vital if we are to constructively
and effectively work together on issues of common
interest and concern. It is the staunch conviction of
the Group of Friends that in order to achieve those
lofty, value-based aspirations, it is imperative to
promote, preserve and staunchly defend the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. We must do so on the basis of a spirit of
inclusivity and respect for national sovereignty, the legal
equality of States, the peaceful resolution of disputes,
social progress and the promotion of a revitalized and
truly inclusive multilateralism.
Consequently, we deem it an international political
priority to defend the institutional essence provided by
23-16861

14/06/2023

the tenets contained in our founding Charter, which
have preserved global peace over the past 77 years and
are currently under systematic attack by those intent on
weakening the multilateral system, including the United
Nations, and fostering instead unilateral practices and
proclivities. As such, we believe that only with the
promotion of confidence-building measures and an
ongoing continued, constructive and genuine dialogue
among all actors in a society will it be possible to build
and sustain the foundations that will ultimately lead us
to the advent of a peaceful and prosperous world for
current and future generations.
Climate change, endemic poverty and inequality,
uncontrolled human mobility, transnational organized
crime and terrorism, for example, will never be
overcome without a dynamic multilateralism in
which agendas based on exceptionalist and unilateral
ambitions are dismantled, bearing in mind that those
scourges know no borders, nor do they spare elites from
their tragic consequences. Consequently, we advocate
greater global awareness of the need for dialogue and
understanding among cultures, political ideologies,
religions and civilizations, so as to bring about a genuine
and sustained peace based on justice and coexistence.
The culture of peace is based, inter alia, on the
sovereign equality of States, which are the international
actors par excellence in the promotion of dialogue
and cooperation among nations. Consequently, it
is vital that without delay we repeal any unilateral
coercive economic or political measures that affect the
individual and collective rights of millions of people,
increase poverty and inequality, restrict access to
essential goods and foster perpetual wars and conflict
in contravention of the very principles set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Moreover, we deem it urgent to actively counter
disinformation, counter-information and hate speech,
which in recent times have been used by unscrupulous
groups to sow discord and create social conflict and
constant anxiety through the dissemination of fake
news, the exacerbation of ideological or religious
differences and the promotion of attacks against
potentially vulnerable groups and sectors, thereby
creating a breeding ground for violent extremism leading
to terrorism and for the promotion of expressions of
fascism, Nazism, neo-Nazism and racial supremacy, as
well as discrimination against Africans and Asians and
their descendants. Those are all extremist ideologies

A/77/PV.79

that we thought had already been overcome long ago
by humankind.
In conclusion, our Group of Friends reaffirms its
commitment to continuing its efforts to create formulas
and effective means to combat intolerance and to
working with the United Nations in order to promote
the values of and the effective implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace. We remain committed, moreover, to resolutely
promoting intercultural and interreligious dialogue as
well as active non-violence, condemning hate speech and
decisively promoting dialogue and peaceful diplomacy
as a concrete means of achieving the ideal of a world
characterized by genuine coexistence — an ideal that
we will never give up on, despite the adversities that the
world is facing today.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): I am honoured
to deliver this statement on behalf of the members of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
At the outset, ASEAN would like to express its
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report
(A/77/614) under this agenda item. We are particularly
pleased to see the continued efforts of the United
Nations towards the promotion of a culture of peace
as well as interreligious and intercultural dialogue
and cooperation.
South-East Asia is a region home to 640 million
people with a variety of ethnicities, religions, languages
and cultures. In recognition of unity in diversity and
the benefits of fostering a culture of peace, good
understanding, good-neighbourliness and meaningful
cooperation, those core principles were enshrined in
the Bangkok Declaration of 1967, and more than five
decades on ASEAN continues its endeavours to ensure
peace, progress and prosperity in the region.
The adoption of the Declaration on Culture of
Prevention for a Peaceful, Inclusive, Resilient, Healthy
and Harmonious Society by ASEAN leaders at the
thirty-first ASEAN Summit, held in 2017, is one such
endeavour, which aims to build a culture of prevention
to address the root causes of violent extremism and
other forms of violence; social issues such as the
displacement of populations; and destabilizing factors
such as poverty and inequality.
ASEAN’s Plan of Action on Culture of Prevention
sets out six thrusts, namely, promoting a culture of
peace and intercultural understanding; promoting
a culture of respect for all; promoting a culture of

23-168615/25

A/77/PV.79

good governance at all levels; promoting a culture of
resilience and care for the environment; promoting a
culture of healthy lifestyles; and promoting a culture
supporting the values of moderation.
Those guiding principles remain relevant and
anchor ASEAN’s continued efforts to realize that vision,
including the adoption in 2021 of the ASEAN Strategic
Policy Framework on Promoting an Adaptive ASEAN
Community of Greater Understanding, Tolerance and a
Sense of Regional Agendas among Peoples of ASEAN.
Following the implementation of the Strategic
Framework, ASEAN has issued a Strategy Playbook on
Promoting an Adaptive ASEAN Community of Greater
Understanding, Tolerance and a Sense of Regional
Agendas among Peoples of ASEAN. The development
of that playbook was informed by three strategic
outcomes, namely, first, a cohesive, tolerant and caring
community supported by an enhanced whole-ofASEAN nexus approach; secondly, a future-proofed
culture that is responsive, resilient, gender-sensitive,
inclusive and prepared by mainstreaming greater
understanding, tolerance and a sense of awareness
of regional agendas in regional policy considerations
and activity implementation; and, thirdly, a dynamic,
sustainable and inclusive ecosystem of stakeholders to
foster greater understanding, tolerance and a sense of
regional agendas’ value-centric ASEAN identity and
communities through the forging of partnerships.
We hope that the issuance of that document will
bring us closer to realizing the vision of promoting
ASEAN as an adaptive community of opportunities for
all that celebrates diversity, tolerance and inclusivity.
In addition to intra-ASEAN initiatives, engaging
our dialogue partners and other partners across the
globe is critical to promoting a culture of peace,
security, stability and prosperity, including through
key instruments such as the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia and the Treaty on the
Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone, as well as
ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the East Asia Summit,
the ASEAN Regional Forum and the ASEAN Defence
Ministers’ Meeting-Plus.
Furthermore, ASEAN’s cooperation with the United
Nations forms part of that nexus of regional and global
partnership. The Plan of Action to Implement the Joint
Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between
ASEAN and the United Nations (2021-2025) covers a
wide range of shared strategic priorities, activities and
6/25

14/06/2023

measures that include technical cooperation to exchange
expertise, best practices, lessons learned in countering
terrorism and radicalization as well as preventing
violent extremism. ASEAN also continues to support
the Security Council’s women and peace and security
agenda as well as the youth, peace and security agenda.
Recognizing the important roles of women and
young people in peacebuilding, peace processes and
conflict resolution, ASEAN convened an ASEAN
Regional Forum Symposium Building on Lessons
Learned from the Women, Peace and Security and
the Youth, Peace and Security Agendas from 28 to
30 June 2022.
ASEAN also welcomes the invaluable role of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in promoting
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and greater
understanding and respect among civilizations,
cultures, religions and beliefs. We would also like to
express our congratulations to Morocco for having
successfully hosted the ninth Global Forum last
November in the city of Fez.
We recognize the Alliance’s role in developing the
United Nations Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious
Sites and support its call for mutual respect, which
stresses that the freedom of religion or belief and
freedom of expression are interdependent, interrelated
and mutually reinforcing rights rooted in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
In a time beset by interlocking challenges, ASEAN
will continue to do its part in contributing towards global
peace, security and prosperity through multilateralism,
mutual respect, tolerance, acceptance, reconciliation
and upholding the rule of law.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm ASEAN’s readiness
to work with partners in the international community
and the United Nations towards maintaining global
peace and stability so as to build more inclusive and
prosperous societies for everyone.
Mr. Wong (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Brunei
Darussalam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and adds the following points in our
national capacity.
My delegation thanks the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (A/77/614) on promoting a culture
of peace and interreligious and intercultural dialogue.
A culture of peace built upon strong and connected
23-16861

14/06/2023

communities remains fundamental to a resilient, stable
and prosperous world.
Just as the world is emerging from the coronavirus
disease pandemic, we face new headwinds of rising
global tensions and growing inequality. In many
countries, our social fabric is being put to the test.
Misinformation and disinformation, amplified in
today’s digital age, threaten to widen fault lines within
societies. It may be tempting, in these circumstances,
to retreat further into insularism. However, more than
ever we need to pursue collective action to deal with
those challenges.
Collective action and achieving social cohesion are
not spontaneous occurrences. That is a hard-won lesson
that Singapore knows all too well. A 2021 Pew Research
Centre survey reported that Singapore, while ethnically
and racially diverse, was one of the least divided
societies surveyed. That is a far cry from Singapore’s
turbulent 1950s and 1960s, when intercommunal
tension boiled over into riots. Every step to get to where
we are today has been deliberate and considered. We
have enshrined multiracialism into our Constitution,
recognizing all persons as equal before the law and
prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of religion
and race. Multiracialism has also shaped many of our
major national policies, with deliberate policies to
ensure that no race is excluded or disadvantaged in
fields spanning education, housing, and politics.
We were proud to ratify the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination in 2017 and presented our initial
report to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination in November 2021.
Articles 6 and 8 of the Declaration on a Culture of
Peace recognize that not only Governments but also civil
societies and religious groups play an important role in
the full development of peace. That is something that
we recognize in Singapore as well. Twenty years ago,
Singapore established the Inter-Racial and Religious
Confidence Circles (IRCCs), a platform for community
and religious leaders to have regular interactions to
foster friendships and build trust.
Singapore will refresh the programmes of the IRCCs
as well as renew and expand their composition, and it
will rebrand them as Racial and Religious Harmony
Circles. We also continue to foster other avenues for
dialogue, including with the broader international
community. In September 2022, Singapore hosted

A/77/PV.79

the second International Conference on Cohesive
Societies, at the initiative of our President. It was
attended by more than 800 participants from more than
40 countries and various spheres, including religious
leaders, policymakers, academics and members of
civil society. The second edition put the spotlight on
the critical role of youth leadership in promoting social
cohesion and on how technology can be used to bring
together instead of divide communities.
We can and must continue to find strength in
diversity and build bridges among communities to
foster a culture of peace. Singapore wholeheartedly
supports the Secretary-General’s efforts to promote a
global culture of peace and will continue working with
the international community towards that common goal.
Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, my country’s delegation aligns
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in
Defence of the Charter of the United Nations and
would like to make the following remarks in our
national capacity.
My delegation has read the report of the SecretaryGeneral under consideration (A/77/614) and takes note
of the efforts of United Nations entities to promote a
culture of peace and non-violence.
The Syrian Arab Republic believes that peace lies in
understanding, respect and tolerance among religions,
cultures and peoples. The establishment of a culture
of peace will be possible only on the basis of respect
for international law, the Charter of the United Nations
and the resolutions of international legitimacy. The
adoption of the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace seeks to establish and enshrine
that culture at the international and national levels.
Unfortunately, there are many challenges in that
regard, including the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism, acts of violence and hate speech and other
phenomena that undermine international peace and
security in our common world.
The challenges facing the maintenance of
international peace and security make it imperative
for all of us to put the culture of peace into practice,
so that it does not remain only theory and resolutions
and so that we can ensure that there is a collective will
to establish and promote human communication that
is free from the practices of exclusion, isolation and
discrimination, in a way that prioritizes the values of

23-168617/25

A/77/PV.79

14/06/2023

dialogue, cooperation, the acceptance of others and
coexistence and puts an end to the policies of hegemony,
aggression, the usurpation of rights and the occupation
of the lands of others.

and the ghost of the cold-war mentality lingering.
Human society has once again come to a crossroads in
history, and thus that backdrop promoting the culture of
peace is of realistic significance.

Establishing a culture of peace requires translating
words into actions through enhancing the principles of
the Charter, so that we can put an end to the practice of
some countries using the mechanisms of our common
work to target certain countries through twisted
interpretations of some of the Articles of the Charter,
the use of double standards and the politicization of
humanitarian issues or the actions taken by certain
countries to impose their will on the international
community. We see that in the unilateral coercive
measures whose consequences are causing many
peoples, including the Syrian people, to suffer.

China would like to touch on the following
three points.

My country stresses also the need to urgently and
decisively address the growing trend of radicalization
and the increase in hate speech, racism, stigma,
stereotyping, contempt for religion and xenophobia,
especially against migrants and refugees.
Those obstacles will continue to obstruct the path to
the culture of peace to which we aspire, deepen the divide
among peoples and weaken trust in the performance of
our Organization at a time when many of our peoples are
still paying a hefty price for colonialism, intervention,
military invasions, terrorist wars and illegal criminal
alliances, with acts of aggression undermining the
significant developmental achievements made in many
of the developing countries.
In conclusion, we look forward to our joint efforts
in the development of implementable solutions that
enhance the practice of peace and are in line with
the principles of primacy and respect for national
sovereignty, taking into account the fact that the culture
of peace is organically linked to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and is a main pillar of the
achievement of international peace and security.

First, there is a need to narrow the trust deficit to
create the conditions for peace. What lies behind the
complex issues facing the world is a long-accumulated
deficit in trust. In his report (A/77/614), the SecretaryGeneral also urgently calls for building trust among
nations and peoples; however, deepening mutual trust
is easier said than done. The key is to adhere to such
values as mutual respect, peaceful coexistence and
win-win cooperation to uphold international equity and
justice and to practice true multilateralism.
A small number of countries are stoking confrontation
under the pretext of democracy, creating division in the
name of risk removal, practicing exceptionalism and
double standards and engaging in hegemonic practices
and bullying. Such practices will only undermine
mutual trust, with continuing repercussions.
Mr. Wallace (Jamaica), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Secondly, we must promote peace through
development so as to lay a solid foundation for peace. In
both the United Nations sustainable development agenda
and the Secretary-General’s Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), development is viewed as an important
means for eliminating the root causes of conflicts and
achieving lasting peace. The international community
should take that seriously and increase investment in
development and uphold the concepts of solidarity,
cooperation and common development, pay attention to
the special difficulties faced by developing countries
and ensure the equitable sharing of development
benefits by all countries.

China also co-sponsored draft resolution A/77/L.74,
sponsored by Bangladesh.

A small number of countries have deliberately
practiced decoupling and the breaking of chains, built
high barriers for isolation purposes and suppressed the
development of other countries in pursuit of their own
development privileges. That runs counter to the global
trend of development and progress and is doomed
to failure.

The world today faces multiple interconnected
challenges and crises, with the global economy
struggling to recover, the development gap widening

Thirdly, strengthening inclusivity and mutual
learning among civilizations and improving the links
among peoples is key. In a globalized world, the future of

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
associates itself with the statement made by the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Group of
Friends in Defence of the Charter of the United Nations.

8/25

23-16861

14/06/2023

all countries is closely linked, and humankind belongs
to a community with a shared future. We support the
inclusive coexistence of cultures, encourage exchanges
and mutual learning among civilizations, welcome
empathy and joint efforts by peoples in the face of
common challenges.
A small number of countries impose their values and
morals on others and stoke ideological confrontation,
which has seriously eroded the cornerstone of mutual
understanding and cooperation among civilizations
and runs counter to global efforts towards the
culture of peace. Those countries will ultimately find
themselves isolated.
President Xi Jinping recently put forward the Global
Civilization initiative, which advocates for respect
for the diversity of civilizations, the promotion of the
shared values of humankind, continued innovation
by civilizations and the enhancement of international
personal and cultural exchanges and cooperation.
The Global Civilization Initiative, together with the
Global Development Initiative and the Global Security
Initiative, have become important public goods provided
by China to the world in the new era, offering Chinese
wisdom to resolve difficult global issues and promote
peace, development and progress for humankind. All
parties are welcome to actively join our initiatives,
which are geared towards building a community with a
shared future for humankind.
Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in
Spanish): Nicaragua welcomes the convening of this
meeting on the topic of the culture of peace. We align
ourselves with the statement made by the delegation of
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations.
We also express our recognition and thanks to
the delegation of Bangladesh for its leadership in
introducing the draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace” (A/77/L.74), which we will be adopting at
this meeting. Nicaragua is pleased to co-sponsor the
draft resolution.
We are at a historic juncture in a changing world,
and all of us have a responsibility to look after one
another and to safeguard our Mother Earth, our
cultures, our languages and our ways of life from the
constant threat of extinction and from those who would
attempt to subjugate and dominate us all in order to
preserve a model that oppresses all cultures and ensure

A/77/PV.79

that their supremacy prevails — which we, the peoples
of the world, do not accept.
Our world is quickly moving towards multipolarity,
with irreversible trends towards political, social,
economic and cultural integration through mechanisms
for unconditional, solidarity-based cooperation, greater
investment and openness in trade to non-traditional
markets, contributing to bringing about a holistic
culture of peace among brotherly countries and peoples.
As a factor contributing to that multipolarity, the
culture of peace becomes a crucial element in the
development of such a world, based on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law. Those include respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in the domestic affairs of States,
non-discrimination and absolute sovereign equality
based on universal values such as peace, development,
equality, social justice, democracy and freedom.
We must also at all times prioritize negotiation and
mutual understanding as well as mutually beneficial
cooperation. We must call for an end to conflicts and
acts of aggression and to the illegal unilateral coercive
measures imposed on our peoples.
We urgently appeal for a greater global commitment
to a genuine multilateralism, one that promotes
cooperation and joint endeavours to tackle all our
current challenges, including those that are rooted in
social, economic and environmental inequalities within
and among countries.
We note that the Secretary-General’s report on the
promotion of a culture of peace (A/77/614) presents an
overall snapshot of the actions undertaken by Member
States and the United Nations system as a whole to promote
a culture of peace. However, the report fails to mention,
among the many challenges currently hampering the
promotion of a culture of peace, the deliberate impact
of the imperialist and neocolonialist practices of some
States, which impose illegal unilateral coercive and
arbitrary measures against peoples and Governments
that exercise and defend their right to national
sovereignty, independence and self-determination.
Nicaragua, as part of its culture of peace, continues,
along with the international community, to defend
multilateralism, building relations based on respect,
equality, solidarity and mutual cooperation, abiding by
and upholding the principles contained in the Charter
of the United Nations, which include respect for

23-168619/25

A/77/PV.79

international law and non-interference in the domestic
affairs of States.
We advocate for a just multipolar world that is
equitable and based on solidarity, one that reduces
poverty and inequalities throughout the world. We
will continue to staunchly defend peace, and we
will continue to implement our model of Christian
development, which is socialist and solidarity-based,
with a view to ensuring the well-being of our families
and communities.
For that reason, we demand the immediate cessation
of all coercive economic actions and measures, be
they unilateral, bilateral or multilateral and regardless
of which country they are imposed on. We champion
the right of all peoples to decide their future without
interference of any type.
As a people that cherishes and defends the
establishment, preservation and defence of peace, our
National Assembly on 19 April declared a National Day
of Peace, reiterating the commitment of the Nicaraguan
people and the Government of Reconciliation and
National Unity to achieving a peace with dignity, a
sovereign peace, a peace without foreign interference
and an unconditional peace.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
welcomes the consideration of this important item on
the culture of peace. We thank the Secretary-General
for the report contained in document A/77/614, and we
thank the President of the General Assembly for his
opening remarks.
Pakistan welcomes and has co-sponsored the
draft resolution submitted by Bangladesh (A/77/L.74),
which has just been introduced by the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh.
As outlined in article 3 of the United Nations
Declaration on Culture of Peace, the realization of a
culture of peace is integrally linked to the central
purposes of the Charter of the United Nations: that is,
the non-use of force, respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, the recognition of the right
of peoples to self-determination, the pacific settlement
of disputes and the elimination of racial or religious
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance.
Humankind encompasses diverse cultures and civilizations, which have come into progressively closer contact as the communications and information revolutions
have contracted the world. The multicultural interac10/25

14/06/2023

tions of different languages, foods, customs and beliefs
have successfully enriched each culture, community and
State. Greater intercultural understanding has helped to
liberate peoples, end wars and promote peace and cooperation.
Unfortunately, there is a dark side to the closer contact of cultures and civilizations, as manifested in the
historical and current instances of hostility, discrimination, hate and violence based on differences of race,
religion, ethnicity, nationality and culture. History has
frequently witnessed mass crimes and atrocities against
the “other” in pogroms, wars, oppression and foreign occupation.
Despite the bitter lessons of the last century and the
endeavours of the United Nations and many peoples and
Governments of goodwill, recent times have witnessed a
significant rise in hate, discrimination, xenophobia and
organized violence against individuals, communities
and nations owing to differences among cultures, nationalities, religions or races. The most adverse development
in that context is the proliferation of Islamophobia and
anti-Muslim hate and hostility, especially after the terrorist attacks of 9/11.
Anti-Muslim discrimination is pervasive in several
non-Muslim countries. Islamophobic attitudes have justified societal discrimination and violence against Muslims. Worse, several instances of military intervention in
which hundreds of thousands of Muslims perished would
not have happened if Islamophobia had not influenced
perceptions and decisions. The world is dealing with the
consequences of several such Islamophobic mistakes.
The resolution of the consequent conflicts and tensions
in Asia and Africa will require the active promotion of a
culture of peace.
Resolution 76/254, adopted last year, proclaimed
15 March — the day of the Christchurch massacre of
55 innocent Muslims — as the Day to Combat Islamophobia was most timely and essential. We look forward
to developing, along with the Secretary-General, a plan
of action to combat Islamophobia. In such a plan of action, the international community cannot fail to address
the worst contemporary manifestation of Islamophobia — the threat posed by Hindutva hate in India against
the 200 million Indian Muslims and Christians as well as
the oppressed Muslims of occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
A century after the rise of fascism in Europe, which
devastated the continent, the world is witnessing the
rise of another State imbued with a similar ideology,
23-16861

14/06/2023

Hindutva, and similar practices of racially and
religiously driven oppression and aggression against
minorities. It is no accident that Hindutva, prescribing
Hindu supremacy, was born simultaneously with
Nazism in the 1920s.
The exponents of Hindutva — the so-called Sangh
Parivar, or the family of Hindu organizations — adhere
to an ideology of Hindu supremacy. They seek to
transform India into an exclusive Hindu State in which
Muslims and other minorities are obliged to convert to
Hinduism or accept ejection or a second-class existence.
The founders of that party — the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), the parent of the ruling
Bharatiya Janata Party — proudly equated their
ideology with that of Hitler’s Nazis and called for
the persecution of India’s Muslims just like that of
the Jews. As Arundhati Roy, the Indian author, has
observed, none of the modern-day white supremacists’
neo-Nazi groups can boast the infrastructure and size
of the RSS — with 57,000 branches, or what they
call shakhas, and an armed and dedicated militia of
600,000 volunteers.
One of the members of the RSS, Nathuram Godse,
assassinated Mahatma Gandhi. Within India’s ruling
party today, it is Godse, not Gandhi, who is glorified
as a deity.
The RSS is responsible for the organized pogroms
against Indian Muslims in Bombay in 1992, in Gujarat
in 2002 and in Delhi in 2021. The BBC documentary
on the Gujarat pogrom and the Indian Prime Minister’s
culpability in that massacre was banned in India, and
the BBC is being investigated for tax fraud.
The RSS and the Sangh Parivar were responsible
for the destruction in 1992 of the historic Babri
mosque in Ayodha and the construction, with judicial
complicity, of a Hindu temple on the site. Thousands
of other mosques are threatened with destruction
by Hindu zealots. The United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations must take action, in accordance with its
mandate, to protect those Islamic shrines. The United
Nations must demand that the Indian Government halt
its programme to eliminate India’s Islamic heritage by
changing history books, place names, school curricula
and other similar cultural obliterations of Islam.
India must also be prevented from reducing its
Muslims to statelessness through the discriminatory
Citizenship Law and the National Registry List.
India must halt the daily atrocities against Muslims

A/77/PV.79

such as the lynching of Muslims by “cow vigilantes”;
the detention of Muslims on the ridiculous charge of
“love-jihad”; and violence against Christians for the
“crime” of proselytizing.
Hindutva extremism is also turbocharging India’s
repression in occupied Jammu and Kashmir. It has
deployed 900,000 troops — one soldier for every eight
Kashmiri people — to impose its colonial annexation
of Kashmir, resorting to extra-judicial killings;
the abduction of 15,000 Kashmiri boys; collective
punishment; and the incarceration of the entire political
leadership of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference — the
true voice of the Kashmiri people. India is implementing
its strategy to transform occupied Jammu and Kashmir
from a Muslim-majority State into a Hindu-majority
territory, in violation of Security Council resolutions
and international humanitarian law.
Pakistan has circulated a detailed dossier
documenting, with evidence, more than 3,432 war
crimes committed by Indian officials in occupied
Jammu and Kashmir. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights has issued two
reports citing massive human rights violations and
proposed the establishment of a commission of inquiry
to investigate those violations, asking for access to
occupied Jammu and Kashmir. More than a dozen
Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council have
expressed similar concerns about the human rights
violations in occupied Kashmir and sought access to
investigate those violations. None have been provided
access, even as India has held stage-managed Group of
20 events in occupied Jammu and Kashmir to project
a false normalcy there. As the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on Minority Issues, Fernand de Varennes,
stated on 15 May, by holding the G-20 meeting in
occupied Kashmir, “the Government of India is seeking
to normalize…military occupation”. He added that “the
situation in Jammu and Kashmir should be decried and
condemned, not pushed under the rug”.
Adama Dieng, the former Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Genocide, used to say that
“atrocities do not happen overnight” Gregory Stanton,
the head of Genocide Watch, has warned that what is
happening in Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir and
in India itself points to the possibility of genocide in
Kashmir and in India.
We urge those who are ready today to open their
doors to the Prime Minister of India to call for a halt
to India’s oppression and atrocities. Their silence

23-1686111/25

A/77/PV.79

diminishes their stature and exposes their vocal
commitments to universal human values and human
rights as being hollow and hypocritical.
Mr. Mohammad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the
Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, for his report
(A/77/614) before us, which reviews the measures taken
by Member States and the Organization to promote
the culture of peace and dialogue among religions and
defines the challenges facing international and regional
efforts and endeavours to spread the culture of peace.
We
endorse
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations contained in that report, which
stress the need to continue making efforts to promote
the culture of peace and dialogue among religions and
cultures in order to deal with the root causes of violence
and conflict. It is also important to adopt comprehensive
approaches that address the various dimensions of
building peace, humanitarian work, human rights and
development. We believe that the culture of peace
should be based on a better understanding of the
main motives behind the rise of conflicts and their
continuation.
Our world today faces many interrelated,
interlinked and intertwined tensions and crises. Acts
of violence and instability plague many parts of the
world. Many of them can be attributed to the rise of
various forms of racism and an increase in hate speech
and discrimination. The spread of such phenomena is
the concern of all and adds to the complexity of others
that the world has suffered for decades, even centuries,
including intolerance, not accepting the other, bigotry,
violent extremism, religious and factional strife,
exclusion and the rejection of coexistence, all of which
represent challenges that undermine and threaten the
spread of a culture of peace in our societies and States.
Facing those challenges requires that we make
every effort at the national, regional and international
levels to transform a culture of hate, bigotry and war
into a culture of dialogue, coexistence and peace. We
must therefore take tangible and effective measures to
address and limit hate speech, including Islamophobia,
and to promote dialogue among religions and cultures,
respect human rights and support peacebuilding
efforts. We also stress the important role of women and
young people in strengthening the culture of peace,
particularly the need to enable and involve them in all
fields, including political processes.
12/25

14/06/2023

The promotion of peace is closely linked to
sustainable development. A commitment to peace
is vital to realizing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and its Goal 16, on the promotion of
peaceful and inclusive societies for all. In that context,
we would like to stress that there can be no sustainable
peace without development and no development without
sustainable peace, as both are closely interlinked.
The culture of peace has deep roots in my country.
The spirit of tolerance, dialogue and interaction with
various cultures, religions and civilizations has been
deeply established in the history of Kuwaiti society for
hundreds of years. Those values have been translated
in our contemporary age into a Constitution that
guarantees the freedoms of opinion, expression,
belief and practice of religious rights. In addition, our
State founders clearly and explicitly stipulated in our
Constitution that for the State of Kuwait peace is a State
objective, thus establishing a peaceful approach to all
endeavours undertaken by my country at the regional
and international levels through our balanced, moderate
and reasonable diplomacy.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait stresses the
importance of making every effort internationally
aimed at promoting the culture of peace, a dialogue
among civilizations and the spread of the values of
moderation, tolerance and mutual respect, so as to ensure
the renunciation of extremism, hatred and violence in
all their forms through international and multilateral
efforts, particularly through the United Nations, which
was established to embrace and entrench dialogue as
a steadfast principle in international relations towards
achieving peace, cooperation and communication
among nations and peoples.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to thank President Kőrösi for having
convened this annual debate on the culture of peace.
I take this opportunity also to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report entitled “Promotion of a culture
of peace” (A/77/614).
I wish also to congratulate Bangladesh for having
introduced draft resolution A/77/L.74, entitled “Followup to the Declaration and Programme of Action on
a Culture of Peace”, which Morocco has always
co-sponsored and supported.
A culture of peace is the raison d’être of our
Organization. It is founded on the promotion of political
understanding and constructive dialogue among States
23-16861

14/06/2023

on the basis of mutual respect and in line with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It embodies the three pillars that guide United
Nations action – development, peace and security, and
human rights.
In that context, I wish to reiterate the full support
of my country for United Nations efforts to make the
promotion of a culture of peace and dialogue among
religions and cultures a central focus of the United
Nations system as a whole.
In line with the instructions and guidance from His
Majesty King Mohammed VI, the Kingdom of Morocco
is a tireless advocate in the promotion of the values
of peace and dialogue among religions and cultures,
as well as mutual respect, human dignity and goodneighbourliness. We also attach great importance to the
fight against all forms of discrimination, xenophobia,
hatred and the rejection of the other, including
Islamophobia, antisemitism and Christianophobia.
To address the numerous challenges that our world
is currently facing, particularly the rise in ideological
conflicts, intolerance, inward-looking attitudes,
populism, violence, extremism and separatism, the
Kingdom of Morocco, as an active, committed and
responsible player on the international stage, is
convinced that strengthening multilateralism and
consistent collective action within our Organization to
foster dialogue, pluralism and mutual respect are more
crucial than ever.
The Kingdom of Morocco is working tirelessly to
remain a model State in which, in a climate of fraternity
and security, people of various monotheistic regions can
coexist. My country is a crossroads and a melting pot
of various cultures, religions and civilizations. Indeed,
for centuries now Muslims, Jews and Christians have
coexisted in our Kingdom. Morocco generously hosted
and protected the thousands of Muslims and Jews
who fled the Iberian peninsula to escape religious
persecution in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.
Respect for cultural and religious diversity is a key
tenet of the day-to-day life and collective consciousness
of Moroccan society. The Kingdom of Morocco is also
working tirelessly to strengthen the values of peace,
harmony, growth and respect for cultural diversity at
the national, regional and international levels, under
the guidance of his Highness King Mohammed VI.
Here I would recall the historic visit of Pope
Francis to Morocco on 30 and 31 March 2019, at the

A/77/PV.79

invitation of His Majesty the King, Commander of the
Faithful — the second visit, following that of Pope
John Paul II, in 1985 — which is clear and eloquent
testimony to the key role played by Morocco in
promoting dialogue, understanding and cooperation
among different religions and cultures.
Morocco attaches great importance to education,
which we view as a basic, key element to ensure the
development and maintenance of a culture of peace
and to tackle the scourges of discrimination, hate and
extremism. The educational system in Morocco teaches,
from an early age, respect for open-mindedness, diversity
and human rights. School manuals and curricula are
systematically and periodically reviewed to include the
values of coexistence, harmony and tolerance.
I should like to note here the decision made by
Morocco to teach Jewish history and culture in Arabic
to Moroccan students starting in primary school.
In addition, in order to promote the just, noble and
respectful values of Islam and combat all forms of
radicalism and extremism, the Kingdom of Morocco
is carrying out various initiatives, including religious
reform, an upgrading of religious education and the
promotion of cooperation with brotherly and friendly
countries, particularly in Africa.
In that connection, on the instruction of King
Mohammed VI, Morocco established the Mohammed
VI Foundation for African Ulemas and the Mohammed
VI Institute for the Training of Imams, Morchidines and
Morchidates. The Kingdom provides multidimensional
training to hundreds of preachers from a large number
of African, Arab, European and Asian countries
Morocco is also playing a crucial, two-pronged role
at the multilateral level. First, we actively contribute to
the discussions held on this issue in the various bodies
of the United Nations. We also participate in processes
aimed at the elaboration and adoption of relevant
resolutions at the United Nations. It is on that basis
that Morocco submitted to the General Assembly in
July 2019 the historic resolution 73/328, on promoting
interreligious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance
in countering hate speech.
In addition, the General Assembly in July 2021
unanimously adopted resolution 75/309, submitted
by Morocco, which proclaims, for the first time in
the history of the United Nations, 18 June as the
International Day for Countering Hate Speech. That
is another illustration of a contribution from Morocco

23-1686113/25

A/77/PV.79

as a State that builds bridges of tolerance and dialogue
among religions, cultures and nations.
In that connection, I wish to invite all present to
an event to be organized by Morocco and the United
Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the
Responsibility to Protect. The event will commemorate
the second anniversary of the International Day for
Countering Hate Speech and will be held on Monday at
11 a.m. in the Trusteeship Council Chamber.
Morocco is also proud to have made a substantial
contribution to the adoption and implementation of the
plans of action, documents and resolutions that form
the cornerstone of the various United Nations efforts
and initiatives aimed at promoting the culture of peace,
the universal values of moderation and tolerance and
the fight against all scourges related to discrimination
and exclusion. Here I refer in particular to the United
Nations Plan of Action to Safeguard Religious Sites;
the United Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on
Hate Speech; the Marrakesh Declaration on the rights
of Religious Minorities in Predominantly Muslim
Majority Communities; the Rabat Plan of Action on the
prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious
hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination,
hostility or violence; and the Plan of Action for
Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to
Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes.
I would like to underscore here that the Kingdom of
Morocco, one of the founding members of the Alliance
of Civilizations — whose High Representative,
Miguel Ángel Moratinos, we commend — actively
participates in global dialogues and conferences and
works to foster understanding and cultural enrichment.
It spares no effort to promote a dialogue of peace that
would allow genuine synergies to flourish within the
international community.
My country was pleased to host in November 2022,
in the historical city of Fez, the ninth Global Forum
of the United Nations Alliance for Civilizations,
which highlighted the value of dialogue and tolerance
as well as Africa’s role as a positive player in the
international arena.
The Fez Declaration, which was adopted as the
outcome document of that Forum, is a text of particular
importance. It sheds light on the fundamental principles
of intercultural dialogue, tolerance and international
cooperation. The declaration underscores, inter alia, the
importance of the central role of education; of women
14/25

14/06/2023

and young people as mediators in the fight against
discrimination and intolerance; of sport as a vector for
peace and inclusiveness; of the role of religious leaders
in promoting peace, coexistence and social harmony
within societies; of reinvigorating multilateralism
through the culture of peace; and of countering online
hate speech.
I would like to conclude with an excerpt from
the statement made by His Majesty the King during
the Parliamentary Conference on Interfaith Dialogue:
Working Together for Our Common Future, which is
currently being held in Marrakesh ,from 13 to 15 June:
“We must be aware that if we succeed in creating a
fruitful dialogue among religions and civilizations,
we will be able to address many of the issues and
several of the challenges that threaten the future
of our planet and that compromise the ideal of
coexistence. As we are all in the same boat, we
face the same destiny. Given what is at stake, we
must reflect now on the kind of world that we will
be bequeathing to future generations. That is as
much the responsibility of parliaments, religious
institutions and intellectual elites as it is the duty
of Governments, civil society and the media”
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): The promotion and
cultivation of dialogue, tolerance and non-discrimination
lie at the core of human rights and human dignity, which
are indispensable to building peaceful and inclusive
societies. At the current difficult time in the history
of humankind, fostering a culture that values peace,
understanding and cooperation is of crucial importance,
as intolerance, exclusion and discrimination, in their
various forms and manifestations, continue to create
new lines of division and generate conflict in many
parts of the world.
Unchecked military buildups and escalation,
accompanied by the promulgation of hate speech at
the highest political level, persist, including in our
immediate neighbourhood.
Armenia welcomed the launch of the United
Nations Strategy and Plan of Action on Hate Speech
by the Secretary-General in 2019, and we encourage
the United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention
and the Responsibility to Protect, as the focal point for
the implementation of the strategy, to clearly identify
instances of hate speech, which constitutes both a
trigger and an indicator of the risk of atrocity crimes.
As has so often been demonstrated, intolerance and the
23-16861

14/06/2023

A/77/PV.79

cultivation of hate speech against national, ethnic and
religious groups, if not properly addressed, can lead to
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

been ensured, which makes it a moral imperative for
the international community to stand up for the values
and convictions that unite us, the people.

UNESCO plays an important and unique role in
promoting the culture of peace and in protecting cultural
heritage. Armed conflicts and military action can have
a devastating impact on objects of cultural heritage,
which are of irreplaceable value to all of humankind
as unique expressions of history, identity and cultural
memory. Today the milleniums-old Christian Armenian
sites in Nagorno-Karabakh are on the verge of total
extermination. Armenia’s deep concern about the fate
of cultural property in Nagorno-Karabakh is also based
on the previous history of the total and intentional
eradication of the Armenian heritage in Nakhijevan
by Azerbaijan.

Armenia remains committed to a strong and
effective multilateral system, with respect for human
rights and the rule of law at the heart thereof. We
are determined to continue working towards justice,
tolerance and non-discrimination, in line with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the values and goals of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace.

The destruction of the Armenian cultural heritage
has been extensively monitored and reported, including
through the use of modern digital technologies. In
particular, satellite technology has been increasingly
used to monitor and document efforts that seek to
destroy or modify cultural sites. Cultural genocide
perpetrated on the grounds of ethnic hatred and intent
to destroy the traces of the historical and civilizational
presence of a particular nation is no longer mere
hearsay but can be seen in high-resolution imagery,
placing material and factual evidence before the eyes
of the international community.
Armenia has consistently requested that a UNESCO
fact-finding mission be deployed to Nagorno-Karabakh
and adjacent areas in order to help preserve the vast and
unique cultural heritage of the region; yet the efforts
of international organizations for an independent and
impartial assessment of the facts on the ground have
been continuously obstructed.
Those who disregard instances of the erasure of
cultural heritage in the face of irrefutable evidence
thereof for the sake of so-called neutrality need to be
reminded that more often than not, State-sponsored
policies of hate crimes and violence against culture and
history are followed by other kinds of atrocities.
The late Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjöld
once said:
“Never, for the sake of peace and quiet, deny your
own experience or convictions”.
A culture of peace can thrive only where the right
to truth, justice and guarantees of non-recurrence has

Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation aligns itself with the statement made by the
delegation of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on
behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence of the Charter
of the United Nations
The world continues to face the grave situation
caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, against a
backdrop in which the consequences of colonialism and
the unjust international economic order had already
led to hunger, abject poverty, exclusion, ignorance
and inequality, as well as the danger posed by climate
change to our very survival.
Despite the fact that that complex state of affairs
should have been confronted in a spirit of cooperation
and solidarity, instead the flames of conflict are
being fanned, and millions and millions continue
to be spent on the modernization and scaling up of
weapons, including nuclear weapons. Those resources
could have been channelled into fostering peace and
sustainable development.
Much remains to be done in order to foster and
enjoy a genuine culture of peace, a culture that fosters
understanding among peoples as well as tolerance and
mutual respect in the face of differences. There can be
no peace without economic and social development,
justice and equity for all. There can be no peace or the
strengthening of a culture that fosters it if we do not
stringently adhere to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and of international
law, in particular the prohibition of the use and threat
of use of force, non-interference in the domestic
affairs of States, respect for sovereignty and the selfdetermination of peoples.
The advent of a culture of peace is hampered also
by the application of unilateral coercive measures as
tools of pressure and the promotion of supremacist,

23-1686115/25

A/77/PV.79

racist and xenophobic ideologies, all of which are
scientifically false and morally unacceptable.
My country, which has for more than 60 years
been living under constant threat, is well aware of the
value of peace. Throughout all those years, Cuba has
had to weather State terrorism, military aggression,
bacteriological warfare and constant defamation
campaigns and campaigns aimed at manipulating
Cuban realities, as well as the economic, commercial
and financial blockade imposed on us, which represents
an act of economic warfare in time of peace and harms
the daily lives of the Cuban people.
All that comes from one country. In the face of that
policy of systematic hostility, Cuba has always defended
its sovereignty and its right to live in peace using the
model that our people have freely chosen freely. We
are staunchly committed to the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace. We reaffirm and defend international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the Proclamation of
Latin America and the Caribbean as a Zone of Peace,
signed by Heads of State and Government in Havana
in 2014.
However, a peaceful world will remain but a pipe
dream so long as we fail to prioritize multilateralism
and ensure respect for our legitimate differences. The
promotion of a culture of peace is the path to follow to
bring about a better world, a world that is more just and
sustainable for all.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): Our statement is aligned with that made
by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of Friends in Defence
of the Charter of the United Nations.
First and foremost, I wish to thank the President of
the General Assembly, Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, for giving me
the opportunity to speak in a debate on the issue of peace,
which is of paramount importance for humankind.
I take the floor on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea to first thank President Kőrösi
for having convened this important meeting on the
promotion of a culture of peace. Secondly, I wish to
congratulate Secretary-General António Guterres for the
comprehensive report (A/77/614) that he has produced
on the topic in accordance with resolution 76/68, on
follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of Action
on a Culture of Peace.
16/25

14/06/2023

Mahatma Gandhi said that there is no path to
peace; peace is the path. Indeed, the many challenges
currently facing humankind, including armed conflicts,
terrorism, tensions among nuclear Powers, pandemics
and the effects of climate change, can be tackled by
humankind as a whole only if we live in peace — if
peace reigns throughout the world
Indeed, enjoying peace and living in a world of
peace is the result of promoting a culture of peace, which
involves promoting also a culture of non-violence. The
culture of peace is a process that requires creating
and consolidating an environment that is conducive to
dialogue and discussion in order to find solutions to
problems and tensions. It is a process that must value
all of us, large and small — a process in which all can
participate in and influence decision-making.
Consequently, humankind, through institutions
such as the United Nations and its decision-making
bodies such as the Security Council, must establish the
obligation of promoting a culture of peace, an end to
violence and the practice of non-violence via education,
dialogue and cooperation through multilateralism, as
well as through formal education, education based on life
skills and cultural awareness programmes, all of which
can be used to create and sustain a culture of peace.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea deems it vital
that we reiterate with one voice our commitment to the
ideals set out in the United Nations Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace. As such,
the Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
will continue working resolutely to shoulder its share of
our collective responsibility to build a more sustainable
peace and to contribute to guaranteeing the collective
well-being of humankind.
It is in that spirit that His Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, President of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, stated on 5 January 2019, before the
Federation of World Peace:
“A people’s greatness is not measured by its
geographical dimensions, rather, by its spiritual
strength and its humanitarian leadership, by whether
it is capable of designing strategies anchored in the
search for peace and in the healthy coexistence of
nations and peoples as a fundamental and important
premise of development.”
That is why the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
supports and co-sponsored draft resolution A/77/L.74,
introduced by the representative of Bangladesh.
23-16861

14/06/2023

To conclude, allow me to encourage all Member
States within the United Nations family to promote the
culture of peace. There is no path to peace; peace itself
is the path. We must strengthen that peace by bolstering
all means and instruments that allow us to resolve
disputes peacefully, in a spirit of respect for human
dignity, tolerance and non-discrimination. We must
strengthen national capacities to implement policies and
programmes designed to drastically reduce the share of
the global population of all ages living in poverty.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): We welcome the emphasis
that the General Assembly has placed on the culture of
peace as a driver and enabler of peace and development.
We firmly believe that pluralism, tolerance, mutual
respect and the diversity of religions and beliefs are
the foundation for promoting human fraternity and
fostering a culture of peace.
The tradition of welcoming, respecting and
honouring all faiths is as old as India itself. The Great
Indian philosopher-thinker Swami Vivekananda said:
“We believe not only in universal toleration, but we
accept all religions as true”.
It bears reiterating that India considers the entire
world as one large, interconnected family. That enduring
philosophy has guided our constant interaction and
exchange of thoughts with the outside world. In fact,
and as many here know, the theme of India’s presidency
of the Group of 20 is Vasudaiva kutumbakam — one
Earth, one family, one future.
Sarva Dharma Sambhava is also a unique concept
of Indian secularism that maintains that all religions are
inherently good and worthy of respect. That principle of
equal respect and treatment for all faiths has been a part
of India’s ethos for thousands of years. That principle is
also integral to the Constitution of India.
We appreciate the efforts of Bangladesh in
introducing a draft resolution today on the follow-up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action (A/77/L.74),
which India is happy to co-sponsor. We firmly believe
that the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion
and expression and full respect for the freedom
to seek, receive and impart information play an
important role in promoting pluralism and combating
religious intolerance.
Today, as we all know, the world is facing
serious threats owing to geopolitical tensions and
unequal development. There is a surge in instances of

A/77/PV.79

intolerance, discrimination and acts of violence based
on religion or belief. We are deeply concerned with
growing manifestations of intolerance, discrimination
or violence against followers of both Abrahamic and
non-Abrahamic religions.
It is an undeniable fact that contemporary forms of
religiophobia are on the rise. These need to be factored
into our discussions; we cannot exclude them therefrom
for political expediency.
We strongly condemn acts of discrimination or
violence motivated by antisemitism, Christianophobia
or Islamophobia. We also express deep concern at the
growing increase in the number of attacks on religious
places, including churches, gurudwaras, monasteries,
mosques, temples, synagogues and other religious sites.
This is the time for us to work together to strengthen
human fraternity and to intensify our efforts in
building a culture of peace. We call for strengthened
international efforts to foster a global dialogue on
the promotion of a culture of peace and reaffirm that
interreligious dialogue should be inclusive, broader and
encompass all religions and all faiths.
Terrorism, which is a manifestation of intolerance
and violence, is the antithesis of all religions and
cultures. The world should be concerned by terrorists
who use religion to justify these acts and those who
support them in this quest. We must adopt zero tolerance
against terrorism and violent extremism.
I will also say that effective international cooperation
on any of the pillars of the United Nations — human
rights, development or peace and security — will
remain elusive unless countries recognize and promote
the values of democracy, pluralism and the rule of
law in the work of the United Nations. I am sure that
everyone will agree that it is important to preserve the
unitedness of the United Nations by pushing back all
attempts to introduce a divisive agenda, particularly in
matters related to religion. Member States need to work
together to strengthen a real culture of peace and to
envision the world as one large family, as does India.
Lastly, and most regrettably, we have heard
some deeply distorted and inaccurate, not to mention
malicious, remarks from a certain delegation. We have
nothing but the utmost sympathy for such a mindset
that utters falsehoods repeatedly arising undeniably
out of ignorance and a total lack of appreciation for a
culture of peace. Unlike the delegation in question, I
will not be wasting the time of the Assembly gathered

23-1686117/25

A/77/PV.79

in this Hall to strengthen multilateralism and foster a
dialogue of peace. My only advice to that delegation
would be that its members look at the numerous rights
of reply we have exercised in the past. There they will
find their answer.
As far as my country, India, is concerned, our
agenda will always be constructive, progressive
and for the greater good of humankind. In the spirit
of our civilizational ethos, we remain committed to
spreading the message of humanity, democracy, peace
and non-violence. We will continue to work with all
States Members of the United Nations as well as United
Nations entities to promote a culture of peace based on
understanding, compassion and respect.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
Ecuador welcomes the report of the Secretary-General,
entitled “Promotion of a culture of peace” (A/77/614),
and appreciates the delegation of Bangladesh’s
leadership in negotiating the draft resolution entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”, contained in document
A/77/L.74, which is being considered by the General
Assembly and which my country has co-sponsored.
The current situation is worrisome. Peaceful
coexistence and development are threatened by the
persistence of conflicts, the revival of hate speech,
impunity, devastation caused by natural disasters and
an unprecedented number of displaced persons and
refugees, among other factors. The goal of achieving a
sustainable culture of peace seems increasingly distant
in the face of new threats that exacerbate the causes of
violence, and which are expressed through intolerance,
discrimination and misinformation. Some conflicts
are magnified by the deployment of speech that incites
hatred and intolerance against States, communities
belonging to different ethnic, religious, cultural or
belief groups, and even against personnel deployed by
the United Nations to support conflict resolution, all of
which is worrisome.
The use of hate speech and propaganda already
proved its destructive capacity in the years leading up
to the Second World War. It is imperative to banish
their use for good, since narratives construct realities
and make us responsible for their consequences. These
circumstances, far from discouraging us, should
be the main motivation to redouble our efforts to
promote a culture of peace that seeks justice, equity
and inclusiveness in our societies. We need to renew
our commitment to facing the present moment with
18/25

14/06/2023

processes that allow the participation of women and
young people in decision-making.
In accordance with Article 24 of the United Nations
Charter, my country currently has the responsibility
conferred upon it by the General Assembly to occupy a
non-permanent seat on the Security Council. Ecuador’s
contribution to the work of the Council is sustained
by the principles that guide its foreign policy. Direct
dialogue as the best instrument for prevention and
coming together and pursuing peace and development
are part and parcel of these principles.
The principles of the culture of peace infuse
Ecuador’s national legislation. They are, above all,
embedded in the conscience of a peaceful people that
in recent years has been threatened by transnational
organized crime seeking to do away with our democratic
institutions. That effort will not succeed because
Ecuador is a country committed to peace, sustainable
development and democracy.
For all those reasons, on this occasion, we reiterate
our concern about the persistence and proliferation
of violence and conflicts in various parts of the
world. Peace is a positive and dynamic participatory
process that requires a spirit of mutual understanding
and cooperation.
I would conclude by reiterating our commitment to
efforts aimed at establishing a culture of peace, and to
supporting the implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace (resolutions
53/243 A and B) at the local, national, regional and
international levels.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
President of the General Assembly for convening
today’s important meeting on the culture of peace.
This issue is extremely important in the light of the
growing challenges and crises that undermine peace
efforts around the world, foremost of which are the
spread of hate speech, intolerance and growing armed
conflict, as well as the impacts of humanitarian crises
and climate change.
Confronting those threats requires us to redouble
our efforts for promoting a culture of peace. The United
Arab Emirates believes that that is the basis for building
peaceful and prosperous societies that acknowledge
their differences and see them as opportunities for
achieving progress and prosperity. In that context, we
look forward to adopting the draft resolution submitted
23-16861

14/06/2023

by Bangladesh on a culture of peace (A/77/L.74) and
co-sponsored by my country.
We also support the point made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on today’s topic (A/77/614) on the
need to harness knowledge and expertise in the light of
the escalation of conflicts, so as to promote a culture
of peace. That requires us to continue exchanging best
practices and exploring ways to overcome challenges
that undermine peace and stability, while focusing
on the impact of hate speech and extremism against
women and girls, in particular.
We stress the need for adopting a proactive and
comprehensive approach at the international level
to address the threats of racism, intolerance and
extremism in all its forms, particularly as extremism
incites, exacerbates and prolongs conflicts. That is
why the United Arab Emirates has made that issue
a top priority, including during its membership in
the Security Council. The Council meeting that my
country is convening today on the importance of
the values of human fraternity in the promotion and
sustainability of peace (see S/PV.9346) is a testament
to raising awareness about the pivotal role of the values
of tolerance and peaceful coexistence in empowering
societies to be resilient and build and sustain peace.
The aim of draft resolution A/77/L.74, submitted by
the United Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom to
the Security Council, to be adopted today, is to address
the threats of extremism, intolerance and hate speech
and to promote the values of tolerance and peaceful
coexistence in conflict situations.
There is no doubt that strengthening partnerships
and fostering coordination among all actors, including
Governments, the private sector and civil society
institutions, are essential for our responses to be
effective and comprehensive. Each of us has unique
contributions to make to promoting a culture of
peace. In that regard, we stress the importance of the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women in
such efforts, given their pivotal role in building and
sustaining peace.
It is also necessary to invest in the potential and
ability of young people to create solutions, promote
mutual understanding and address their concerns so
that extremist and terrorist groups do not exploit them
to achieve their goals.
We believe that religious and community leaders have
an indispensable role in fostering mutual understanding

A/77/PV.79

among different peoples. In that context, the United
Arab Emirates launched the Zayed Award for Human
Fraternity, which annually recognizes individuals and
organizations that have dedicated their lives to peace and
made valuable contributions to that end. Furthermore,
the Abrahamic Family House, in Abu Dhabi, provides
a venue for promoting mutual understanding,
peace and dialogue among people of goodwill.
In line with our belief in the critical role of education
in establishing a generation that believes in the values
of peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding, the
United Arab Emirates has been keen to make tolerance
an integral part of its educational system through the
launch of several initiatives, including the “On the
Path of Zayed” project, which focuses on strengthening
communication and positive dialogue among students.
As the Secretary-General emphasized, digital
space will be an important issue throughout the
next decade. It will require focusing our efforts on
addressing the spread of hate speech over social media
and disseminating an alternate narrative that promotes
human values among peoples.
In conclusion, we look forward to continuing our
discussions on a culture of peace, including through the
New Agenda for Peace and the Summit of the Future, to
be held next year. Despite our important achievements,
we must continue to work together to overcome
challenges and ensure a better future for the peoples of
the world.
Mrs. Mozgovaya (Belarus) (spoke in Russian):
The delegation of the Republic of Belarus thanks
Bangladesh for introducing the draft resolution, and
welcomes its adoption by consensus.
Belarus is firmly committed to the ideals of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace, but regrets to note that, two decades later, the
world is still far from embodying that concept.
Today the world is still shaken by conflicts. Old
hotbeds of tension remain, and new ones are emerging.
Instead of mutual understanding and cooperation, we
are witnessing only growing confrontation and mutual
accusatory rhetoric. Instead of dialogue on an equal
footing, there is a policy of double standards and blatant
interference in the internal affairs of States. Instead of
respect for cultural diversity and pluralism, there are
ongoing attempts by individual countries to impose
their paradigm of values and views on others. Instead
of promoting sustainable development and strengthening

23-1686119/25

A/77/PV.79

mutually beneficial trade and economic cooperation, we
are unwittingly witnessing the reckless imposition of
illegal sanctions.
The Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, adopted by all Member States more
than 20 years ago, called for refraining from taking any
unilateral measures not in accordance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations and recognized
that they hamper the economic and social development of
the affected countries, undermine the well-being of their
populations and places obstacles to the full enjoyment of
human rights.
But today sanctions continue to be almost the only
tool in the hands of Western countries directed against
those who do not agree with the imposition, by them,
of the “rules-based order”. I take this opportunity to
once again call on Western countries to reconsider their
approaches and lift unilateral and coercive measures that
violate international law and undermine the culture of
peace at the global level.
After the horrors of war that our people had to live
through, a culture of peace is rooted in our consciousness
in Belarus, in our genes, enshrined in our cultural code.
The concept of a culture of peace is at the heart of our
foreign policy. It is no coincidence that many provisions
of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace resonate with the initiative of the President
of Belarus to start a global dialogue, leading main
international players in the true spirit of San Francisco
to build a new system of collective international security.
Today the world needs the decisive will of world
leaders to find ways to overcome their differences.
Embodying the concept of a culture of peace could be
a tool to achieve that end. Committed as we are to the
ideals of the Declaration and Programme of Action,
Belarus will continue to contribute to strengthening the
culture of peace at the global and regional levels.
Mr. Mukashev (Kazakhstan): The delegation
of Kazakhstan welcomes the comprehensive report
presented by the Secretary-General on the promotion
of a culture of peace (A/77/614). The report serves as
a testament to our collective commitment to fostering
harmony, understanding and unity among nations.
As a multi-ethnic and multireligious country,
Kazakhstan places the utmost importance on
strengthening interfaith dialogue, both domestically
and globally. Since 2003, we have actively fostered
interreligious dialogue by hosting the triennial Congress
20/25

14/06/2023

of Leaders of World and Traditional Religions. The
most recent Congress, the seventh in the series, was
held in September. We were honoured to have the
participation of esteemed figures such as the Grand
Imam of Al-Azhar, Ahmed Al-Tayeb, His Holiness
Pope Francis and other prominent religious leaders who
delivered powerful messages of peace to the world.
As an outcome of that Congress, a significant
and highly detailed Final Declaration was adopted,
encompassing principles of religious pluralism, mutual
respect, non-discrimination and equality. Participants
of the Congress initiated the issuance of the Final
Declaration as an official document of the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly, serving as a
guiding framework for Governments, political leaders
and international organizations in their pursuit of
interfaith harmony.
All of those initiatives align with the Organization’s
concept of the culture of peace, which aims to promote
dialogue and understanding among diverse cultures,
religions and nations as a means to achieve sustainable
peace and security.
In that spirit, the delegation of Kazakhstan is
pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution on this item
today. We also commend the delegation of Bangladesh
for its transparent and diligent efforts in facilitating the
text of the draft resolution and successfully leading the
negotiation process to reach a consensus.
Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for convening this meeting and
for his important opening remarks.
We are grateful to the delegation of Bangladesh
for facilitating the negotiations on draft resolution
A/77/L.74, entitled “Follow-up to the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace”, submitted
annually, which my country, Azerbaijan, has sponsored.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report, contained in the document A/77/614, on the
promotion of a culture of peace submitted pursuant to
resolution 76/68.
Azerbaijan attaches great importance to the
promotion of a culture of peace, paying particular
attention to encouraging intercultural and interreligious
dialogue at the national and international levels and
successfully implementing various initiatives to
that end.
23-16861

14/06/2023

A/77/PV.79

As the Secretary-General informed in his report,
in Azerbaijan, UN-Women and the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, in partnership
with the Government of Azerbaijan, put forward a
plan for a series of intergenerational forums on women
and peace and security to raise awareness about
gender mainstreaming in post-conflict reconstruction,
access to sustained and legal livelihoods, women’s
participation in spheres of decision-making and
advocacy for endorsement of the country’s national
action plan on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000). The report also mentioned
the participation of women and youth civil society
representatives from Azerbaijan in the UN-Womenorganized online consultations on the theme entitled
“Looking beyond 2020: Advancing Women, peace and
security in Eastern Partnership countries”.

The fundamentally flawed and false allegations
made by the representative of Armenia earlier at this
meeting reveal the extent to which hatred, intolerance
and falsehood dominate in his country’s discourse
and the serious threat that it poses to regional peace,
security and stability.

As the Secretary-General highlighted in his report,
a culture of peace is central to the founding mission
of the United Nations. Indeed, intercultural and
interreligious dialogue remains one of the important
avenues within the broader objectives of peacebuilding,
sustaining peace and reconciliation and is essential for
tackling the root causes of violence and conflict.

That is exactly what Armenia tried to accomplish
by expelling all of the more than 200,000 Azerbaijanis
from their historical homeland in Armenia, further
unleashing aggression against Azerbaijan and
occupying and ethnically cleansing a large portion of
my country’s sovereign territory.

However, hate propaganda, disinformation and
the policies aimed at sowing dissension on religious
and racial grounds, building mono-ethnic societies
and advocating the ideas of ethnic incompatibility,
dehumanization and racial superiority, continue to fuel
identity-based intolerance, destabilize societies and
undermine peaceful coexistence.
Attempts to weaponize the past and promote
fabricated historical narratives serve the same purpose,
resulting in generations growing up with a deep sense
of hatred and intolerance.
Impunity for serious violations of international law
remains one of the major impediments to peace, justice
and reconciliation in some parts of the world.
It is high time to translate the right words into real
actions. As we speak in this Hall, people are dying in
conflicts or are being blown up by mines in peacetime,
including in my country, Azerbaijan.
We concur with the Secretary-General that the
work of the United Nations on a culture of peace can be
seen as a natural support for the New Agenda for Peace
and its role to promote peace and prevent conflict.

It is ironic to hear accusations of hatred and
discrimination on ethnic grounds from Armenia, where
the dehumanization and identity denial of Azerbaijanis
is so prevalent that anti-Azerbaijani stereotypes are
taught to Armenian children in school from an early
age and have expanded into a widely accepted view
that Azerbaijanis are ethnically incompatible with
Armenians. At the heart of the real objectives and
policies of Armenia is a long-standing racist ideology,
which seeks to unify all Armenians within a single,
mono-ethnic State.

Over more than 30 years of conflict and occupation,
Armenia subjected Azerbaijani cultural heritage in the
formerly occupied territories to large-scale plunder,
destruction and vandalism. The facts are really
shocking and unprecedented. Suffice it to mention
just a few. Thus, out of 67 mosques in the formerly
occupied territories 64 were destroyed. The deliberate
use of mosques as pens for pigs and cows during the
occupation was a potent and symbolic action intended
as a particular insult. Over 900 cemeteries in those
territories were either destroyed or desecrated. They
were targeted deliberately owing to their familial,
historical and cultural importance to our people.
Moreover, despite the end of the war in the fall
of 2020, in blatant disregard for the binding measure
indicated by the International Court of Justice on
7 December 2021 ordering Armenia to take all
necessary measures to prevent the incitement and
promotion of racial hatred, including by organizations
and private persons in its territory, targeted at persons
of Azerbaijani national or ethnic origin, various
organizations operating in Armenia continue to incite
anti-Azerbaijani hatred with total impunity.
Despite the devastating consequences of the
aggression unleashed against my country and

23-1686121/25

A/77/PV.79

14/06/2023

unspeakable atrocities and sufferings that our people
have endured, it was Azerbaijan that, following the end
of the war, genuinely proposed to Armenia normalizing
inter-State relations. That initiative has been widely
supported by the international community.

faiths and cultures must be vigorously promoted.
The culture of peace is an important dimension of
international commitment towards the promotion of
mutual understanding and cooperation with a view to
achieving global peace.

Azerbaijan remains fully committed to the objectives
of a peaceful, secure, stable and prosperous region
and will continue its efforts towards advancing postconflict peacebuilding, reintegration and development
in the region. We are keen to further contribute to the
culture of peace, strengthen the legal order, advance the
prevention agenda, ensure accountability and enhance
dialogue and global solidarity.

The promotion of interactions among States, as
well as peoples, from diverse faiths, cultures and values
is imperative to develop understanding, acceptance
and appreciation of our distinctiveness. That would
in turn contribute to strengthening global peace and
security, a prerequisite for sustainable economic and
social development. As a multicultural, multiracial and
multireligious country, Malaysia strongly believes that
mutual understanding, respect and tolerance among
religions, cultures and peoples form the bedrock of the
culture of peace.

Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): Malaysia aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the representative of Brunei
Darussalam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and wishes to add the following remarks
in its national capacity.
At the outset, we thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the promotion of a culture of peace, as
contained in document A/77/614.
Our meeting today is an opportune moment to
reflect on the recently concluded International Decade
for the Rapprochement of Cultures and where we stand
at this juncture.
Regrettably, 24 years after the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace was
adopted, the paramount objective of peace appears to
be further out of reach. Many parts of the world are
currently embroiled in conflict, unrest and upheaval,
both recent and long-standing. The peaceful settlement
of disputes is being cast aside in favour of the escalation
of tensions. We are living in volatile times not seen
since the end of the Second World War.
Further compounding the situation are acts of
terror and hate crimes emanating from racial and
religious discrimination, as well as xenophobia. While
we have seen some efforts to increase awareness and
address those concerning trends, including through the
proclamation of international days, the level of vigour
in combating some of those phenomena, for example,
Islamophobia, remains lacklustre.
The dire situation we face today is a case in point
of the importance of cultivating a culture of peace. It
is imperative that respect for peace and non-violence,
intercultural dialogue and social inclusion are fostered
globally. Peaceful coexistence among nations, peoples,
22/25

We also believe that embracing and adopting the
culture of peace must begin at home. In line with that
spirit, the Honourable Prime Minister of Malaysia
introduced the Malaysia Madani concept, centred on
six core values, namely, sustainability, prosperity,
innovation, respect, trust and compassion, as an
expression of Malaysia’s desire to create a humanistic
nation based on its civilizational values.
The status quo is unsustainable. The cultivation of
a culture of peace globally is important now more than
ever. It is imperative that we cast aside inflammatory
rhetoric and instead embrace meaningful dialogue.
Every layer of society, from Governments to the
individual person, share the collective responsibility of
promoting and upholding global peace.
I end with the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson,
“Peace cannot be achieved through violence; it can
only be attained through understanding.”
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my thanks to the
delegation of Bangladesh for its efforts pertaining
to the facilitation of draft resolution A/77/L.74 on a
culture of peace.
The Kingdom of Bahrain stresses the importance
of promoting a culture of peace through dialogue
and mediation to prevent conflicts and create the
conditions necessary for resolving the differences by
peaceful and sustainable means and by promoting
preventive diplomacy.
The Kingdom of Bahrain, under His Majesty King
Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa and with the support of His
23-16861

14/06/2023

Royal Highness Prince Salman bin Hamad Al Khalifa,
Crown Prince and Prime Minister of the Kingdom of
Bahrain, is proud of its civilized and cultural history
based on tolerance and peaceful coexistence. We support
the efforts of the international community to promote
security and peace in view of establishing relations
among nations and cultures based on friendliness,
understanding, dialogue and respect for others along
with the tenets of Islam, the provisions of international
law and the commitment to maintain the rights and
dignity of human beings without discrimination based
on race, gender or religion.
The Kingdom of Bahrain is proud to celebrate
annually the International Day of Conscience on
5 April, which was adopted by the General Assembly
in resolution 73/329 and stresses the importance of
international conscience for the collective efforts
of the international community in achieving peace,
tolerance and saving peoples from the scourge of wars
and conflicts while rejecting violence and hatred and
establishing a safe and sustainable world characterized
by harmony, peaceful coexistence and brotherhood.
Since its foundation in 2018, the King Hamad Global
Centre for Peaceful Coexistence has launched many
international initiatives and organized international
conferences for dialogue among religions and cultures,
the most recent of which was the Bahrain Forum for
Dialogue: East and West for Human Coexistence,
which coincided with the visit of His Holiness the Pope
and His Eminence Sheikh Al-Azhar Al-Sharif, along
with establishing the King Hamad International Award
for Dialogue and Peaceful Coexistence and many other
awards in the service of humankind and in support
of sustainable development, enabling women and
empowering the youth.
The Kingdom of Bahrain calls on countries to adopt
an international convention to criminalize hate speech
based on religions, sectarians and discrimination. We
should work collectively to spread a culture of peace,
promote brotherhood and strengthen friendliness
among nations. Those values should be incorporated
into our curricula along with our religious, cultural and
sports activities.
In conclusion, our continued efforts to promote a
culture of peace and dialogue among various religions
and cultures will help us to overcome ignorance and
misunderstanding which threaten social cohesion
and peace and stability in our interrelated, open and
multicultural world.

A/77/PV.79

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/77/L.74.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.74 and in addition to the delegations listed in the
document, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Algeria,
Bhutan, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, the Gambia, Greece, Guatemala,
Guyana, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Namibia, Nigeria, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Palau, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Portugal,
the Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, South Africa, the State of Palestine, Suriname,
Sweden, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye,
Tuvalu, Uganda, the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen and Zambia.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.74, entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/77/L.74?
Draft resolution A/77/L.74 was adopted
(resolution 77/296).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after adoption, I would like
to remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Pine (United States of America): The United
States strongly believes in encouraging a culture of
peace through the promotion of justice, democracy
and human rights, as well as by rejecting violence and
addressing the root causes of conflict. In recognition of
those values, we support resolution 77/296. We thank

23-1686123/25

A/77/PV.79

14/06/2023

Bangladesh for its leadership on the text and for its work
to ensure that it reflects the views of all delegations.

(Fourth Committee) to enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on draft resolution A/77/L.75.

Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I take the floor to explain the position of the Islamic
Republic of Iran regarding resolution 77/296, which the
General Assembly just adopted.

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to consider
agenda item 48 directly in plenary meeting and proceed
immediately to its consideration?

My Government recognized the importance
of the Declaration and Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace, adopted by the General Assembly
on 13 September 1999, which served as a basis for
the emerging international understanding regarding
the promotion of a culture of peace and non-violence
for the benefit of all humankind. Various subsequent
resolutions have contributed to the implementation of
the Declaration since then. In that understanding, my
delegation joined the consensus on today’s adoption
of resolution 77/296. However, we regret that despite
numerous requests by Member States, some new
language was included in the resolution without the
consent of all delegations.
In that regard, I would like to address the issue
of the fifth preambular paragraph and the references
made to resolution 76/250. Our position regarding
that particular resolution remains valid, as we
stated during its adoption at the Assembly’s plenary
meeting of 20 January 2022 (see A/76/PV.55). My
delegation strongly believes that this resolution is not
relevant to the implementation of the Declaration and
Programme of Action. We would also like to share
our concerns regarding the proliferation of repetitive
and irrelevant references to national priorities in the
context of resolutions related to a culture of peace,
which negatively undermine the implementation of
resolution 53/243 and distance us from our common
goals enshrined in the Declaration.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after adoption.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 14.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall that
at its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the
General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 48
to the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
24/25

It was so decided (decision 77/505 B).
Agenda item 48 (continued)
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Draft resolution (A/77/L.75)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India to introduce draft resolution
A/77/L.75.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.75, entitled “Memorial wall
for fallen United Nations peacekeepers”, submitted
by Bangladesh, Cameroon, Canada, China, Denmark,
Egypt, France, Indonesia, Ireland, Jordan, Morocco,
Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Rwanda, the United States
of America, Zambia and my own country, India. I
would also like to thank all 190 delegations that have
sponsored the initiative and to invite the rest to join
as well.
For 75 years, United Nations peacekeeping has been
one of the most important tools for mitigating conflict and
promoting peace and security around the globe. During
that period, more than 1 million men and women from
125 countries have served in 71 peacekeeping missions
worldwide. Even today, more than 80,000 peacekeepers
are serving in various conflict zones, enduring harsh
conditions and risking their lives to keep the peace.
Keeping peace, however, has not been without its cost.
In those 75 years, more than 4,200 peacekeepers have
laid down their lives in service of the Blue Flag. Those
brave men and women came from different parts of the
world, practiced different faiths and followed different
cultures. They were united by their commitment to the
cause of peace, their spirit of selfless sacrifice, their
professionalism and their resolve to bring succour to
lives riven by conflict. Those peacekeepers made the
supreme sacrifice in the pursuit of mandates that we, as
Member States, asked them to carry out. It is therefore
our bounden responsibility to ensure that their sacrifice
is not forgotten and that their memories are honoured.
For that very purpose, since 2015 the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, known
23-16861

14/06/2023

as the C-34, has been consistently recommending
the establishment of a memorial wall for fallen
peacekeepers at United Nations Headquarters. India,
as the largest troop- and police-contributing country,
is deeply committed to that cause. During the World
Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping held in New York in
2015, the Prime Minister of India said,
“I would like to pay homage to the peacekeepers
who have laid down their lives in defending the
highest ideals of the United Nations. It would be
most fitting if the proposed memorial wall to the
fallen peacekeepers was created quickly. India
stands ready to contribute, including financially, to
that objective”.
The establishment of the memorial wall at a
prominent location at United Nations Headquarters is
therefore of the utmost importance for all of us. It will
be a testimony to the importance that we as the United
Nations attach to peacekeeping and our peacekeepers.
It will be a source of solace for the near and dear ones of
the brave hearts who have made the supreme sacrifice,
as well as for their serving comrades and colleagues. It
will be a constant reminder not only of the sacrifices of
the fallen but of the cost of our decisions.
We are conscious that peacekeeping is a shared
endeavour, and many Member States may want to
contribute to the overall endeavour of establishing a
memorial wall. At the same time, it should be a burden on
no one. Draft resolution A/77/L.75 therefore stipulates
that the memorial wall should be funded entirely
from voluntary contributions from interested Member
States. The draft resolution also recommends that once
established, the memorial wall should be given due
respect through inclusion during peacekeeping-related
events, especially the solemn ceremonies conducted on
the International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers.
We are aware that the draft resolution is just the
beginning of the endeavour. There are many challenges
before us and many decisions to be taken to ensure that
the wall is established in a manner befitting its sanctity
and purpose. But importantly, the draft resolution has
also served to unite us in the endeavour. It is therefore
our belief that together we will prevail over any
obstacles and establish the wall within the next three
years, as stipulated in the draft resolution.

A/77/PV.79

In conclusion, India would like to thank all sponsors
for their support to the draft resolution. We would
especially like to thank the delegations of Bangladesh,
Cameroon, Canada, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
Indonesia, Ireland, Jordan, Morocco, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Rwanda, the United States and Zambia
for their effort and support, which have led to the
submission of the draft resolution. We are also most
grateful to the Secretariat for its constant assistance in
all technical matters related to the submission of the
draft text.
Peacekeepers are not born; they are forged
through the crucible of sacrifice. Their unwavering
commitment and selfless acts pave the way for a
world in which peace must triumph over conflict.
We will now deeply appreciate the adoption of the
draft resolution on “Memorial wall for fallen United
Nations peacekeepers”.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/77/L.75.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/77/L.75: Brunei Darussalam, the Congo, Sao Tome
and Principe. The State of Palestine has also become a
sponsor of the draft resolution.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/77/L.75,
entitled “Memorial Wall for fallen United Nations
peacekeepers”. May I take it that the Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.75?
Draft resolution A/77/L.75 was adopted
(resolution 77/297).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 48.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

23-1686125/25
