861'th

, United Nations

ING
PLENARY ngMEE1'
meetin g)

,GENERAL

(Openi

i

ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, ~O Septem ber 1'960,

at 3,p.m.

FIFTEENTH SESSION

NEW YO,RK

Official Records
CONT ENTS

drafts which had been submit ted earlier , was also
adopte d unanim ously. This recogn ized the interes t of
all people s in partici pating in the Disarm ament
Agenda item 1:
Comm ission and the princip le of parity as. a means of
Opening of tile session by the Chairm an of the
balanc ing the interes ts of East and West. With the
1
delegation of Peru • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
same unanim ity, the Assem bly recons tituted the
Comm ittee on the Peacef ul Uses of Outer Space
"0 Agenda item ~:
1
[resolu tion 1472 A (XIV)}.
Minute of silent prayer or medita tion • •••••
rary
4. Eagerl y but !"Gspectfully we heard statem ents by
Address by Mr. VIctor A. Belstinde, Tempo
1
Peru
of
ion
delegat
the
of
an
Mr. Khrush chev, Chairm an of the Counni l ofMin isters
Preside nt, Chairm
of the Union of Soviet Sociali st Republ ics [799th
Agen.da item 3:
meetin g], Mr. L6pez Mateos , Presid ent of the United
Credentia.ls of rept'es~nta.tives to the fifteen th
States of Mexico [828th meetin g], Mr. Sekou Tour€l,
session of the Genera l Assem bly
Presid ent of the Republ ic of Guinea [837th meetin g].
3
fIl) ,Appointment of the Creden tials Comm ittee
i
5. The discuss ion of the Chines e aggTes sion in Tibet
Agenda item 4:
not affect the genera l orienta tion of our
did
4
Electio n of the Presid ent ••••• ••.•• •••.
discuss ions, and in this same spirit the Assem bly
settled the difiicUities in renewi ng the membe rship
, Address by Mr. Freder ick H. Boland . Presid ent
Asl
Genera
the
of
session
of the Securi ty Council and the Truste eship Counci l.
.' , of the fifteen th
4
6. We were not specifi cally called upon to settle
the great questio ns, but it was our duty to preser ve
the right atmosp here for their discuss ion. The world
was already concer ned about nuclea r disarm ament
Nations . .•..
and the related proble m of the contro l of outer
space. The great Power s should have taken a decisiv e
President: Mr. Freder ick H. BOLAND <Ireland>.
step. toward s peace by embark ing on a new and fair
discussioL. of this questio n. The eyes of the world
Tempo rary Preside nt: Mr. Vrctor A. BELAUNDE
(Peru>.
turned from our Assem bly to the Summi t Confer ence
which was to be held in Paris. It is not for me, on
leaving the Preside ncy, to comme nt on the collaps e
of that Confer ence or on the appare nt or real reason s
AGEN DA ITEM 1
'for it, for it is not the task of an outgoing Presid ent,
and still less of the repres entativ e of a countr y
Opening of the session by the Chairman of the delegation
outside the nuclea r conflic t, to intensi fy or aggrav ate
of Peru
the presen t disagre ements .
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (transl ated from
7. The first result of this unfortu nate collaps e was
Spanish): I declar e open the fifteen th regula r session
a return to the atmosp here of the worst period s of
of the Genera l Assem bly.
interna tional tension , and the strugg le of ideolog ies
AGEN DA ITEM 2
and of vlords becam e even more bitter. The founda tions
of peace can only be laid in an an.uosp!1ere of mutual
Minute of silent prayer or meditation
\
respec t, unders tanding and the w:m l.,)X' E.greement.
from
ated
(transl
ENT
PRESID
RARY
TEMPO
The
2.
Spanish): I reques t repres entativ es to stand and
The printed o.fficia l reoord s of the Genera l Asobserv e one minute of- silent prayer or medita tion.
sembl yare pUblisbedin fascicl e form, the record
of each meetin g being issued separa tely. In order
The repres entativ es stood in silence .
that the fascicl es may subseq uently be bound in
nt,
Preside
ary
Tempor
unde,
A.Bela
volumes by organ and session . the pagina tion is
Address by Mr. Victor
ous througllOut each series of record s of
continu
Peru
of
on
delegati
the
Chairman of,
a single 'bod.,V. At the end of the session, a prefatory fasciCile is issued £0,(" each series , con3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (transl ated from
taining a. talble of contents, a list of memb ers
Spanish): The year since last Septem ber has been
the
with
well
began
It
.
zatiop.
dele,gaticms, an agenda. and other prefat ory
of
Organi
our
for
test
a
which
n
electio
an
ent,
matter .
unanimous electio n of a Presid
and
country
my
on
red
confer
Afterth e close of the session , collate d sets of
honour
an
as
ed
I regard
grave
the
tand
unders
fascicl es will be placed on sale for the genera l
a symbo l of a genera l desire to
ion
resolut
the
uently,
Subseq
.
p'l1blic.
settled
be
prob16:m.j;l to
s
0;11 disarm am.ent [1378 (XIV) ],embo dying the variou
A/PV. 864
1
Page

,·.

IA;::::~~~ .~~.~~~~. ~.~ .~~~
ll'

•••••••••••••••

••••

.~

I

'i~>~~'i"'''''~'·-'';!l'>~~M\._1>i1i·'Ifllet. . r

F[

I

....

2

I

--_ -"
.......

...

. General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

Insults and ideological intransigence can destroy in
a moment the result of long years of negotiation and
adjustment, just as, when a deep crevasse appears
in a Swiss glacier, the vibration or echo of a voice
is enough to start an avalanche and cause a
catastrophe. The failure of the Summit Conference
has also had repercussions on problems in the
American continent and on the growing crisis in the
Congo. I am happy to express to the Security Council
and the Secretary-General our appreciation of the
way in which they have ()arried out the provisions of
the Charter, always taking the most judicious steps.
8. A new use has been found for the institution of
the emergency force, which leads us to hope that it
\\'ill become a standing body within our Organization.

9. We must emphasize the importance of the Security
. Council's resolution on the proper application of
Article 52 of the Charter, which defines the relations
between the world Organization and regional arrangements (If agenci~s. Th~se groupings, especially the
first and foremost of them, the American system,
must observe the principles of peace and security
established by the United Nations. The American
arrangemeut has everything necessary for the just,
peaceful and effective solution of conflicts arising
in our continent. The United Nations had to recognize
that it was under a duty to call on regional
organizations and to use all the resources which they
fortunately possess. Regionalism is not a fixed rule,
but a means of using the immediate relationship and
effective link between neighbouring countries in order
to place their problems in true perspective and thus
isolate thE.m from the disturbing influence of outside
interests or tendencies apparent j.n the struggle for
power.

Assembly, in other words. under the authority of the
highest international body in the world. I do not think
I am being unduly optimistic when I say that our
Organization has emerged from its recent difficulties
strengthened and respected, with a reserve of moral
force which it is in duty bound to use in dealing
with the grave problems of the moment.
12. As outgoing President of the Assembly, and as
Head of the delega.tion of Pe:ru for many years, I am
vary pleased that sevente.en nl~W States are soon to be
admitted to the family of thle United Nations. Ever
since the Charter was signed at San Francisco,
the Peruvian delegation has! wo-rked tirelessly to
make the Organization universal. We can now say that
we have almost reached our aim. I once said that
the nineteenth century was the age of the arrival of
the new Latin American nations. I should like to add
now that the twentieth century will be the ~ge of the
arrival of the new independent nations of Asia and
Africa. But there is a difference: When we gained
our independence we were guided only by Bolivar's
dream of establishing ODf~ day the unity and solidari1¥
of the new nations. Today, however, oursisternations
in Africa and Asia have a true home in the great
United Nations.
13. Today we have among us not onlym.anyMinisters
of Foreign Mfairs, as on other occasions, but also
distinguished Heads of State and Prime Ministers.
Tltis is indeed an unparalleled occasion, which clearly
shows how well we realize thatwe are on the threshold
of events which will be critical for mankind. I should
like to welcome all these distinguished representatives, and I thir.k I am expressing the will of
the Assembly when I say that their presence here
reflects a desire to use this Assembly in Qrder to
restore harmony and good will and to make possible
th~ solution of all urgent and fundamental problems
by the -peaceful means set forth in the Charter of
the United Nations.

10. The Congo crisis has also beeu dealt with as
a .regional matter. An appeal had to be made to the
solidarity of the Mrican peoples, who were concerned
to save the young Republic from political anarchy
and economic! chaos. The Secretary-General deserves
the thankS of all mankind for his decision, confirmed
by the Security Council, to use forces from African
countries and the co-operation of impartial European
countries to keep order, to protect lives and to
replace the forces of the former colonial Power.
We can be proud of the manner in which the Security
Coun~il hasrJ\.sen. to the high task entrusted to it
by the Charter., The first thing to do in any conflict
is to put it in the hands of an impartial body, which
is free of any ambition for political or military
domination and of all economic vested interests. This
means discarding the old system of the balance of
interests or of power of a minority of States, and
replacing it by a new system which takes into account,
fir.st andforell1ost, the interests of the parties to
the conflict and which uses the means' offered' by a
commongeograpJ1y, history·' and culture, as well as
the technical efficiency and moral authority of the
United Nations.

14. Owing to the unavoidable circumstances of the
last war, our Organization was built on two foundations: an d'hical and legalfoundatlon, implying the
unselfish and impartial co-operation of all peoples
united in the Assembly. and a political and coactive
foundation, which required agreement among the
great Powers. Unfortilnately, such agreement has
constantly been prevented by crises, each of which
has seemed worse than the last. But despite these
disagreements, reflected in the vetoes in the SecurIty
Council, our Oxganization has survived all the crises
by constantly-I repeat, constantly-emphasizing the
ethical and legal precepts. of the Charter, theaffirmation of which has always had the support of 'World
public opinion. Our future depends on this ethical and
legal element, and the world public opinion which
gOf'JS with it, as expressed in the Assembly, is exerting
an eyer greater influence on the great Powers to
afJhieve not only the negative objective of mere
coexistence, but willing co-operation in a spirit of
true understanding an1 solidilrity.

11. Nothing colli:d have. given me more pleasure
than presiding· oyer the fourth emergency sessiC\n
of .the General Ansembly, at which we endorsed the
wise resolutions 'of the Security Council and the vital
work which the Secretary-General has carried out
so efficiently. We can now hope that the Congo
problem will soon be justly and peacefully .solved,
under the authority of the Security COllDcil and the

15. Peace is now the. supreme concern and aspiration ,
of ~ll m:.l.nkind. 'fhe day has passed when a military
victory, even one bearing a new message for mankind,
could compensate for the squandering of wealth and
the bloody sacrifice 'of human lives. A lightning
victory by· surprise .attack and the discovery of a
weapon toeIld all weapons are now purely Utopian
ideas.

16. Peace
need :W1"
miscalcula
the horror
17. It is
economic
time been
tiers. The
and have
world sup
from its
tunately in
In another
destructiv
recovery.
discovere
that they
seeds of
and the de
18. If we
point of vi
between
which con
to be erro
of outer s
all men
the compe
19. The p
in practic
the .great
of other
precl3dent,
g'Bographi
trun need
defence.
20-. The
nuclear
antithesis
disarmam
outlined a
disarmam
simultane

21. It wo
were supe
the small
Disarmam
disarmam
dif:ficultie
obstacles
political n
atmospher
Assembly
left to th
on which
22. The
. such body
and. impa
AsseD;J.bly
general c
all Powe
Ten-Natio

23. I hop
bly's arbi
never be
situation
ten years.

3

8641;h meeting - 20 September 1960
he

nk

ur
es
~al

ng
as
LlD.

be
er
IO:f

to
tat
tat
of
dd

he
nd
.ed
~'s

lty

ns
lat

rs
so
~s.

'ly
,Id
ild

eof
re
to

lIe

ns
of

he
a-

he

es

ve
he
as
ch

se

ty

es

he

'Id

nd

ch

ng

to
re
of

on ,

:y

d,

ld
lg

a
an

16. Peace is not only an ethical ideal, but a vital
need fc::c mankind. We cannot allow mad obsessions,
miscalculations or tragic emergencies to unleash
the horrors of war anduniversal destruction.
17. It is an unfortunate fact of h~an history that
economic and. political ·systems have nl~ver at any
time been content to develop within their own frontiers. They have always tried to reach beyond them,
and have set up or attempted to set up systems of
world supremacy. The danger of this tendency, apart
from its economic consequences, is that it wortunately involves politic cl demands on other peoples.
In another age these tendencies might lead to partially
destructive wars, with long intervening periods of
recovery. But now that nuclear weapons have been
discovered, the dangers have reached snchproportions
that they are mathematically infinite and carry the
seeds of their own tragic penalty of self-annihilation
and the destruction of all others.
18. If we look at the nuclear problem from this
point of view, we clearly caDIlot rely on the balance
between the great Powers or on their judgement,
which constantly changing circumstances often prove
to be erroneous. Nuclear disarmament andthe control
of outer space are problems w~ch ·directly concern
all men and are therefore matters manifestly within
the competence of our Organization.
19. The problem of conventional arms can be settled
in practice by a.n agreement on ceiling figures for
the great Powers. 'i'ha regulation of the armaments
of other States must be based not on political
precodent, but on the objective faots of population,
gceographical position, length of frontiers and the
truo needs of legitimate national or continental
defence.
2(1. The Assembly should devote all its efforts to
nuclear disarmament. We can resolve· the false
antithesis between control without disarmament and
disarmament without control by following the idea
outlined at the sixth session of the Assembly, that
disarmament and control are indivisible and must be
simultaneous.
21. It would be best if control with proper safeguards
were supervised by impartial· countries, which means
the small Powers. Those who tool: part in the
Disarmament Commission know well that nuclear
disarmament is not now impeded by technical
difficulties; the few that exist can be .solved. The
obstacles to disarmament are t....Jay of an essentially
political nature. Disarmament calls for the peacp.fu1
atmosphere, the pure air and the free spirit of the
Assembly discussions. The specific measures can be
left to the Ten-Nation Committee on Disarmament,
on which East and West are equally represented.
22. The conflicte which are bound to arise in any
. such body cC''' i, ':le solved by the timely, intelligent
and . imparci.:.~ iatervention of the Assembly. The
AsseD;J.bly would thus have twc tasks: to lay down the
general conditions of disarmament agTeed upon by
all Powers; and to resolve deadhcks in the
Ten-NatiOn Committee.
23. I hope the great Powers can accept the Assembly'); arbitration. otherwise, the differenees would
never be settled, and we would continue to be in the
situation in which we have been for the last
ten years. The fairest means of solving these problems

is to seek the opinion of the Assembly, which represents the conscience of mankind.
24. At moments such as this we must think not only
of States, but of peoples. The Preamble of our
Charter does not say "the Governments or states",
but "the peoples of the United Nations". This does not
mean that we should deny the importance of State
or government representation but, at the historic
moment when the San Francisco Charter was signed
and welcomed by all manla.nd as a sign of new
hope, the Assembly reflected and expressed the
desires of all the peoples of the world. Now that the
nuclear arms race, based on power politics, hinders
the great Powers' plans for social reform and their
God-given mission to help the less industrialized
countries, we should return to that spirit of San
Francisco.
25. It is not only a. matter of human survival. Human
life must also be made fit for the human being, both
from the material standpoint of health and nutrition
and from the spiritual one of culture and. above
all, freedom.
26. An unstable nuclear balance might bring about
a negative and sterile coexistence for a while. We
do not think, however, that this tragic dilemma is
ineviiable, or that there can only be a temporary
truCE)
under the threat of total and immediate
destruction. Let us work to create an atmosphere
of understanding, involving the renunciation of all
political domination, ideological supremacy and
Utopian dogmatism, and leading to a clear acknowledgement of the fact that the principles ofthe Charter
should govern the conduct of all States, great and
small.
27•. Spinoza thought that all· men should overcome
the limitations of time and act sub specie aeternitatis,
ignoring the blood-stained myths of race, political
<1.omination and ideological Utopias. Let us, for our
part, approach every question from the point of view
cf all mankind and always act sub specie humanitatis.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of repre£entatives to the· fifteenth session of
the General Assembly:
(!!) Appointmen~ of the Credeniials Committee

28. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (translated from
Spanish): Under rule 28 (.:sf the rules of procad"ut>e
the General Assembly should, at the beginning of
each session, appoint a Credentials Committee composed of nine members at the proposa! .of the
President.
.
29. I therefore propose that the Credentials Committee for the fifteenth. regular session should be
made up of the following Member States: Costa Rica,
Haiti, Morocco, New Zeal3.)1d, Philippines, Spain,
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United
Arab Republic and the United States of America.
30. If there is· no objection, I shall r --nsider these
countries appointed to the Credentia....., Committee.
It was so decided•

.f j ..

-'---_.

I!

4:

-

-..... ~~.~._-

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings
AGENDA ITEM 4
Election of the President

31. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT (tramll;a.tedfrom
Spanish): We shall go on to the election of the
President of the fifteenth session of the Genel'a!
Assembly. It will be held by secret ballot, in
af:lcordance 'V\rith rules 31 and 911 of the ntles of
procedure.
At tIle invitation of the Temporary President,
llfr. Mcnquham Sohmidt (Denmark) and Mr. Gebre'·
Egzy (Ethiopia) acted as tellers.
A vote was taken bJ' secret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
Invalid ballots:
Number of valid bal;"ts:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required majority:

82
2

80

o

80

41

Number of votesobtainecf:
Mr. F'redetick H. Boland (Ireland)•••••• 46
Mr. JiTi Nosek (Czechoslovakia) •••••.• 25
M:r. Thor Thors (Iceland). • • • • • • • • • •• 9
Having obtained the required majority, Mr.
Frederiok H., Boland (Ireland) was eleoted President
of the· fifteenth.session of the General Assembly, and
took the Chair.
Address by Mr. Frederic:k H. Boland. President of the
fifteenth session of the General A5sembly

32. rhe PRESIDENT: May I say first in a few
words how deeply and how sincerely I appreciate
the honour you have done my country and myself
by electing me to preside over this fifteenth session
of the. General Assembly and how profoundly grateful
lam to those delegations whose friendly support
made my election pussible. No one regrets more
than I do that my election should not have had the
support of all sections in the Assembly. Much as
I .regret the fact, I. recognize the reaapns for it.
In tha'i; regard, I should only like to say that I assume
the duties of this office with a deep sense of obligation
and responsibility which .extends in equal measure
to ~very delegati.on in the Assembly. It will be my
constant and :;incere endeavour, while in thifl Chair,
so to discharge the dUt:h~ incumbent on me as to
merit and receive the trust and confidence of the
Aesembly as a whole.
33. I will 1'~ immensely helped and fortified in this
endeavour by the example set by my distinguished
predecessors, and by none more '~an the example of
my immediate predecessor, my good friend and
colleague, Dr. Bela;(mde.By his just, wise and
unfailingly courteous conduct ofthe office of PreSident,
he has provided me with an invaluable source of
guidance and inspiration.

44. Every
its frame
meet that
rather we
our diver
remember,
is someth·
divergence
interept.s 0

38. It is not for me, speaking from the Chair, to
atteIllpt to delineate the charaoter of the session on
which we- are about to embark. That it will be unique
in the history of the United Nations must be already
obvious to us all. Never before will so many Heads
of States and' Governments. have attended in one
place to lend the emphasis and the authority of their
physical presence to the presentation of their
countries' policies. From that point of view alone,
the forthcoming session may well come to rank in
history as the greatest diplomatic gathering theworld
has ever seen. It may well come to rank also as the
most momentous.
39. During the fifteen years of its existence this
Organization has been confronted with difficult and
dangeri'lllil political conflicts. It has succes8fuJ.ly
surmounted more than one sharp challenge, more
than one serious threat to peace and security. The
agenda of the present session includes items which
will ta.~ to the full all the resources of our past
experience. Our conclusions with regard to them may
well prove decisive for the future of the United
Nations and, thereby, for the whole future evolution
of worldeociety.

40. The Assembly of the United. Ntl.tions is a forum
of free debate, and we must not be fJurprised if
the fundamental differences ef poHcy and outlook
which divide the world find sharp and even vehement
expl'ession here in our discllssions. That is something
for which we must be prepared.

35. I take my election ,{) the Presidency of this
Assembly as being a-Jove all a compliment and a

41. The peoples we represent, howevfi1,r, are entitled
to expect that above the clamour of our differences,

!!!!·~~~~.i't'''c2>~'.i'l'\\~~~~~t!I~i!;f.,,#~f.,

43. It is
exists. It
progress
indeed, ha
ever befo
by the WO];
these high

3',7. These same principes shape Ireland's roll'
world affairs today. The policies which IrE ;.lCo
pursues in this Organization are a consequence and
a :refl.ection of our national past; and for that reason,
I venture to think in all humility that it ,viII be a
so' ~ce of satisfaction and pride, not only to people
in Ireland, but to many people of Irish birth and
descent throughout. the world, that a representative
of Ireland should be chosen to preside at the Assembly
of the United Nations at this critical moment in
world history.

34. I know, too, that I can count with absolute
confiden~e on the assistance and support of the
Secretariat and, above all, of the Secretar'Y'~General
himself, than whom no one has given so many and
such irrefutable proofs of single-minded devotion to
the interests of the United Nations and of unselfish
dedicationi.o the aims of the Charter.

. . . . . . . . ..

there will
of reason
throughout
of outlook
hope and p
spared in
has afflict
men and
in our pr
question w
efforts of
is gaining
again blin
42. In fac
hope to dra
resources
as history
sented he
to draw 0
rather tha
according

tribute to the country and the people whom I have
the honour to represent.
36. Ireland is a relatively recent ¥ember of the
world family of sovereign States. But we are an
ancient nation and, throughout the course of the
centuries, we have spread far beyond the limits of
our national territory until today millions of peonle
of Irish birth and descent are to be fou,:..l among
the populations of many countries in P'::'l parts of
the woriJ. Irish people, wherever.- they may be,
have always been distinguished for their fidelity to
the traditions and beliefs which form their heritage.
The ideal of freedom, the essential dignity of the
human person, the inherent evil of all fonns of
persecution and oppression, the right of every nation
to determine its own destiny, in dignity and freedom,
without outside interference or dictation, andthe ideal
of a world order based on juetice and the rule of
law as the surest guarantee of international peace
and security-these are among the principles which
l\nspired the men and women whose efforts and
sacrifices made possible the measure of freedom
we in Ireland now enjoy.

45. In a

re6entmen
held in ch
to come,
check by
of a truly i
46. The n
have the
Assembly
an Assem
race. If,
can ·bl'ing
communit-j
planet,th
noble title:

Admis

47. The
General A
and I do
provision'
Members t
48. The

I

m;'ltterOll·a'
ba
used
any pr~ed
thiB proce

"'Ih~~'·· •. '·' ~(g;c ~~~"'!IIi'r~,"~- *,,;r·''''''T'~_~~'~!''''E_~-': j~..pAf,~~. .bl!!I!l!~

__

-~"'-------------------'_i""-.
5
864th meeting - 20 September 1960

there will also be heard in our debates the voice
of reason and justice. Millions of men and women
throughout the world, in spite of their differences
of outlook and circumstances, are united in. the
hope and prayer that they and their children may be
spared in their time the scourge of war, which
has affI.icted so many past genel'ations. Millions of
men and women in the w9rld will anxiously :--~
in our proceedings an answ~:r to the awe-inspiring
question whetheT at long last, through the collective
efforts of the United Nations, mankind at long last
is gaining control of its own destiny or whether once
again blind fOl'ce is to decide the fate of the world.
42. In facing that challenge, Ollr Organization can
hope to draw on great resources-the almostlimitless
resources of courage, energy and imagination which,
as history proves, exist among the nations represented here. The problem still remains, how best
to draw on these resources for the con:unon good
rather than squander them in mutual destruction,
according to the cruel usage of th~ past.
43. It is to solve that problem that our Organization
exists. It is making, amid tremendous difficulties,
progress towards a solution. The progress made,
indeed, has led mankind to plq,ce more hope than
ever beforf3 in the possibilities of combined action
by the world community. Because of recent events,
these high hopes are now to be severely tested.
44. Every delegation here present, no matter what
its frame of reference, can help the Assembly to
meet that trial. We are not required to dissemblE>rather we should express clearly, without maliceour divergences of outlook. What we do need to
remember, however, and to hold constantly in mind
is something far more important than any of our
divergences-the common aspirations, needs and
interept.s of all the peoples of the world.
45. In a national parliament the normal human
resentments Md day-toaday clashes of' interest· are
held in check by a common patriotism. In the sessf)n
to come, may our divergences similarly be held in
check by a sense of something larger-by the dawn
of a truly international patriotism.
46. The new Member States which we shall shortly
have the pleasure of welcoming will bring the
Assembly nearer in practice to what it ideally is;
an Assembly fully representative of the whole human
race. If, to match this accession of strength, we
can bring to our work a correspon.ding sense of
community, as dwell dXS on this small and threatened
planet, .then indeed ..~-< s Assembly may deserve a
noble title: tl!.e A,sE'",r.\;)l~· of humanity.

AGEl\JDA ITEM 20
Admission of new Members to the Uroited Nations

47. The PRESID~NT~ With the permission of 'ilie
General Assembly, .I now propose to put before itand I do so with great satisfaction-iteLl 20 of our
provisional agenda .sntitled "Admission of new
Members to the Unitod Nations ll •

I

48. The spelclal proceo'.ure of. dealing with this
m;'\tter befQrl' the adoption of thl~ agenda has been
used Oll' aarliel' occasions and it do\~s not constitute
any precedent f,)l' the future., 1iy:reasonforsuggesting
thit:1 procedure; on the pl'esent occasion is to give

~..lIat-IU.~~~.fj

_:r!"""fn~I'

M.

the newly independent States which have requested
membership of our Organization the opporttlnity to
participate from the outset in the work of the ;present
session. Furthermore, I feel, as I nm sure the
Assembly will also, that we owe these new~y independent States the additional consideration of acting
on their requests for m.embership on the day of the
opening of the session, thus underlining the importance
to the Organization of t'llis considerable addition to
its membership.
49, The Assembly already has before it, I think,
a number of draft resolutions recommending the
admission of new Members. The Security Council,
in each case, has unanimously recomm ~")d positive
action to be taken by tb.e Assembly. I therefore take
it that the Assembly may also wish to be given the
opportunity to receive each of these new Members,
one by one, by acclamation.
50. After the votes on all the draft resolutions
before us, Members of the Assembly will. have an
opportunity to take the floor in order to welcome the
new Member States.
51. If :it is agreeable to the Assembly, I shall put
to the vote first the draft reslOlution sponsored by
France and Tunisia [A/L.295] recomm~nding the
admission of the Republic of C,ameroun to membership in the United Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by accla.mation.

52. The PRESIDENT: I now d.eclare the Republic
of Cameroun admitted to membElrship in the United
Nations.
The delegation of the Republi,'J of Cameroun was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.

53.. The PRESIDENT: I now put to the vote the
draft resolution sponsored by France and Tunis;i,a
rA/L.296] recommending the admils.sion of the Togolase
Republic to membership in the United Nations.
THe draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.
54. The PRESIDENT: I now dl~clare. the Togolese
Republic admitted to membxE/hip in the. United
Nations.
The .delegation of the TogcIZese Republic was
escorted to its place in the Ger.leraI Assembly hall.

55. The PRESIDENT: The third candidate fo~
admission to membership of tlle' United Nations is
the Federation of Mali. In this case the AsseJnbly
has no draft resolution before it..
'.
56. A number of delegati()ns' have intimated t<> me
that, in oosting circumstances, they are not l~eady .
to act on this candidacy and,· ther~fore, they would
prefer that the matter shoulel be held over. lam
sure that the Assembly will felel that, in the circumstan~es. that isa reasonable request. If there is no
objectl.on, we shall proceed accordingly.
It was so decided.

57. The PRESIDENT: The . fourth . candidate for
admission to membership in, the United Nations is
the Malagasy Republic. I i1witethe ASSembly to
vote on' the draft resolution sponsored by France and
T\'lnisia [A/L.297] reoorumending the admissiou'ofthe
Malagasy Republic to membership in the.United
Nations.

LlB'

;:

6

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session - Plenary Meetings
The draft resolution was adopted by aoclanl3.tion.

58. The PRESIDE:NT: I now declare the i\IIaiagasy
Republic admitted to membership iD, the United
Nations.
The delegation .of the Malagasy Republic was
escorted to its plaoe in the General Assembly hall.

59. The PRESIDJENT: The next candidatp, for
admission to membership is the Republic of Somalia.
The Assembly will now vote on the draft resolution
sponsored by Italy, Tunisia and the United Kingdom
[A/L.298] recomm,ending tlJ.e admission ofthe Republic
of Somalia to membership in the United Nations.
, The draft resolution was adopted by acolamation.

60. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Republic
of Somalia admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
The' delegation of the Republic of Somalia was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.

61. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for admission is the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville).
The Assembly has before it a, draft l'esolution
sponsored by Tunisia [A/L.299] recommending the
Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville) for admission
to membership in the United Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

62. The PRESIDENT: I hereby declare the Repu1.l1ic
of the Congo (Leopoldville) admitted to membe:rship
in the United Nations.
63.. As M'IDlbers of the Assembly are aware, the
sit;71ation in tb.e Congo has been the subject of much
dJ.scussion in the United Nations within recent weeks
and even 'Within the past few days, and the
cc.nstitutional and political position in that country
still remains, unhappily, far from clear. ill these
circumstances, we are faced with a difficulty as
regards the implementation of the resolution we have
just adopted. The difficulty is one for the Assembly
itself, and I· would suggest to the Assembly. that the
best solution ,of this would be to refer it to the
Credentials Committee. As I hear no obje.ction to
this proposal, it will be considered as a.dopted.
It was so decided.

64. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for admission to the United Nations is the Republic of
Dahomey. I wculd ask the Assembly to vote now
on a draft resolution sponsored by France and
Tunisia [AlL.300] recommending the a.dmission of
the. Republic of Dahomey to. membership in the
United Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by ft.Jclamation.

65. The 'PRESIDENT: I hereby declare the Republic
of Dahomey admitied to membership in the United
Nations.
The delegation of the Republic of Dahomey was
escorted to its place. in the General Assembly hall.

66. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for admission to the United Nations is the Republic of
the Niger.· The Assembly will now vote. on the
draft resolution sponsored by France and Tunisia
[A/L.;;Ol] recommending the admission of the

TIE

Rtif'ublic of the Nige:r to membership in the Um,ted
~~'1tions.

The draft resoluti011 was adopted by acclamation.

67. The PRESIDENT: I hereby declare the RenlJi!ic
of the Niger admitted to membership in the 'D 'oited
Nations.
The delegation of the Republic of the Niger w~s
escorted to its place in tl.~e General Assembly hail.

68. The PRESIDENT: The ne.n· candidate for
admission to membership is the Republic of the
Upper Volta. The Assembly '!!ill vote on the draft
resolution sponsored by France and Tunisia [A!L.302]
recommending the admission of the Republic of the
Upper Volta to membership in the United Nations.
The dra:lt resolation was adopted by acclamation.

69. The PRESIDENT: I hereby declare the Republic
of the Upper Volta admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
The delegation of the Republic of the Upper VoIla
was escorted to its place in the General Assembly hall.

70. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for
admission to membership is the RepubUc of the
Ivory Coast. I will ask the Assembly to vote on the
draft resolution sponsored by France and. Tunisia
rA./L.303] recommending the Republic of the Ivory
Coast for a.dmission to membership in the United
Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.,

71. The PRESIDENT: I hereby declare the Republic
of the Ivory Coast admitted to membership in the
United Nations.
72. I understand that the delegation of the Republic
of the Ivory Coast has not yet arrived in New York
an.d that they will be unable to take ilieir seats this
afternoon, but no doubt we shall all have an opportunity
to welcome them personally and individually on a
later occasion.
73. The next candidate ; '·r membership is the
Republic of Chad. The Assembly will now vote on the
draft resolution. sponsored by France and Tunisia
[A/L.304] recommending the admission of the Republic
of Chad to membership in theUnited Nations.
The draft resolution was aduptedby acclamation.

74. The PRESIDENT:

I n.ow declare the Republic

0;' Chad admitted to membership intheUnitedNations.

ThedeJegation of the Republic of Chad was
escorted to its place in the General Assembly hal.l.

75. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for
membership is the Republic of the Congo (BrazzaviJ.le).
I would ask the Assembly to vote on the draft
resolution sponsored by F'rance andTunisia[A/L.305]
recoll'..mending the admission to meinbership of the
Republ:1.c of the Congo (Brazzaville)~
The drtiEt resolutIon was adopted .by acclamation.

76. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Republic
of the Congo (BrazzaYille) admitted to membership
in tb,a United Nations.
The delegation of the Republic of the Co~go
(Brazzaville) was escorted to its place in the Gene+al
Assem,bly hall.

•

- . ...., ...
.,~

!.- - ••

~

~~

,,,, .... -

-

-~ #

, ••

~~, ?~i;:~~,1~':'(~:".
'''_,0'

". -,'~-i---

''lA'"

~,~ ~~" -

;-'..,......

'W'~~---

i"i""'~

-

-', . . .",W'

---.

W"

11

~.

....

•.,

""'

•

";>•.,:"'",-:

:1tI·~

0 •• ;.:

o~

•

......

\':)

~~

J

..

- .- --

. . . . . . . . . . . . '''l ....

~.

.

864th meeting - 2(1 ,gepCtlllloe.r 1960

. 77. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for
membership is the Gabon Republic. The Assembly
will vote on the draft resolution sponsored by France
and Tunisia [A/L.~06] recommending the admission
of the Gabon Republic to membership of the United
Nations.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

78. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Gabon
Republic admitted to membership in' the United
Nations.
.
The delegation of the Gabon Republic was esco:rted

to its place in the General Assembly hall.
79. The PRESIDENT: The next candidate for
membership is the Central African Republic. The
Assembly will vote on the draft resolution sponsored
.' by France and Tunisia [A/L.3071 recommending the
admission to membership of the Central African
Republic.
The draft resolution was adopted by acclamation.

80. The PRESIDENT: I now declar3 the Centr'al
Afric:Lll Republic admitted to membership in the
United Nation-s.
The delegation of the Central African Republic
was escorted to its place in the General Assembly

ball.

81. The PRESIDENT: The last candidate for
membership is the Republic of Cyprus. The Assembly
will now vote on the draft resolution sponsored by
Ceylon and the United Kingdom' of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland [A/l~.308], recommending the
admission to ml~mbership of the Republic of Cyprus.
The draft resoJution

WG'S

adopted by acclamation.

82. The PRESIDENT: I now declare the Republic
of Cyprus admitted to membership in the United
Nations.
The delegation of the Repul:J1ic of Cyprus was

escorted to its place in the General .4ssembly hall.
83. The PRESIDEN'.I:: Now that these new delegations
have taken their places, r feel I will be expressmg
the desire of all of us if I extend to them a sincere·
and cordial welcome on behalf of the Assembly as
a whole.
84. Within recent years, the representatives of
African States have won the admiration and respect
of the United Nattons' as a whole by the wisdom and
authority with which they have made the voide of
Africa heard in our councns. The emergence of the
peoples of Africa into freedbm and independence has
greatly strengthened the positionQftheUnitedNations.
I am sure that the new Members from the continent
of .Africa who have'taken their seats among us tOday
will further. enhance the advantages whl!:}h our
Organization has already derived· from the great
liberation movement in· Africa.

J

Cyprus, whose history and culture will, I am sure.
enable her to make a distinctive and valuable contribution to our work in the United Nations.
86. Quite a large number ofMembers ofthe Assembly
have expressed a wish to speak on this item. I shall
now give them the floor in turn, in the order in
which they were inscribed. Iwouldjustaskdelegations
to bear in mind that, in view of the heavy programme
which the Assembly has to face, the utmost brevity
which is consistent with what :p9ople may have to
say will be highly useful and will be a positive
contribution to tue dispatch of the Assembly's work.
I would therefore ask Members of the Assembly
kindly to limit their interventions on this particular
item to as small a compass as they feel they
reasonably can.
87. Mr. COUVE DE MURVILLE (France) (translated
from French): First of all, Mr. President, permit
me to convey to you the congratulations of the Fren~ch
delegation on your election to the highest office of
our General Assembly. Your outstanding qualities.
your experience and the esteem in which you are
held by all give us the assurance that you will carry
out this difficult task with succes& and distinction.
You may count on our friendly support in accepting
your decisions and we offer you our warm and sincere
good wishes.
88. I am sure the Assembly will understand why,
immediately after the voting, I wished to speak in
t4e name of France in order to voice our satisfaction
at the admission to membership in the United Nations
of the Replililic of Cameroun, the Togolese Republic,
the Malagasy Republic, the Republic of the Ivory
Coast, the Republic of Dahomey, the Republic of
the Niger. the Upper Volta, the Central AO.'ican
Republic. the Republic of the Congo (Brazzaville),
the Republic of Chad and the Gabon Republic, countries
which have long been associatedwithFranceandwhich
have now, in complete agreement and friendship
with her, become fully independent.
89. The unanimous adoption of the resolutions which
the French and Tunisian de.legations submitted jointly
to the Assembly is a source of great joy and pride
to us. It represents the crowning achievement of •
years of effort, indeed of more than a century in
some cases, .in the process of methodical evolution
which has now brought all these new States to a
po~t where t.l1ey. can take theil'piace in the international--communli'3'. Together they represent a
considerable part of Africa, and that is why their
accession to fudependence has inspired many to call
the year 1960 the year of Africa. My country claims
its share of responsibility and credit in this historic.
development and is particularly proud of two filets
which eme:tge from it.

I

ofall,th~re

I

I

90•. First
are the circumstances in
WhiCh. thes.~ countries. hav.e.a.ttain.ed independenc..:l and
are now being .admitted to membership in the United
Nations. Du..""ingmy speech in the general debate last
85. All lovers of 'freedom everywhere hailed· with
year [814th meeting]. I had occasion to refer to the
joy the splendid conciliatory efforts which resulted
new provisionS .of the French. Constitution of 1958, .
in the independence of Cyprus. The p:l.'esence of the
to the CommUDityr~gime, and particularly to the .
delegation of Cyprus among us today symbolizes· a . fact that . all members of the Community hid been
trlUll'lph of statesmanship and human understanding, .grant~d . the right to ask for· M!sovereignty~!~y
the qualities which we all ardently desire to animate
time. Now. they haveachieve'1 that .... sovereignty, III
our pl'oceedingahere. I extelld a special welcome,
without . heSitation. or rese:rye, in. fr:endshf.p a'Jld "
therefore,· to. the delegation of our new Member;
concord. And in Slmllar conditions two Iormer ~t.·-lIii
...

I
I

••_._~tt!l

~

.:IiiT---_iii••••

.nfl·

!:IS.:

III• •

J

_

... . "-, • .
--

0-- ._.

....
"

.

-.

-" c'

.
"""'

)
~

, -.

..,.,--...

,~

e-v:;;

~t".:i.,"f~

8

91. Our second reason for feeling satisfied. is tue
very fact that this process of evolution is now
complete. For a long time, Mricans and French
have worked. clogely together in mutual confidence
to build the foundations on which future States could
develop an orderly and progressive way of life.
The time has now come to harvest the fruits of our
labours llirough many generations, and particularly
in the last ten or fifteen years. It is wiih complete
confidence that we now see our Mrican friends
assuming full responsibility for their destiny. We
are convinced that they will acquit themselves
honourably of their new tasks and especially those
they undertake in becoming members of the United
Nations. They will represent elements of pl'ogress
and vitality, enthusiasm andreasonintheinternational
community.

--

I

11

I,
,

I

I' . . .

0

.

.

,

,!

'"

"

,.;.... ,' .... ~ :"'"":; '·.~l"·

.-"

';

I

~~
.t·... ·:.,~.

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenary Meetings

Territories, Cameroun and Togo, have become
completely independent. Our first cause for satisfaction, therefore, is this exoellent understanding
between France and all these countries now reaching
the culminating point of a long period of evolution.

Ill'
I,

"-

92. The eleven Mrican countries recommended for
admission by France and Tunisia are in many respects
vastly different. Cameroun, the first Trust Territory
to become a sovereil:;n State, mer forty years of
particularly close co-operationwiththeAdministering
Authority; Togo, which over the same period has
brought about its unity, developed its economy and
organized its political life; :Madagascar, that great
isla.'tJ.d with a poiitical personality that has made
itself felt for centuries which constitutes a link
between Mrica and southern Asia; the Ivory Coast,
an old country with deeply rooted traditions yet a
new nation, proud of its tremendous vitality; Dahomey,
a country- limited in area but great by reason of
the quality of its pf~ople; tue 'Upper Volta, a country
as hospitable as it is picturesque, the source of
such skilful, tenacious and valuable ~anpower; Niger,
situated where two worlds meet, the m.elth"".......pot
where the white a.nd black races mingle; Chad, so
long the meeting-plane of caravans and now one of
tha most lively centres ~f the new Africa, the Central
African Republic, coun""try of old traditions, isolated
for a thousand years, but now in touch with the world
through modern communications; the Congo centred
on Brazzavil!e, whose capital has been one of the
strongholds of liberty, occupying a key position as
the great transport and redistribution axis for the
four States of the former Equatorial Africa; and
promise of a most prosperous future. Ail these
State,;, so diverse by. nature, have one thing in
common: they are governed by trmy democratic
institutions, are animated by sincerely peaceful
instinct,;, haye at their head a capable lI elite ll , and
can build sound economic structures which will
enable them, with the help of their friends, to view
the future with confidence. As I said before, the
participation of these countrles and their leaders
in the work of our Organization will enrich it to an
extent that France, better than any other cOlpltl'y,
:is in a position to appreciate.
93. Among the States whose admission he,d been
recommended by the Security Councn at the reqUest
. of France and TlLllisia there is one. the Federation
of Mali, whose case cannot, unfortunately, be decided
today by the GeneralAssembly. It is not t~at Senegal

and Sudan, which had decided in June 1950 to unite
in that Federation, are any less prepared or less
anxious to become Members of the united Nations,
but recent events of which the Assemb]y has been
informed and which have prevented the setting up
of federal institutions in Mali make it necessary for
us to reconsider the question of its admission. We
must wait for a clarification of the situation there,
which only concerns the interested parties and in
which our Organization should not intervene. France
will be the first to rejoice at what it is hoped will be
a speedy restoration of normal relations between
those parties.
94. I should not wish to encroach on what certain
delegations may have to say about other States which
our Organization is welcoming today and whose
application for membership they have sponsored.
May I be permitted, nev~uthel~ss, to greet these
new Membars and to say how delighted my delegation
is to see them ta1dIJ.g their place amongst us. I am
sure that they, like the Mrican countries I have just
mentioned, are fully conscious of the fact that on
their admission to membership of the United Nations
they not only see their independence solemnly and
internationally recognized but also assume new
responsibilities. In the tr01J.bled world of today, the
dominant note is one of disputes, threats and fear.
Our Organization, where only the theme of peace
and international concord should be heard, has itself
become the breeding ground for the great conflicts
which divide men, for reasons of political doctrin~
or of differences in their stage of development and
race, or which merely arise through the desire of
some for political expansion and domination. It is
to be hoped that the newly elected Members of our
world community, who are still immune from the
virus of dissension which sets their elder brethren
at variance. will inject imo the stormy and profitless
debates wMch we only too often witness here a note
of objectivity, of optimism and good will and, above
ill, of the !ilpirit of tolerance which the rest of us
so often fail to display.

and on
We feel
relatio
rights
in. hum
is re
97. Th
com.mo
the p
ancient
accum:
know
are bri
fact th
Hii.sgi .

to libo
Nations
world.
freedo
admiss
there i
the Or
for 'W
stren
20 Se
history
98. Be
coUntry
reason
friends
people
State,s
outatan
several
of whi
the m
Gove
peoples
consoli
all 0 1
Republi
of Sow
the Re
the Re
the Iv
Republi
Republi
llepubli

93. M:f, :SLiM: {Tunisia) (translated irom French):
Mr. Pr{'!lsident. first and foremost, I should like to
congratulate you most sincerely on behalf of the
Tunisian delegation on the General Assembly's
expression of confidence in you, which is a fitting
tribute to your high qualities and to the fine country
that you represent.
96. I have particular pleasure in welcoming to the
the Government of ,the Republ:l.c of Tu.llisia, the
fourteen new independent States of the Mediterranean
and Mrica, whose admission has been approved
today a~;the opening of the fifteenth session of the
General Assembly. Two others will certainly be
joining us at the beginning of ne..~ week in an atmosphere of con~lOrd, friendship and conciliation. It is
particularly heart--W'arm.tng for the young African
State that I represent to 'see the Mrican continent
fill the. .void which has subsisted so long in our
Organization by reason of its absence and .enjoy,
on the same .footing as the other continents; a
representation more in line with its possibilities
and its . rapid political development. And it is still
more heart-warming, on a more general plane, to
see the United Natigns coming closer toUDiversaIity,
which we still regard as its primary characteristic

:~i~S·

I

.'.

traditi
have a
enough
from
...
ova_co
,be fac
and ha
Mrica,
assum
our pe
brother
engage
their f
the ne
aware
I am ,s
... freedo

~~IIilI!IJ.!I!lJ!--.._,g!..Al...-,,

I

, , ..

..

'
J.

~.

'..

,

..

'

• '-;:i

.. 1r ......
ji:

864th meeting - 20 l:leptelIliJel' i~t:I\I

nite
:ess
)ns,
leen
;up
for
We

and one that must be reflected in its membership.
We feel that there is a greater chance of interfiational
relations returning to normal, of fundamental human
rights being safeguarded and of the values inherent
in human dignity being respected if the Organization
is really universal, thus excluding all bias.
97. The peoples of Africa cert9.inly are, to use a
com.mon expression, "young peoples'. Compared with
the peoples of an old continent like Europe or an
ancient one like Asia, the nations of Africa have
accumulated fewer international tra9itions. We all
know that the newly independent peoples of Africa
are !:lrlnging into these august precincts, where the
fact that a nation is young sometimes gives rise to
misgivin.gs, their ardour andtheirprofound attachment
to liberty, peace and justice, ideals which the United
Nations has always championed everywhere in the
world. We all feel convinced that fud cause of human
freedom has been greatly strengthened by the
admission of these new African States today, and that
there is more support for justice and dignity within
the Organization. In the end, man and all the values
for which he stands will certainly be much
strengthened as a result. That ia why we feel that
20 September will be an important date in the
history not only of Africa but of the United Nations.

~re,

i in
:nee
~be

'een
tain
lieh
lose
~ed.

lese
tion
am
just

: on
:ons
and
new
the
~ar.

98. Because of Tunisia's position as a Medit.erranean
coUntry and because it is par'/; of Africa, it has several
reasons for welcoming this event. The bonds of
friendship and brotherhood which unite the Tunisian
people to the ancient peoples of these new Member
State.s have won for the Tunisian delegation the
outstanding honour of submitting the candidature of
several of them to the Security Council, an honour
of which it may well be proud.· Allow me to convey
the most sincere good wishes of the Tunisian
Government and people for the happinsss of their
peoples in a stable and peacef"ul future and the
, consolidation of their sovereignty and independence to
all our friends-the Republic of Cameroun, the
Republic of Toga, the :Malagasy Republic, theRepublic
of Somalia, the Republic of the Congo (Leopoldville),
the Republic of Dahom\~, the Republic of the Niger,
the Republic of the Upper Volta, the Republic of
the Ivo~ Coast, :the Republic of Chad and the
Republic oi the Congo (Brazzaville), the Gabon
Republic, the Centr.a1 African Republic and the
Republic of Cyprus.

lace
self
iets
~ine

and
~ of

t is
our
the
.ren
ess
lOte
love

fus

ch):

to
the
ly's

l

ting

itry

-I

the
and
the
ean

V:~d

the
be
os~ is
can ,
lent
our

joy,

, a
:ies
ltill
, to
ity,

~tic

"*!'!l.!

99. I am convinced that the· new nations whose

a~i&.sion to tlie Umted Nations has bE!en approved

today will be able to draw from their inherited
traditional wisdom, their own genius and what they
have acquired from contact with the modern world
enough spiritual and moral strength to save them
from the convulsions of independence, to help them
overcome the obstacles with which they will soon
.be faced and to forge for themselves a prosperous
and happy future. For us, the young countries of
Africa, the achievement of independence involves the
assumption of major responsibilities and duties to
our peoples, the internaiWnal community and our
brothers of the African continent, some of whom are
engaged in a long and murderous struggle to recover
their freedom and dignity. We are convinced that
the new Members of the United Nations are fully
aware of these different duties and responsibilities.
I am .sure that they will strive to work for peace and
freedom, in Mrica and in the world~

;.Uliilm!M~I:~Jl!.!!]I:!r.:l\mi!!li!".tWJ!I:.!HI

.

100. Mr. MARTINO (Italy): I am very glad,
Mr. :Etresident, to offer you my heartiest congratulations on your election to preside over the work and
the deliberations of this session of the General
Assembly. It is without doubt a fully deserved tribute
and an aclmowledgement on the part of the Assembly
of your experience and wisdom in the conduct of
international relations, as weil as of your outstanding
record of service in the pursuit of the aims of our
Organization. For the Italian delegation especially
your election is a matter of gratification because
of the ~aditional bonds of friendship between our
two countries, their common heritage in the ideals
of the Christian tradition and the friendly sentiments
which you have alwa,ys shown toward the Italian
people.
101. I have asked for the floor on this significant
occasion when the General Assembly has decidedupon
the admission of fourteen new countries to
ID.ti.n.bEJlT8hip 1D the United Nations. From all of them
we feel certain 1.:.11' Organization may expect a
substantial contribution from which to derive new
vigour for the attainment of ita goals, the furthering
of friendly relat\ons am~ngst the paoples of the
world and their (Jonstructive cO'-operation in the
achievement of social and er-onomic progress and
well-being..
102. My

delegation regrets that, owing to the
constitutional situation in the young R9public of the
Congo, the matter of its representation in this
'Assembly should have to be deferred. My delegation
sincerely hopes that the problem will be solved
before long, in the interests of the Republic of;
the Congo and as a sign that peace and harmony
have been fully re-established in that country.
103. To all of the new Member countries, their
peoples and their leaders, I wish to express here
the sincere and warm faelings of friendship of
Italy. I welcome heartily their representatives in
this Assembly and look forward to a most· fruitful
collaboration with them.

104. The Italian delegation is gratified at the
admission of a sister Mediterranean country, the
Republic of Cyprus. OUr relationsliip with the peoples
9f Cyprus may be traced back to the very beginning
of history and civilization in the Mediterranean
area, and it may well be said that through centuries
of intercourSe and common history Italy has shared
with the peoples of Cyprus amostsignificantheritage.
105. The admissions of all of the new Members

sanctioned by .this Assembly today are a reason for
rejoicing. Howevel", may I say. without being suspected
of partiality, that in one of the admissions Italy finds
also a reason for pride. I refer ~o the Republic of
Somalia, concerning whose admission Italy was
privileged to co-sponsor, together with Tunisilta.nd
the United Kingdom, a draft resolution [A/L.298].
The rellttionship between Italy and Somalia, indeed
a long and healthy 011e, has developed throngh the
years into the clofJest ties offriendslilp, co-operation,
mutual confidenoe, respect and esteem between the
two peoples. Mell'lbers of this Assembly are especially
familiar with the period of our association 'With
Somalia when one parl of the territoryoithis rooently·
born Republic was entrusted by the United Nations
to Italian administration under a Trt!$1:e~hip
Agreement. We are indeed pr()udth~t the objectives

I

'''.''~_

.,;

. ,:jt .•
~

..•

... . .

-

...

..

•
10

General Assembly - Fifteenth Session·- Plenary Meetings

cl the Agreement have been attained fully and with
the utmost success in all fields.

106. The Republic of Somalia has attained independence fully aware of the duties and responsibilities
which fall upon it as· a member of the international
community, and we know that it is in this spirit that
the newly-born African State is joining the
Organization: for the purpose of contributing to the
fulfilment of the ail'.lS and principles of our Charter.
We are indeed gratified that the Assembly has
decided to sanction the admission of Somalia to
memberEhip by adopting the draft resolution sponsored
jointly by Italy, Tunisia and the United Kingdom, for
we are confident of its contribution to the stability
and well-being of the African continent, which is
becoming so important a factor for harmony and
progress in the world at large.
107. Lord HOME (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
J: am happy ...lat my first words to the General
Assembly of the United Nations should add to the
unity of our proceedings, and it is immensely
gratifying to me in particular that I find myself
sitting under your presidency_ We were colleagues
together in London, and therefore from my own
personal knowledge I know that we could have no
wiser guide and no greater and more devoted champion
of peace than you.

I

108. I would also like to add my congratulations
to Mr. Bela1inde, who conducted the last session of
the General Assembly of the United Nations with such
conspicuous success.
109. The third purpose for which I come to speak
at this rostrum now is to add my welcO'me to that
which has been given by the representatives of other
countries to the fourteen States which, by the
unanimous vote of the Assembly today" have been
admitted to our Organization. I welcome them by
virtue of their own claims to recognition, because
much -of the history of the next hundred years wiJl
be shaped in the continent of Africa and many of
them are African States, and because the United
Kingdom is in the process of converting a dependent
empire into an independent commonwealth of f..-se
nations. For us, the transition is from dependence
to independence to interdependence, and that is· the
order of our going.
110.1 wish especially to acclaim. the admission of
two Members. In this Organization, cultures and
traditions meet, and by meeting they are enril}hed.
The President and the representative of Italy h9.ve
said that the history of the island of Cyprus stretches
far back . into the past, and the island of CYP:!."'<1S
today is the heir to those priceless gifts which the
Moditerranean has brought to the civilized world
and in which the United KingdQm has been privileged
to share. This is, therefore, a particularly happy day
for us when Cyprus is admitted to membership in
the United Nations.
111. Inhistory~ the relationship of the United Kingdom
and Cyprus. has been comparatively brief and, over
all, it has been haPpy. Of course, the Gene....al
Asse;mbly has been i3eized Qf the troubles we had,
which extended over twc or t.hree years, in trying
to solve the constitutional problems involved in the
search for independence .for the. island, and d.uring
those years we had violence and we had deadlock,

To solve the deadlock and to end the violence,
sacrifices had to be made by four parties, i:>y the
Cypriots, by the Greeks, by the Turks"and by the
United Kingdom. I will not recall to the Ggneral
Assembly now nor rehearse the whole story of
these years, but I would suggest that the moral is
clear, that any problem, however stubborn, can be
solved if there is the political will to do so and if
we find the necessary patience, restraint and
determination. Therefore, I e~end to the representative of Cyprus who has joined us the most wa.rm
and friendly greetings from the UnitedKingdom•..

further, :t
support in
an indepe
Kingdom's
colony.
117. We
tulations t
for their
harmonia

Cyprus.

118. On tl
just had
admission
in the Uni
this oppo
behalf of
ment and
lations, 0
their succ

112. It gives us great .3atisfaction, too, that toda~
Somalia has been admitted to the Univ· .rations.
We have had very special ties with one part of the
new Republic. When the independent State of
Somaliland freely entered into the union which now
comprises the Republic of Somalia, we were pleased
and acclaimed the move as increasing the strength,
the cohesion and the influence of the whole, and
we look forward to wOi'king with Somalia in this
Organization and in co-operating in the high and
creative purposes for which the Unite(1 Nations
stands.
113. The events of the last few years have thrown
upon the General Assembly many duties and
responsibilities which the authors of .the Charter
did not foresee. Upon the Assembly now lies the
task of seeing that justice is given to all nations,
both great and small, and it is because land the
United Kingdom Government have faith that the
introduction of the new Members today will add to
the harmony of nations. and see that justice is done
in the world that I have much pleasure on behalf of
my Government in welcoming them all to the United
Nations.

I

114. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): Permit me,
Mr. President, to exprsss our pleasure on your
elevation to this high and distinguished office, which,
from our previous knowledge of you. we have no
doubt that you will adorn. There can also be. no doubt
that you will fulfil your duties with the greatest
distinction.

I

11~~ On 54 Aug-l1St 1960, we had the privilege of
being associated ''11th the representative of the
United Kingdom in co-sponsoring a draft resolution
in the Security Council recommending the admission
of Cyprus to membership in the United Nations
[S/4458], an.d today we had the added pleasure of
following that up with Ollr support. The representative
of the United Kingdom has already spoken of the
variolls constit-utional developments that preceded the
declaration of independence by Cyprus and the details
of the democratic system of government which has
been established ill. the new RepubUc. I do not wish
to go jnto these matters, in order that I may make my
s'i:atei.1lent as brief as possible.

llS.Cyprus .has h~d a memo:rablam.story 4DQ. an
<incient civilization. It has· been at the cross1'oads
of many civilizations for thou.sands of years, and it is
also in the happy position of having been able to
achieve freedom and' independence after only thirtyfive, years of foreign rule. I take this opportunity,
therefore, to congratulate Cypr-a.s on its freedom and
on its admission to membersbip in the UnitedNations,
and also to congratulate the United Kingdom on
graDIt'illg independence to another of its colonies and,

II
,

I
a

I

I
~I

I

~

I

119. Ther
to refer b
of the fou
General A
of Afrioa
Governme
The liber
greatest s
and it is
movement
free will
great inte
Nations s
which, as
is the basi
120. The
of this 0
proof was
their saga
their .willi
the joys
In recent
and othe
of fue Un!
how-much
in this Or
Afrilcan S'
Whil~h

we

uncertain
considera
121. rney
in Americ
period of
in -;;he tra:

pandence.

F ofnewtheMem
co

I

.

I

I"

i

I...

in them
ship in
that they
the Unite
to the Me
on behalf
our best
122. Mr.
Spani$n):
briefly fo

~R~~.,~..·"~. ~"""~flii!M~~~

864th meeting - 20 September 1960

violence,
ies, by the
and by the
le General
3 story of
e moral ia
rn, can be
lo so and if
traint and
;he reprenost warm
;dom.

that today
Id Nations.
part of the
State of
which noW
:re pleased
e strength,
.....hole, and
Lia in this
high and
Nations
rown
and
arter
s the
tions,
and the
at the
add to
is done
ehalf of
e United

ege of
of the
olution
ission
Nations
ure of
ntative
'en of the
~ceded the
he details
which has
) not wish
. make my
ry and an

rossroads
, and it is
m able to
ùy thirtyportunity,
tedom and
dNations,
19dom on
mies and,

further, for its promise of considerable financial
support in the early years of Cyprus r existence as
an independent nation, thus showing the United
Kingdom 's interest in the well-being of Us erstwhile
colony.
117. We would also like to extend our warm congratulations to the Governments of Greece and Turkey
for their valuable contribution in facilitating the
harmonious achievement of the independence of
CypruB.

118. On this historie and unique occasion, we have
just had the happy privilege of witnessing the
admission of fourteen sovereign States tomembership
in the United Nations. 1 would like therefore to take
this opportunity of extending to aU those States, on
behali of my delegation and on behali of the Government and the people of Ceylon, our sincere congratulations, our warm welcome and our best wishes for
their success and welfare.
119. There ia one particular point to which 1 wish
to refer befure 1 conclude. That no less than thirteen
of the fourteen States admitted to membership by the
General Assembly are States from the vast continent
of Africa ia a matter of special gratification ta my
Government, to my delegation, and to me personally.
The liberation movement of Airica is perhaps the
greatest single political phenomenon of this century,
and ft is our hope that with the spread of this
movement aU the other States which are still not
free will soon become independent and enter our
great international family, thus bringing the United
Nations still closer to the objective of universality
which, as the outgoing President stated earlier today,
is the basis of our efforts here.
120. The Airican States which are already Members
of this Organization have shown, if, indeed, any
proof was necessary, that their sense of responsibility,
their sagacity in approaching complex problems and
their willingness to join in the sorrows as well as
the joys of the United Nations are second to none.
ln recent times, by their contributions, material
and otherwise, to the valuable, constructive efforts
of the United Nations they have proved to the world
how much the world has benefited bytheir memberslùp
in this Organization. We have no doubt that the new
African States which have joined us today and to
which we offer a warm welcome will add in no
uncertain measure to the sum total of the alreacly
considerable Airican contribution to our work.

11

about me. It is a privilege and a compensation of
old age that our coUeagues often choose tbeir seniors,
both in years and in service to the United Nations,
for a particularly congeDiaI duty such as that of
welcoming the States we have just received so
warmly.
123. 1 mah to summarize the tribute due ta these
young nations in two words: joy and hope. AlI the
peoples of Latin America rejoice because our dream
of universal membership has come true and because
in this great adventure of freedom we have always
considered ourselves the brothers of the peoples of
the Airican continent and of the new countries of
Asia. We know well that independence carries with
it great responsibilities, and that no stronger tics
of brotherhood exist than those which link peoples
working towards a common destiny. We know now
that the countries of South America and the young
countries of Airica are destined to share a common
future. The representative of Brazil said eloquently
that the race of Iberian America may be called a
cosmic race (859th meeting]. We have never known
any racial discrimination, and there may well be,
in our sense of rhythm, in some turns of our
imagination and in the way we express our feelings,
traces of a precious African heritage. Moreover,
we also have ta struggle against forces of nature
which have always seemed unconquerable, and we are
destined to couquer them for the good of manldnd.
That is the cause of our joy.
124. And now 1 shall tell you what are the grounds
of our hope. In the United Nations, the small Powers
must always support just causes and demand strict
compliance with the provisions of the Charter. Our
young sister republics are thus also our new allies,
who will work towards the glorious destiny of the
United Nations. The United Nations welcomes them
enthusiastically and with a tremor of hope.
125. Mr. SHUKAillY (Saudi Arabia): Mr. President,
no amount of words can suffice to express our joy
at your election as President of this session-I dare
say, this summit meeting of the United Nations.
Your election is not oruy a matter of hanour to your
persan and to your country, but it is a great asset
to the United Nations. You not only preside over
the Assembly in accordance with certain rules and
procedures, but you import to this house all the
noble traditions of your noble country. The braveryof
your people-and how brave they are-their chivalry
and gallantry, and their deep attachment to the
sacred concepts of sovereignty, liberty and human
dignity are all the qualities that are needed for our
guidance in our deliberations.

121. They, like aU States elsewhere in Europe,
in America and in Asia, will certainly undergo a
period of stress and difficulty which is Inevitable
in the transition from colonial statua ta true independence. We have not a scintilla of doubt that our
new Members will prove themselves fully worthy
of the confidence the General Assembly has placed
in them by unanimously admitting them to membership in the United Nations, and we have no doubt
that they will play a very active raIe and enrich
the United Nations by their membership. 1 convey
to the Member States adroitted to membership today,
on behalf of the Government and people of Ceylon,
our best wishes for their suc cess.

126. Looking back for a moment at the records of
the Organization ever since its establishment, we
can harclly flnd an aclùevement more thrilling and
more inspiring than the adoption of the resolutions
on the admission of the new Members to the United
Nations. For aU of us this is an historie moment,
ushering in a history-making era. Its far-reaching
reslÙts, no doubt, are baund to influence the future
destiny of,the continent of Mrica, the course of human
history and, l would emphasize, the evolution of the
United Nations.

122. Mr. BELAUNDE (Peru) (translated from
Spanish): Mr. President, 1 should like to thank you
briefly for the generous remarks you have made

127. C0ming from Africa these nations bring to the
United Nations something more than additional Members. This Organization ia not in dire need of

.

.'

,

:

.. ~.

·'·0

. ...'-; -.

".

.:..,.

. .....

..

12

~,

.
,

...

. ,.

\-:i

! ..- -~
•.•.•

..

-.
•

••

'--..

'y

,

._

n

~

.1

0

~

.

.0

...

,.-;

Q
""

'.

...

~

".1 •

•

0

•

General Assembly - Fiiteenth session - Plenal'y Meetings

numbers-just numbers; it craves for beU\"vers,
for crusaders and for ardent Members. Its agonizing
necessity cries out not only for peace--Ioving peoples,
as required by the Chartf'jr, butfor freedom-observing,
independent-thinking and liberty-struggling nations.
128. The United Nations stands in need of a new
force, and the nations we have aG'mitte.sd are the
vanguard of this force, to be followed b'J all peoples
now fighting for their liberty and independence.
We appll'....a.d their arrival after'this heroic journey.
We rejoice in their admission to the Organization,
and from this rostrum we send to their peoples cur
heartfelt congratulations.
129. In expressing this joy, I would not fail to make
a special mention of Cyprus, whose peoplehavefought
gallantly for their independence. With Cyprus, its
land and its people, we have ancient associations
which ar.e· deeply rooted in the history of the
Mediterranean and its civilization. Cyprus, we hope,
shall ne more be a. base of aggression against the
Arab world, but an island of peace, tranquillity and
friendship.
130. This is a memorable occasion for all of us
to pay warm tribute to the memory of all their
heroes who fell as martyrs on the soil of Africa
in defence of the liberty of their peoples.

131. The fact which should capture our attention is
that these African States do come to oux' midat with
fresh wounds, with glimmering sweat and with
sparkling tears-the three medals in the battle for
freedom. Such qualifications can revitalize the
United Nations, can reinforce its Charter and can
bring its objectives to realization.
,I

..

-

should continue to remain under foreign rule in any
of its manifestations.
136. What remains of colonialism, of the vestiges
of imperialism and the relics of European domination
should be liquidated, and liquidated forever~ The
United Kingdom, France, Spain and Portugal-aand
I say this with all due respect, bearing in mind
the importanoe ofinternational friendship andharmony
among the nations of the world; after '9l1, the United
Nations is the centre for harmony and genUine
friendship among the nations' of the world-must
now be ready to leave the continent peaceful :::or its
own peoples, and the peoples unmolested.
137. Of slpecial mention in this regard is Algeria,
which should no longer be dominated when the
countries of Africa, one after the other, are elevated
to the status of independence. It would seem a tragic
paradox if France should delay the liberty and
independence of Algeria, since France itself has
endorsed the admission of fourteel' sister countries
on the same continent.
138. This new membership should open new vistas
of hope for all peoples fighting for their liberty
in Asia and everywhere else in the world. The
people of Malta, of Oman, and of Palestine, we hope,
will soon join the Organization, fully independent
and fully sovereign. In Palestine, particularly, the
people are reorganizing their national ranks to
emancipate the Holy Land. We trust that they will
soon occupy their lllace in the United Nations as
an independent State representing all the legitimate
people of Palestine: Moslems, Christians and Jews
alike.

134. Thus, the admission of these new Members
marks . the beginning. of a new United Nations, a
United Nations very different from that of 1945.
The admiS13ion of the new Members highlights the
emergence of a new force and points the way towards
universality.

139. There remains one other major issue and it
is 'the last point to which I snall refer. Neither
the United Nations nml:' its Members should hamper
the movement for unity now prevaIent in the minds
.of all African peoples. The movement may take the
form of a federation, a confederation of any African
system which will recognize the living realities
of AfJ;ican life. Such a· union, whatever its form,
should be unhampered. There should be no intervention and no interference. It should be left to
its fullness. The area should be kept out of bounds
for all except Africans. Such a union will doubtless
reflect the solidarity of Africa and, in the memorable
words of Chief Justice of the United States Supreme
Court, Salmon P. Chase, such a union would be
ttan indestructible union composed of indestructible
States". Lastly. the admission of the African States
invites our attention to the future of the white man
in. the whole continent· of Africa. A number of States
represented in this Organization, we know, have
this problem very much on their minds. The moving
question is: what is the destiny of the white man
in Afdca after the independence of Africa? Is the
white man finished? I shall not attempt to answer
the question myself. It was Jan Smuts who volunteered a reply when he said: ttThe old Africa is
gone, and the white races must face the situation \
whioh they themselves oreated."

135. I emphasize universality, for it is stil1lacking.
Many nations are still outside the United Nations.
The admission of the African .States is a step in
the right direction. The whole of Africa finally
should be emancipated. Not one acre of African soil

140. The matter does not rest with Africa and
the Africans. It lies with Europe and the Europe~
themselves. ResponsibUity for the white man istha
white hlan's responsibility. It is he, not the African,
who should shoulder the responsibility fully..
.

132. A membership of this calibre helps to balance
the imbalance whioh for a long time has existed
in the United Nations. It helps to establish the
equilibrium which the Unitel1 Nations has never
enjoyed. The entry of the new Members cOlL1d be
a milestone in the history of our Organization.

133. These nations ''lame to us at· the right time
to meet the requirement of the moment, and that is
what we have longed for. They come to us with an
independent will, for they have fought for their
independence. They come with an independent judge-ment. for they have been the victims of dependence.
They come to join their African. and Asian colleagues
in the 'pursuit of a policy of positive neutrality and
non-military aJ1gnment, as the last refuge for world
peaoe and seourity• Lastly, they come to join the
States of the Bandung Conference in striving to
bring the United Nations back to its Charter so that
all its potentialities may be marshalled in the battle
for freedom, peace and human dignity.

141. The
behaves
Let us ho
that the w
of peace,
prosperity,
for all ere

142. Mr. J
It is a gr.
convey to
delegation;
personality
session, w
important

143. On thi
StattlS whic
been receiv
The Haiti
the honour
being able
bo~md to
breakable
origins and
destroyed
Our forefa
transplante
the unfo
tousatr
the imperi
this Msto
Negro Stat
with joy t
peoples, bo
grow ever 1

144. Our t
uncomprom
race, one
w.ho, on b
cold and so
words: "W
of liberty
It will grow
145. Our
who, car
the flag 0
sunlight on
146. For
people to
whether w
voice has
ideals of
solidarity,
striving to
147. Onb
of Haiti, I
leader of
expert on
peoph,
the Haitia
good wishe
co-operati
the new Af

148. Mr.
Republics)
States hav
the United

864th meeting - 20 September 1960
eign TIÙe in auy

of the vestiges
,pean domination
d forever. The
1 Portugal-and
bearing in mind
lhip andhannony
Ir '!i11, the United
lY and genl11ne
he world-musl
peaceful for lla
ted.

:ard is Algarla,
:iated when the
er, are elevated
.d seern a tragic
;he liberty and
ance itself has
sister countries

:Jpen new vista8
~r their liberty
the world. The
estine, we hope,
Illy independenl
larticularly, ilie
ional ranks 10
It that they will
ited Nations as
1 the legitimate
stians and JewJ

or issue and JI
refer. Neither
should hamper
n.t in the mincis
lt may take the
1 of any Afrioan .
living realities
:ever its tom,
d be no intermld be left to
t out of bounds
1 will doubtless
the memorable
States Supreme
Inion would be
indestructible
African States
the white man
mber of States
re know, haVt
Is. The moving
the white man
liriea? Is the
npt to anBwel
ts who volW1'"
old Africn. la
l the situation

:h Africa Md
the Europeans
,te man 18 tbe
It the African.
Ully.

141. The white man will not be finished if he
behaves himself as he behaves himself in Europe.
Let us hope that he will behave, and let us pray
that the whole of AIriea will become a continent
of peace, a continent of liberty, a continent of
proeperity, and a continent for human brotherhood
for aIl creeds, for aIl races, and for 811 peoples.

142. Mr. JOSEPH (Haiti) (translated from French):
It is a great pleasure for me, Mr. President, ta
convey to you the congratulations of the Haitian
delegation; we are happy ta see such an outstanding
personality as you presiding over the fifteenth
session, which will certainly be one of the most
important in the annals of our Organization.
143. On this historie day, fourteenfree and sovereign
States which have newly achieved Independance have
been reeeived into the great United Nations family•
The Haitian Government and people, whom l have
the honour ta represent here, are full of joy at
being able ta welcome them as brothers. We are
bound ta thirteen of these young republics by un~
breakable bonds arising out of our common ethnic
origine and a cultural unity which has been neither
destroyed nor weakened by centuries of history.
Our forefathers, torn from our Airica-mater and
transplanted ta America to replace the Indians,
the unfortunate victims of exploitation, handed down
ta us a treasure which we have faithfully guarded,
the imperishable spirit of black Airiea, sa that at
this historie moment Haiti, which was the first
Negro State ta free itself from slavery, i5 singing
with joy ta see the young family of the coloured
peoples, bowed for so long beneath a pitiless yoke,
grow ever larger.
144. Our thoughts fly ta Toussaint Louverture, the
uncompromising champion of the freedom of his
race, one of the pioneers of Haitian independence,
who, on board the ship Le Héros carrying him to
cold and solitary exile and death, said these prophetie
words: "With my defeat, only the trunk of the tree
of liberty of the black peoples has been eut down.
It will grow again, for its roots are deep and strong."
145. Our thoughts turn also ta the great Dessalines
who, oarrying the struggle on to victory, raised
the flag of liberty and independence in the blazing
sunlight on 1 January 1804.

13

to the Charter of the United Nations. which was
drawn up, while the last guns of the Second Warld
War were sounding, in order, as the Charter itself
says, ta save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war and ta maintain international peace.

149. The Soviet Government ia profounilly gratified
by this new addition to the ranks of the United
Nations. It considers it an important event-and
not merely because of the subatantial increase wlùch
it represents in the number of States Members of
the United Nations, although the faet that the United
Nations is drawing closer ta the statua of a genuinely
universal organization should in itseU be welcomed.
150. It is enormously signifioant that aU of the
fourteen new cOlUltries admitted ta membership in
the United Nations are young States which have
endured a long period of harsh colonialist oppression
and have only very recently attained independence..
For these States, membership ln the United Nations
is one of the important stages in the consolidation
of their political independence-one of the principal
ways in which ta escape from the harsh lot of t11eir
past position, and to establish co-ooperation and
friendship on a basis of genuine equality with the
other States of the world and with other peoples.
151. Close ta the heart of the Soviet peoples, and
fully understood by them, are the concerna and
aspirations of the young countries who have freed
themselves from centuries-old oppression and are
exerting every effort to overeome poverty and
backwardness, ta banish this painful legaey of colO'"'
nialism forever, and ta stand on their own feet
economlc81ly.
152. We fully appreciate that, if only for these
reasons, the new sovereign States are vitally concerned with the safeguarding of peace and the development of peaceful co-operation between aU countries,
on the basis of full equality of rights and strict
respect for the independence and sovereignty of
each of them. We therefore have no doubt that this
new addition to !ta ranks will help the United Nations
ta become an ever more effective instrument of
peace and international co-operatian.

leader of our nation and an internationally known
expert on Mrican affaira, on bellali of the Haitian
people, united in a eommon joy, and on behalf of
the Haitian delegation, 1 extend our most cordial
good wishes for a prosperous fnture in concord and
co-operation ta the Governments and peoples of
the new African States.

153. The simultaneous admission of fourteen new
independent States-thirteen of them Mrican countries
-ta membership in the United Nations :ls a very
significant event, primarily because it reflects the
great changes in the life of humanity which are
taking place in our time. Let UB consider what Is
happening in Africa. For many deeades, the mention
of Airiea ealled forth the image of a continent
whieh, although very wealthy> was groaning under
oppression, its population dominated by foreigners
and ita territory divided up by foreig;yi oecupiers.
The map of AIrica was a map of colonies. Now the
African continent is squaring !ts powerful sholliders
and awakening to a new, independent liie. 'l'Ile system
of colonialist oppression is collapsing like Il house
of cards. In one year alone, fifteen new independent
States have appeared in Airioa. And the time is not
far off when the dawn of freedom will break ovar
the entire African continent.

148. Mr. GROMYKO (lJnion of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Fourteen new
States have just been admitted to membership in
the United Nations. TheBe States have Bubscribed

154. Now a new map of Africn must be printed.
On fuis new map the African lands will be designated
as belonging to the peoples who have lived and worked
on these lands from tirne immemorial. Such a course

146. For many years we have been the only black
people to be haard; we leave it ta others ta j'ldge
whether we have spoken selfishly or whether our
voiee has not always been raised to defend the
ideals of freedom and human brotherhood and
solidarity, and in support of all peoples who were
striving towards nationhood.
147. On behalf of the Government of the R epublic
of Haiti, 100 by Dr. François Duvallier, the spiritual

. . ..
"

.

...

. -....

'

-

'''-' , . ...,.'

1~

... .
'

..'t" . .~,

.

!t

.... ,

',-"

,

0

•

_.

~

(I

"

••

1\

o,!;?::J

1n,..:"';."I"~.t ...~. "~,,'"

,.

h-~
,J","",

'wo

',-

...

:'":.

•

." ..

'

""

.

events cannot but be welcoD'.led by everyone who
genuinely desires that the lofty principles of the
United Nations Chp.rter ragarding equal rights for
all p'cloples should be put into effect.

155. Unfortunately, i:o. this matter a great deal remains to be d:one" But one can confidently assert
that the time is a.prJrpaohing when all peoples under
the colonialililt yoke villI obtain their freedom and
independence and take their place in the United
Nations as equals among their peers.
156. History and experience show that, while the
attainm0nt of fo:rmaI independence by the former
colonies is an important step, alone it is not enough;
the principal task consists in achieving genuine
independence, and in the first place economic inde....
penrlence, so that the new independent States oan
stand economically, on their own feet. This is all
the more important in that the colonialist Powers,
while prepared ,to accept the formal independence of
the new States, are striVing to conv~:rt the older
forms of colonialist oppression into new forms which
are, in essence" much the same~ They are trying
in effect to continue the exploitation of these new
States, their peoples and their natural resources.
157. Experience shows that, with this end in view,
they are trying to install governments convenient to
the colonialists, governments which will help the
colonialists to pursue their former policy of colonial
oppression. It is appropriate to recall this fact today,
when we are welcoming new independent States
whose representatives are present in this hall
together with the delegations of all the other States.
158. Life is always yielding further instances of
States which, having recently attained to independence,
despite all' the difficulties and obstacles placed in
their path, contribute remarkable examples of peaceloving policy and co-operation in the strengthening
of international peace.
159. Quite frankly, it would be no bad thing if
this example of a peace-loving policy were followed
by certain countries whose ruling circles, while not
averse to boasting about their ancient cultu!"e and
democratic traditions, in fact strive in every way
to maintain the colonialist order, and look down on
the peoples of Asia and Africa,~s if these peoples
were immature, unable to govern themselves, and
incapable of deciding their. own fate and their own
affairs.
160. It is no secret that- the successes of the popular
national liberation movements are not to everyone's
taste. To one accustomed to impose his will on
others, the changes which these successes have
wrought in the United Nations are not welcome. Some
people are already baginningto regret the expansion
of the United Nationl3 membership and to express
the apprehension that the United Nations, with the
addition of the new young States will become a
politically immature body. But those who value the
strengthening of peace and friendship between peoples
can only rejoice, sincerely, at the new addition to
the United Nations' ranks.
161. The Soviet Union's position on this matter is
clear. The Soviet State steadfastly pursues a policy
of friendship and co-operation with the countries
of ASia and Africa, .and furnishes them with disinterested help and support. In their righteous struggle,

'

."-

- - - - - - - General Assembiy - Fifteenth Session - Plenary Meetings

(Jf

. '.

the African peoples can always count on the friendly
assistance of the Soviet State.

'"
162. The Soviet Union. which consistently
suppoZO+the principle of the seli-determination of peop1
and their striving for national independence, was
among the first to welcome the appearance of Africa's
new independent States, and of the Republic of Cyprus.
The Soviet Government solemnly recognized them
as ind(1lpendent ,and sovereign States and announced
its willingness to establish diplomatic relations with
all of them. And subseqtlently the Soviet Union
expressed its full support of these States' applications
for admission to membership in the, United Nations.
It made a statement to that effect during the consideration of these applications in the Security Council,
and formally repeats' it here in the General Assembly.
163.':'he Soviet Union heartily welcomes the new
members of the United Nations accepted today, and
expresses its confidence that they will make an
important contribution to our common cause of
strengthening peace and international co-operation.
164. Mr. PAZHWAK (Afghanistan): This is a great,
historic occasion for the entire world, but even a
greater moment for the peoples of the UnitedNations.
The first day of this year was marked by the attainment of independence of a former Trust Territory,
an event which has been followed by the attainment
~f independence of more peoples and nations.
165. In no periud of history have the peop~es of
the world rejoiced with so much cause, and perhaps
this occasion will remain unique in its grandeur
and significance. It is not only my pleasure and
privilege to welcome the new Members of the United
Nations, but it is also a great honour to join the
voice of Afghanistan with that of other Members in
this most hearty and most sincere welcome.
166. It is also a special privilege for me to speak
on behalf of some of Asia's great nations and
Afghanistan's great friends-Iran, Iraq, and Japan.
167. We are very happy to have seen this day
arr'Lve, for throughout the struggle of these new
Members for independence, we have always supported
their cause with a hope that shall be fulfiUed.
Therefore, the fulfilment of their aspirat10nsis the
fulfilment of our own aspirations. In the joyful
thoughts that we have at this moment, one is most
strongly attached to the success of all dependent
peoples whose struggles for independence have not
yet come to the same happy end. .This thought is
most overwhelming in our minds; hut stronger than
our sentiments is not only our hope, but our deep
and unchangeable conviction that one day the world
will be truly free, a place of beauty and joy for
mankind, and that the United Nations will be a
gathering place for all peoples and nations of the
world.
168. The entry into the United Nations of the new
Members means the entry into force of thli.\ universal
principle of the equali~i 'Uld dignity of man. This
event took place at a time wnb~ the United Nations
had less power to terminate the domination of one
uation over another. No one can deny that the dependent peo~le will have more support than ever
before by reason of the j,ncrease in the number of
independent nations in our Organization.

16l). We
Member S
fullest c
We wish
we wish
170. All
not only 0
Assembly
this great
171. Mr.
Mr. Fres
congratula:
to the high
By your p
zation, yo
W~wishy

172. The
admission
independe
Their ac
dramatic
responsive
United Sta
the United
we do no
from a de
equal and
basic free
173. I ne
responsib"
as well
developme
for indivi
so the fre
part of a h
,174. By
ar'~ ~aking

expanding
::'75. With
sJ,.~cial sel
successful
importanCE
now in a
ma'tters 0
to the we
by its ve
newly deve
go'Vermnen
peoples.
and co-op
are cmui
today ma
collaborati
United Na
extend to t
176. Mr.
French):
gratulating
election t
Assembly.
your com
of justice
ov~r our
that you
bution to

864th meeting - 20 September 1960

wxaUon of ~

169, We not only congratulate these fourteen new
Member States, but we extend to an of them our
full est co-operation and our most friendly hand.
We wish ali of them eternal dignity and prosperlty;
we wish them success in their new responsibilities.

lidependeoce. 1
II r'luce of l\lm
(!publ le or e)~
ret'ognbted '"
:J!'j :md ~

170. Allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate you
not only on your election as President of the General
Assembly at this session, but aIso on the fact that
fuis great event has taken place under your presidency.

~!stently ~

Uc:: relat:fœ..$!It
Iwe SoViet (lliR

lltes applj~1
c li nlted Nati1ill
i

during I.be ecl7i!

Security c~

ImeralAs~

eh:(Imes the li
e pted toœy. r
)' will make:
nmon cause

IU.1

C(,..1>peratl1!

This la a. gnl
et. but 6'ft'l

:1 r 1

, UnlledNatY.ll
ed br lbe alUil

'Mlll't Tenil$!
" thenltalnmE

IItfc:ms.

the r.eoples

lfi e, and perl!i!;
ft 1tB gramiI!
'f pleasure l!1

ra of the Uœ
ruru r to Jam::

er Members:

,come.

)r me to Spel
il nations fi!

'a<L and Jap>1

sean thls dl
uf these Ilt'
ways BUppol"'d
1 be fulfillfi
Ji ra.tlons lB là
In the jO)'fl
t, one t8 mes

all depend6!

lance have li!

'bis thought Î
stronger tk
, but our de&

day the won
ty and joyh

ns wiU he;
rlaUons olltl

lB

of the Jle'I

the univenl
of man. Th
'nlted NaUœ
nation of GD:
. tilat the de
rt thlln eVli!
he numberd

171. Mr. HERTER (United States of America):
Mr. President, let me begin by offering you the
congratulations of the United States on your election
to the high post of President of the General Assembly.
By your past distinguished services to this Organization, you have earned our confidence and respect.
We wish you every success.
172. The United States wholeheartedly welcomes the
admission into the United Nations of the newly
independent States of Africa and the State of Cyprus.
Their achievement of Independance represents a
dramatic expansion of freedom. This strikes a
responsive note in the hearts of the people of the
United States, for it was less than 200 years ago that
the United States achieved its own independence, and
we do not forget that our national existence stems
from a declaration stating that aIl men are created
equal and that they have a God-given right to certain
basic freedoms.

:L 73. I need hardly add that with freedom comes
responsibility; responsibility for national development
as well as for participation in the international
development of the world community. Just asfreedom
for individuals is an essential for a free nation,
so the freedom of individual nations is an easential
'Part of a healthy world community.
174. By entering the United Nations, these nations
are taking on a share of the task of maintaining and
expanding liberty in the world.
175. With the conclusion last night of the emergency
special session on the Congo, the United Nations has
successfully met a severe test on an issue of particular
importance for the new St41tes. The United Nations is
now in a position to deal even more effectively with
matters of vital concern to peace and security and
to the welfare of its Members. The Unit~d Nations,
by its very nature, is in a unique position to help
newly developing States to attain stable and democratic
government with higher living standards for their
peoples. The United States will continue to support
and co-operate with the United Nations effort. We
are confident that the admission of the new States
today marks the beginning of a long and fruitful
collaboration of these countries in tile work of the
United Nations. As one of their new partners, we
exteIid to them our warmest welcome.
176. Mr. ENCKELL (Finland) (translated from
French): Mr. President, let me begin by congratulating you, on behalf of my delegation, on your
election to the high position of President of this
Assembly. Your devotion to the United Nations cause,
your competence and the impartiality and sense
of justice which you bring to the task of presiding
over our discussions are weIl known to us. We know
that you will make a valuable and effective contribution to the session which is opening today.

15

177. The delegations of Austria, Denmark, Iceland,
Norway and Sweden have done the Finnish delegation
the honour of asking us to extend their welcome
together with our own, to the States that have just
been admitted to our Organization. Ifeel that everyone
will understand the pride with which 1 am Carrylng
out this task today, a red-letter day in the annals
of the United Nations. These six delegations extend
a friendly, cordial and fraternal welcome to the
fourteen delegations who will now be sitting beside
us.
178. We feel sure that there is a deep significance
in the fact that, no sooner had these States achieved
their national sovereignty, than their Governments
a11 decided that one of their first acts should be to
indicate thelr desire to participate in the work of
the United Nations and solemnly to recognize the
Purposes and Principles of the Charter, accepting
aU the rights and responsibilities involved.
179. We feel also tilat much encouragement is to
be drawn from the unanimous welcome which our
Organization immediately extended to you, thus ranouncing the hesitations that have impeded Us growtb.
in the pasto We are sure that you are going to give
us abundant proof that, by taking this Just and
unanimous decision, which does us as much credit
as it does you, the United Nations will, with the
growth in membership, increase its possibilities of
working in a spirit of mutual respect and brotherly
co-operation in the interest of our common future.
180. We are deeply and sincerely happy to be able,
side by side with you and with the advantage of your
valuable contribution, to devote ourselves to tilis
far-sighted and painstaking endeavour, to the continuaI
reconciling of different national interests whlch the
peaceful development of the international community
towards the universally desired reign of justice and
peace requires of us aIl, for our own and in the
common good.
181. Most of you come from the great African
continent· so rich in potential and promise, whose
many nations will now be able to devote their efforts,
their energies and their ambitions to the great
national tasks that the world expects of them. We,
for our part, will do everything in our power to
facilitate these tasks and to co-operate with you in
attaining our joint objectives.
182. Lastly, we welcome the presence of the
Republic of Cyprus, the beneficiary of the three
great heritages of Greece, Christianity and Islam,
each of which has contributed so much to our
respective civilizations and taught us the value of
suah Ideals as humanism, moderation, wisdom and
faith, Ideals we must aIl be guided by as we start
the work of the fifteenth session.
183. The PRESIDENT: Before we adjourn, 1 should
like to inform the Assembly that the representatives
of the Republic of the Ivory Coast, which became
a Member of the United Nations this afternoon, have
nQw arrived in New York and, 1 have been advised,
are present at this moment in the hall. In order
that the Assembly may have an opportunity to eJC:tend
its welcome to the representatives of tIlis new
Member State, as 1 am sure it would wish to do by

,,"

•

"

..'

• t>

16

\..

:

_

'"

"if" .,,""1..

\

::i': . .

.\ ."

_

.

~

.

General Assembly - Fifteenth session - Plenar.:.:.::.y...;M=.::.ee.:..t;.;:.in:.,:g;:..5

its acclamations. I would ask the Chief of Protocol
to be good .<:::lough to escort tile representatives of
the Republic of the Ivory Coast to their seats on
the floor of the Assembly.

':

"" . '

>"

~

•

_

United

The delegation of the Republic of the Ivory Coast
was escorted to its place in the Assembly hall.

GEl

The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

AS
F'FTEE

Officia

Agenda
Admi
Nab

Pre

Admissi

1. Mr

fJi

Litho In V.N.

nOOl-January 1961-2,225

Mr. Pr
to con
this se
have h
togethe
eral A
presid
in yo
fairnes
late no
that yo
2. Ma:,
deeil a
acted
Assem
servic
3. La
its lml
Very 1
only a:f1
them,
genera:
seen t
being
great
also
greate
nothi
and oi
brutal
of rac
dav fo
haveb
which
are no
for al
thatb
the w
it who
freedo
people
ia, no
the h
admitt
are n
