U,
6. Requests the Council to study the feasibility of
working out estimates for the programme on a basis
longer than a one-year period, and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its eighth session.

411th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.

ANNEX
Financial arrarr.geme,.,.
(AGDED BY THE EcoNOIIIC AND Soc;JAL CoUNCIL IN PAL\•
GII.Al'H 4 OP ITS RESOLUTION 433 B

(XIV))

Contributiom received for the third financial period lhall
be allocated as follows:
(i) Fifty per cent of total pledges for 1953, up to but not
exc_eeding $10 million, s~I be automatically available for allocation to the participating oraanizations in accordance with
paragraph ~ (e)• of Council resolution 222 A (IX), as
amended, out of the contributions received for the third financial perioc' ;

(ii) The balance of contributions received ■hall be retaiaed
in the Special Account for further allocation, as provided in
the resolution of the Technical Assistance Committee of 23
May 1952, approved by the Economic and Social Council an
11 June 1952 in resolution 433 A (XIV).

tailed plan for establishing such a special fund but that
the Council, by resolution 416 A (XIV), has established a Committee for the purpose of drafting a detailed plan to be completed not later than 1 March
1953;
3. Requests the Council to submit to the General
Assembly at its eighth session the detailed plan referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of General Assembly
resolution 520 A (VI), including recommendations
for a special fund for grants-in-aid and for low-interest, long-term loans, and to keep in mind that,
especially in the present state of world tension, it is
necessary to give special attention to the problem of
international financing of economic and social development through international co-operation within the
framework of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to place before
the Committee appointed under Council resolution
416 A (XIV) the records of the discll5Sion on this
subject at the fourteenth session of the Economic and
Social Council as well as at the seventh session of the
General Assembly ;
S. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its eighth session an item concerning the establishment
of a special fund, with a view to considering practical
methods for establishing the fund as soon as circumstances permit.

411111 ,i.,,..., ,uefflf{/,
21 Dece,nber 195Z.
622 (VII). Fin1111elng of economic development
of undeNleveloped eoantriee
A

The Gmwal Assembly,
H tlfling mmind the obligations assumed by the governments of Member States under Articles SS and 56
of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolutions 400 (V) of 20 November
1950 and 520 A (VI) of 12 January 1952,
Taking ""te of Economic and Social Council resolutions 294 (XI), section C, of 12 August 1950, 342
(XII) of 20 March 1951, 368 (XIII) of 22 August
1951 and 416 A (XIV) of 23 June 1952,
1. Notes with appreciation that the Secretary-Genera! has prepared a working paper • setting out alternative approaches to the establishment of a special
fund for grants-in-aid and for low-interest, long-term
loan:i. :to under-developed countries for the purpose of
helpmg; them, at their request, to accelerate their economic development and to finance non-self-liquidating
projects which are basic to their economic development;
2. Notes also that, for reasons beyond its control
the Economic and Social Council was unable to submit
to the General Assembly at its seventh session a de-

parae--1131. (e).
This working paper is briefly de-

• Formerly
document t!J,

1 See

lCribed in pararrapli 33S of the last report of the Economic
and Social Council.,, O/lieial R,e,,,.,u of IM G,,.m,J Auntbl:,
Sftlfflllt Stssio,e, :n,P,lemnsl No, J.

'

B
Tiu Gfflfflll Assembly,
Tuiltg note with satisfaction of the preliminary report I by the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development which had been requested by the
Economic and Social Council, in its resolution 368
(XIII) of 22 August 1951, to consider the potential
contribution an international finance corporation could
make to promote economic development through the
financing of productive private enterprise in underdeveloped countries,
Recalling that the Economic abd Social Council, in
its resolution 416 C (XIV) of 23 June 19S2, requested the International Bank for Reconstrudlion and
Development to continue its examination of the proposal and, in the light of that further examination, to
seek the views of its member governments on the desirability of establishing such a corporation, and to inform the Council during 1953 of the results of its
further examination of the proposal and the action it
has taken concerning it,
Considering that the questions relating to the establishment of an international finance corporation have
been discussed by the Economic and Social Council at
several sessions, and that consultations are in progress
with a view to defining more clearly. in what respects
this proposal can be made practicable with the object
of providing greater facilities for financing the ~ opment of under-developed countries,
1 See

document E/2215.

Reaolutlom adopted ·on repol'la of dae Seeond C.Ommlttee
1. Looks forward to the early completion of their
tasks by the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development and by the Economic and Social
Council;
2. R1qu1sts .the Secretary-General to place at the
disposal of the International Bank the records of the
discussion on this subject at the seventh session of the
General Assembly;
3. R1qt11sts the Economic and Social Council to
report to the General Assembly at its eighth session
on the progress made in regard to the proposal for the
establishment of an international finance corporation.
411th plenary meeting,
21 December 1952.
C

The General Assembly,
Considering:

(a) The importance of stimulating the international flow of private capital for the economic development of under-developed countries,
( b) The work already done in this field by the
Economic and Social Council, by its regional commissions and by the specialized agencies, as well as the
varioua studies on the question which have been prepared by the governments of various Member States,
by the Secretary-General and by a number of nongovernmental organizations,
(c) That certain governments have taken action
designed to stimulate the flow of private capital for
economic development purposea,
(d) That,despite the efforts already made in this
regard, the flow of private capital is not yet adequate
to cover the needs of the under-developed countries,
1. R,qu,sts the Secretary-General:
(o) To include in an early future world economic
report an' analysis of the international flow of private
capital, including·the volume and direction of that flow
as well a, the types and the fields of application of
such investment and any reasons for the continued
inadequacy of .such investment in under-developed
countries, so as to facilitate the efforts of the Economic and Social Council in its formulation of constructive proposals ;
( b) To prepare a memorandum for the Economic
and Social Council summarizing the work done, the
studies conducted and the action taken, as referred to
in sub-pa.ragrarhs ( b) and ( c) of the preamble to the
present resolution ;
2. R,qwsu the Economic and Social Council,, in
the coune of its conaideration of the que1tion of financing econqmic development in the light of the analylis
and of the memorandum referred to in paragraph 1
above, to give attention-at an early session to the steps
which the Unitec:l N•tions, the specialized agencies
and the govenuaefltl of Member States might take to
stimulate the iteadl flow into under-developed cotm"1es o.f i?lttate capital in adequate amounts, 10 that it
may effectively contribute to the harmonious and ade-

IS

quate integration of the economies of those countries
and to their economic and social development.
411th plenary m111ing,
21 Dec,mber 1952.

623 (VII). Financing of economic development
through the eetahllehmenl of fair and equl•
table international prieee for primary eom•
moditiee and through the execution of national programmee of integrated economic
development
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the relevant passages of General Assembly resolutions 307 (IV), 403 (V), 404
(V), 521 (VI) and 523 (VI), of Economic and Social
Council resolutions 341 (XII), 416 F (XIV) and 427
(XIV), as well as the suggestions• of the group of
experts appointed in pursuance of Council resolution
290 (XI),
Recogniring that the problem of financing the economic development of countries in the process of development is fundamental to the maintenance of the
peace of mankind, and that,. therefore, high priority
should be given to the consideration of its practical
solution in international economic relations,
Consid,ring:
(a) That the urgent and satisfactory solution of
this problem requires the full utilization of all sources
of financing, among which• the 'ability to obtain adequate and stable proceeds from exports is one of the
most important for all under-developed countries,
( b) That, in formulating measures for financing
economic development, consideration should be given
to the influence on their economic development of the
terms of trade of the countries supplying primary commodities,
( c) That, without prejudice to the international
and national measures already recommended for financing economic development, special attention should
be given to the correction of maladjustments resulting
from cyclical fluctuations in the prices of individual
primary commodities and from secular movements in
their value as a group in terms of manufactured goods,
( d J That the economic rroaperity of countries in
the process of development 1s especially vulnerable to
wide short-term fluctuations in the prices of primary
commodities which affect their terms of trade, and
that any deterioration in the terms of trade affects the
economic development and monetary ectnilibrium of
these countries and so hampers not only the acquisition
of the necessary amounts of external means of pay•
ment but also the formation of sufficient domestic aavinp,
( ,) That the implementation of plam of ~ t e d
economic development contributes to the mitigation of
the consequences of such flactuatioaa or of any deterioration in the terms of trade,
(/) That in order to make such programmes Po':
sible it is necessary both for the highly induatrialized
• See 011,eial R,eonl, of IM Gfflfflll A1UMbl1, Sillla S•1.not1,
No. J, para. 454 ,, 1,q.

s-,,,,,,._,
