S/PRST/2006/51

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 December 2006
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5584th meeting of the Security Council, held on 12 December 2006, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its deep concern over the situation in
the Middle East, with its serious ramifications for peace and security, and
underlines the need to intensify efforts to achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region.
“The Security Council stresses that there can be no military solution to
the problems of the region and that negotiation is the only viable way to bring
peace and prosperity to peoples throughout the Middle East.
“The Security Council stresses that the parties must respect their
obligations under previous agreements, including by putting an end to violence
and all aspects of terrorism.
“The Security Council expresses grave concern over the deteriorating
humanitarian situation and calls for the provision of emergency assistance to
the Palestinian people through the Temporary International Mechanism,
international organizations and other official channels.
“The Security Council welcomes the agreement between Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to
establish a mutual ceasefire in Gaza.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken by both sides to
maintain the ceasefire and expresses its hope that it will lead to a sustained
period of calm. It calls on both sides, therefore, to avoid any actions which
could jeopardize further progress. It reiterates its call for an end to all aspects
of terrorism and violence as set out in previous statements and resolutions.
“The Security Council is mindful of the need to encourage steps to
increase confidence in the peace process.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the Palestinian Authority
Government to accept the three Quartet principles.

06-65457 (E) 121206

*0665457*

S/PRST/2006/51

“The Security Council reaffirms its profound attachment to the vision of
two democratic states, Israel and Palestine, living side-by-side in peace and
security, as envisaged in the Roadmap.
“The Security Council underlines that action by the international
community cannot be a substitute for determined measures by the parties
themselves.
“The Security Council encourages the parties to engage in direct
negotiations.
“The Security Council reaffirms the vital role of the Quartet and looks
forward to its continued active engagement.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance of, and the need to
achieve a just, comprehensive, and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on
all its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), and
1515 (2003), the Madrid terms of reference and the principle of land for
peace.”

2

06-65457
