A/S-25/PV.5

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Twenty-fifth special session

5th meeting
Friday, 8 June 2001, 9 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Harri Holkeri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Finland)

The meeting was called to order at 9 a.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)

Further actions and initiatives for overcoming
obstacles to the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda

Credentials of representatives to the twenty-fifth
special session of the General Assembly

Declaration on cities and other human settlements in
the new millennium

Report of the Credentials Committee (A/S-25/6)
The President: We shall proceed to consider the
draft resolution recommended by the Credentials
Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.
The Assembly shall now take action on the
recommendation of the Credentials Committee set forth
in paragraph 15 of its report.
The Credentials Committee adopted this draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same? It is so decided.
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
S-25/1).
The President: We have thus concluded our
consideration of agenda item 3.
Agenda items 8, 9 and 10 (continued)
Review and appraisal of progress made in the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda

The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
the Honourable Seymour Mullings, Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister of Land and Environment of
Jamaica.
Mr. Mullings (Jamaica): Mr. President, I wish to
first join other delegations in congratulating you on
your leadership of this special session of the United
Nations General Assembly that is dedicated to a review
and appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda.
We meet to assess our stewardship in furthering
the commitments that we made in Istanbul and to
examine afresh the strategies and mechanisms that will
assure greater opportunity for all our peoples in the
urban civilization of the future.
This meeting marks almost 25 years since
Habitat I. We, the international community, particularly
the developing countries, continue to seek solutions to
the major issues identified in the Habitat Agenda, the
most urgent being access to affordable land and shelter,
as well as access to credit and appropriate technology.
Several other interrelated issues have gained increasing
importance, including urban governance, poverty
eradication, urbanization, social integration and the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

01-40413 (E)

*0140413*

A/S-25/PV.5

support of
government.

disadvantaged

groups,

and

local

Jamaica has utilized its National Habitat
Committee and several of its ministries and agencies to
plan and implement many aspects of the Habitat
Agenda. We have also formulated and begun to
implement a number of major policies and programmes
aimed at achieving the goal of the sustainable
development of human settlements. The National Land
Policy, the National Housing Policy (which includes a
joint venture policy for housing development), the
National Industrial Policy and the Jamaican
Environmental Action Programme represent key
intervention areas in which the Government has taken
action.
Prepared with the involvement of a broad crosssection of stakeholders, the policies have become the
platform for enriched partnerships. They have brought
together the resources and enterprise of the government
and the private sector with the innovativeness of civil
society,
non-governmental
organizations
and
community groups.
They deal with a variety of problems, including
many problems identified in Habitat documents and
programmes. We have learned from the best practices
of other countries and have developed some of our
own. We are also establishing new local government
structures to assist with planning for sustainable
development at the local level.
We have also fostered participation by nongovernmental organizations and community groups in
our planning and development activities. We have
implemented several projects dealing with the
reorganization of squatter-settled areas and the
provision of land with secure tenure to many people.
We have begun a major island wide cadastral mapping
programme of some 800,000 parcels of land, and we
hope to clarify and register over 350,000 of those
parcels. We continue to implement mitigation measures
to address costly natural and man-made disasters. We
have also begun a major inner city and urban renewal
programme.
Yet today our country is, like others, faced with
the persistent problems of inadequate human, financial
and technological resources. We continue to depend on
grants and loans from developed countries and
multilateral funding agencies. We in the developing
world, however, need to make international donors and

2

lenders understand that while problems can be
generalized, cultural and other practices, norms and
levels of education vary, and there are human faces to
the issues.
The commitment and enabling role of
transnational corporations must be encouraged so that
they can become more involved in the solutions.
Developing countries should also continue to
strengthen their self-sufficiency and self-reliance in
dealing with the issues, and draw more on the
innovativeness, initiative and capacity of their own
peoples.
The importance of a participatory approach to our
development strategy must also be underscored. All
citizens of our countries, including the youth, must be
made to understand the problems that exist and the
actions that must follow the decisions that we make at
these meetings. If we do not involve all citizens in the
search for solutions; if we do not commit to do
whatever we can, however we can, even if it is
incremental; if we do not become more self reliant; if
we do not adopt a policy of more action and less talk,
then at Habitat III we may be forced to acknowledge
that we have progressed little beyond where we are
today.
The decisions reached at Istanbul and those we
will adopt today constitute a solid foundation for future
progress, but they must be translated into concrete
measures, into national policy, into new forms of
international cooperation, if we are to achieve the
worthy goals that we have set for ourselves. Let us
therefore find the political will to meaningfully
implement our agreed agendas and plans of action.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Miguel Cárdenas, Minister of Housing of Panama.
Mr. Cárdenas (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): On
behalf of the Government of Panama and the Meeting
of Ministers and High-level Authorities of the Housing
and Urban Development Sector in Latin America and
the Caribbean (MINURVI), I have the honour to take
this rostrum to speak before the General Assembly at
its twenty-fifth special session to review and appraise
the implementation of the Habitat Agenda.
Today, five years after the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements, held in Istanbul,
we take this opportunity to reiterate our commitment to
continuing, fully and progressively, to implement its

A/S-25/PV.5

Declaration and Habitat Agenda, which are and will
continue to be the sources for the sustainable
development of human settlements.
In accordance with these commitments,
MINURVI met in Havana and Panama City at its eighth
and ninth forums, respectively, and at the Latin
America
and
Caribbean
regional
preparatory
conference for this special session, in Santiago, Chile.
At these meetings, policies, strategies and cooperation
for the sustainable development of human settlements
were developed, with the technical support of the
regional Habitat office and the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean. We drafted the
strategies for a regional plan of action, with the
fundamental goal of making a qualitative assessment of
the trends in policies adopted by various countries and
the elements thereof. Among these elements, I would
point to the achievement of equity and the eradication
of urban poverty; urban development and the
productivity of human settlements with a view to
improving the quality of life; vulnerability to natural
disasters; improving the environment; governance and
participation; and the efficiency of policies and
management.
Moreover, on behalf of the Governments and
inhabitants of our countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean, we ask that the Declaration of Santiago be
included in the report on this special session as an
explicit recognition of our updated regional plan of
action.
We also feel that this is right moment to
emphasize the fact that, in October in Caracas,
Venezuela, the tenth anniversary of MINURVI will be
celebrated. The central theme of that celebration will
be assessments of, reflections on and the principal
strategic guidelines for housing and human settlements
in the coming years.
Statistics and indices demonstrate that the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda in Latin
America and the Caribbean has indeed allowed for
significant progress to be made in providing adequate
shelter to the poorest of our people, guaranteeing
security of land tenure, reducing environmental
degradation and addressing the needs of the most
vulnerable sectors of our society.
Despite these results and the efforts of our
Governments, there remain deep-rooted inequities
arising from the effects of globalization and age-old

social deficiencies that we will have to consider in due
course. In the context of the issue under discussion, the
Government of Panama has worked to implement
policies and programmes to guarantee financing for
social housing with a view to ensuring that, with the
resolute participation of the private sector, the current
housing shortage can be gradually reduced.
At the same time, activities are under way to
establish the conditions necessary to ensure that shelter
is available in a sustainable, pleasant and safe urban
environment and that financial instruments are
accessible to the people most affected by the housing
shortage. Similarly, we are revitalizing the “Lotes
Servidos” programme to provide access to appropriate
financing to allow families to build their own homes
and to live in dignity, as well as a programme for the
loan of building materials. All of this falls within the
context of a national urban development strategy that
serves to guide our housing programmes and urban
transportation projects.
In conclusion, at this twenty-fifth special session
of the General Assembly for an overall review and
appraisal of the implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
I express my sincere wish that this will be a fruitful
session of discussions under inspired leadership. We
are convinced that it will provide us with an
opportunity to exchange ideas and experiences,
allowing us to contribute to and renew our commitment
to making tangible progress for the benefit of
humankind.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Jaime Ravinet, Minister of Housing, Urban
Development and National Heritage of Chile.
Mr. Ravinet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I am
here as the representative of my country, Chile, leading
a delegation comprised of slum dwellers, community
leaders, parliamentarians, mayors, academics, business
people and Government officials. I represent a nation
that, for many years, has come together in an effort to
create better living conditions for our neediest sectors.
Chile is a small country of 15 million inhabitants,
with just over 4 million dwellings, of which nearly 1
million have been constructed during the past decade.
We can say with pride that we are reducing the housing
deficit in Chile and that providing housing for the
neediest sectors has been a priority of all our
Governments over the past 50 years. Today, we are

3

A/S-25/PV.5

closer to achieving the goal of ensuring that each
Chilean family has its decent housing.

challenges facing many of the countries represented
here today.

How have we done this? In Chile, it has been
demonstrated that the key to improving the quality of
life in our human settlements is the implementation of
effective public policies, such as those aimed at
sustained economic growth, fiscal balances and a
steady increase in public social investment in
sanitation, housing and neighbourhoods.

In Chile, we succeeded in the 1990s in
significantly reducing the number of people living in
poverty — from 40 per cent to 20 per cent of the
population — as a result of the doubling of our national
product and of proactive and innovative social policies.
As a result of the marked increase in life expectancy,
smaller families and increased expectations, new
problems are emerging in the areas of housing and
habitat. We have therefore been forced to adapt the
Government’s response to these circumstances. It is no
longer possible to think only of overcoming the
housing deficit; we need also to adopt an integral
approach to the problem by devising programmes to
benefit the most disadvantaged sectors.

Ongoing cooperation between the public and
private sectors is an essential requirement for steady
progress towards overcoming the quantitative and
qualitative deficits in housing. We have established a
policy of public infrastructure concessions —
roads and inter-urban routes, ports and health
infrastructure — that has led to a threefold increase in
the level of traditional investment, with reasonable
rates of return and a strong regulatory framework. This
concession-based approach is now also being extended
to land and tax areas with tourism potential and to the
construction of prison establishments. Clear rules have
been established governing applications for access to
housing characterized by transparent procedures,
regular savings by each applicant family, the
organization of applicants and payment of the
obligations and loans contracted by beneficiaries.
Citizens have been organized and have contributed
significantly to the progress that has been made. Public
institutions have been improved at the regional and
municipal levels.
All these principles have been at the heart of our
policies and programmes and have yielded
demonstrably efficient and effective results at times of
varying economic performance, as has been the case in
the second half of the period 1997-2001, when the
international crisis has forced us to exercise even
greater discipline in our investments and public
expenditures. In short, the principles of increased
production, cooperation between the public and private
sectors, transparency, the organization of citizens and
the modernization of institutions are just as or more
valid in times of economic downturn.
A great deal remains to be done, however. Our
country still has many unmet needs, as a result of
which many of our compatriots live in extremely
marginal conditions. I would like on this occasion to
share our challenges, which are surely also the

4

We are therefore committed to overcoming the
difficult situation faced by Chilean families that still
lack access to safe and decent housing. The challenge
facing the country is to be able to meet the housing
shortage over the next 10 years. It is a very bold and
ambitious goal. We have pledged to build every year
25,000 basic houses — all with the capacity to be
extended — for our neediest sectors by encouraging
savings and providing a state subsidy that removes the
need to obtain a mortgage. Under the programme
“Chile Barrio”, 100,000 families currently living in
squatter settlements and slums will be relocated by the
year 2005 and 30,000 more by the year 2007. Together,
these two programmes will provide housing for the
300,000 poorest families in Chile by the year 2007.
The challenge, however, is not merely to build
housing; it is to build cities. Today, 85 per cent of our
population reside in urban areas. The horizontal sprawl
of cities is a widespread phenomenon in Latin America
and practically throughout the world. We are therefore
promoting a development policy to identify and rebuild
central districts and zones, to restore older housing and
to create programmes relating to urban density that will
allow our cities to grow.
Some tasks remain unachieved, however. We
believe that it is necessary to modernize our
institutions in order to enhance the efficiency of urban
governance. We need to develop new information
systems and planning methodologies. We need to
redirect the allocation of public expenditures and revise
property tax systems. We believe that cities cannot
develop
without
sustainable
environmental

A/S-25/PV.5

development. Most important, cities cannot exist
without cooperation between Government, the public
sector at all levels, in particular the private sector and
social entities.

during the 10 years of brutal war. As a result of this
continuous and sustained support, the war is almost at
an end and, for once, the people of Sierra Leone will
begin to enjoy peace.

Throughout our recent history, we have striven to
develop and maintain mutual trust. Our intention is to
continue this approach, which has proven to be an
effective one. Experience has shown us that ongoing
cooperation between the public and private sectors and
between Government and the opposition has been a key
condition for steady progress towards overcoming the
quantitative and qualitative deficits in housing and
essential services. Faced with the challenge of meeting
the need for housing of a large number of persons, it is
essential to establish and strengthen our ties of
cooperation with the international community.

I need not belabour the fact that Sierra Leone has
gone through a senseless and brutal war, during which
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) rebels
perpetrated unimaginable atrocities against innocent
Sierra Leoneans, some of whom were killed, maimed
or sexually abused or had limbs amputated. In January
1999, the RUF and the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council invaded Freetown, causing mass destruction of
public and residential houses in the city and suburban
areas. In fact, figures obtained from the registration of
burnt-out houses, conducted by my Ministry, indicated
that 5,932 houses were completely destroyed in the city
and its environs.

“Exchanging
experiences”,
“developing
technologies” and “building the future” are phrases that
should resonate through and guide our efforts. Today,
in this global forum, I wish on behalf of my country to
assure members once again of our cooperation and to
urge everyone to embark upon the task of building
once and for all a more liveable world in which all of
us can grow and develop.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Alfred Bobson Sesay, Minister of Lands, Housing,
Country Planning and the Environment of Sierra
Leone.
Mr. Sesay (Sierra Leone): Let me first of all
extend the warm felicitations of His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Sierra Leone, as well as
those of the people of Sierra Leone. Let me assure the
General Assembly that the President of Sierra Leone,
with the support of all Sierra Leoneans, is prepared to
implement the provisions of the Habitat Agenda and
the decisions of this Assembly.
The resolve of Sierra Leoneans to support their
President to ensure the successful implementation of
the decisions of this session is not just a cosmetic one.
It will be recalled that, in 1997, Sierra Leoneans stoutly
resisted junta rule in favour of democracy. Today, we
are more than ever ready to defend our hard-won
democracy, especially with peace and stability in sight.
At this point, the President and the people of
Sierra Leone wish me to convey their profound
gratitude to the family of the United Nations for its
unflinching support to the people of Sierra Leone

There is no accurate record of the total damage
inflicted on human settlements nationwide. However,
various assessments indicate that as of now
approximately 300,000 houses have been destroyed
nationwide. In addition, 1,700 educational facilities,
400 health posts and 300 water wells have all been
destroyed. Out of the total population of 4.5 million,
the war uprooted approximately 1.2 million people,
who became either internally displaced persons or
refugees in neighbouring countries. In addition,
approximately one thousand people of all ages had
limbs amputated.
From this scenario it can be deduced that the
Government has an enormous task to meet a huge
backlog of housing needs estimated at 300,000. There
is also the problem of re-planning the 30,000 human
settlements that were destroyed during the war. Koidu,
formerly the second largest city in Sierra Leone, has
been destroyed to its foundations.
The task of reconstructing, rehabilitating and
resettling this war-ravaged country is daunting. In
1996, the Government made institutional changes to
address this situation. It transformed the National
Reconstruction
Committee
into
the
National
Commission for Reconstruction, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement, and created the Demobilization,
Disarmament and Reintegration (DDR) Programme.
The former is responsible for the coordination of relief
related to the construction, rehabilitation and
resettlement activities by ministries and nongovernmental organizations. The DDR Programme

5

A/S-25/PV.5

oversees demobilizing, disarming and reintegrating excombatants into society.
The Government has also carried out regulatory
reform. The Town and Country Planning Act has been
amended to allow the declaration of the whole country
as a planning area. To ensure effective environmental
management, an environmental protection act has also
been passed into law.
My Government has revised the National
Housing Policy, which was approved in 1996, to reflect
recent trends in the shelter sector. The central goal of
the National Housing Policy is to achieve a maximum
addition to the housing stock of the nation, and to
enable every citizen to have access to safe, healthy,
decent and affordable housing.
The revised National Housing Policy redefines
the role of Government as facilitator and enabler. This
means that the Government’s role will be to create a
conducive environment for fully mobilizing the
potential resources of the public, private and
community sectors in the housing delivery process.
Considering the recent and future financial
situation of the Government, and the sheer magnitude
of the task, it is obvious that the Government alone
does not have the capacity to intervene in planning for
the war-affected areas and to deliver adequate shelter
for internally displaced persons. Given these
circumstances, the Government believes that the only
way out of this situation is to create an enabling
environment for the private sector, communities, and
bilateral and multilateral donors to fully and effectively
participate in planning for the war-affected areas and in
delivering adequate and affordable shelter for the
internally displaced persons.
To this end, the Government has therefore
decided to create the enabling environment that will
facilitate easy access to land and to durable but
affordable building materials. One of the strategies to
achieve this objective is the provision of adequate
amounts of land with services at affordable prices and
at suitable locations through the establishment of land
banks in urban and provincial centres.
Our Government, in collaboration with the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlement (Habitat) and the
Government Fund for Technical Assistance, has
popularized the use of local building materials

6

throughout the country. In each of the 149 chiefdoms in
the country, our Government has trained at least four
trainers for each chiefdom, 40 per cent of whom are
women. These people have been encouraged to form
cooperatives in the provision of shelter.
To ensure the full participation of war-affected
communities in planning the reconstruction of their
ravaged settlements and shelters, our Government has
decentralized most of its functions to local government
institutions, including district councils and town
councils. My Ministry has also decentralized from its
headquarters to regional planning offices. These
regional planning offices have the power and authority
to carry out functions of surveying, environmental
management and physical planning in their areas of
jurisdiction. To facilitate country-wide physical
planning, the Ministry will consult with local
authorities and other stakeholders on the need to
declare the whole country as a planning area.
Thereafter town planning committees will be set up in
the newly declared town planning areas.
Our achievements over the past years have been
modest due to the intensification of the war, which
engulfed the entire country by 1999. The rebel war not
only destroyed the physical fabric of the country but
also its socio-economic infrastructure. The war has
almost come to an end. Currently disarmament and
demobilization of combatants are progressing
satisfactorily under the guidance of the United Nations
Mission to Sierra Leone. With peace in sight, I wish to
inform this Assembly that my Government will
continue to implement its plan of action included in the
last country report. As and when the economy
improves, new programmes will be developed and
implemented.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
the Honourable Garba Madaki Ali, Minister of State
for Works and Housing of Nigeria.
Mr. Madaki Ali (Nigeria): On behalf of the
Nigerian delegation, I wish to congratulate you and the
Bureau on your election to guide the proceedings of
this special session.
We also wish to commend the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, Mr. Kofi Annan, and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat), Dr. Anna K. Tibaijuka,
for the able manner in which this special session has
been successfully convened. I unreservedly assure you

A/S-25/PV.5

of the cooperation and support of my delegation in the
conduct of this session.

year 2020, 52 per cent of the continent’s population
will be living in cities.

My delegation recognizes and appreciates the fact
that this special session is the result of joint
collaboration with a range of international institutions
working tirelessly to ensure that this session could be
held to discuss very important human settlement issues
that affect humanity. As you may probably recall, our
collective search and desire for better living conditions
for all peoples of the world is a journey that started in
Vancouver, Canada, twenty-five years ago, and was
continued by the Habitat II conference held in 1996 in
Istanbul, Turkey. The Habitat Agenda that was adopted
by over 171 governments, including Nigeria, provided
a roadmap for resolving the problems of a quickly
urbanizing world, setting out approaches and strategies
towards the achievement of sustainable development of
the world’s urban areas.

Since Istanbul, Nigeria has made serious efforts
to achieve the objectives of the Habitat Agenda. In its
latest initiative to promote effective and responsive
human settlements management, the Government of
Nigeria, in collaboration with the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements, in April this year
launched in Abuja the Global Campaign on Urban
Governance. The Campaign, in the main, underscored
to the people of Nigeria and, indeed, of Africa, our will
and commitment to democracy and the entrenchment of
the principles and ideals of accountable governance.

Five years after the Habitat II conference was
held in Istanbul it is indeed very appropriate for
Member States to meet once again to evaluate the
progress made in the implementation of the
recommendations and strategies adopted at that
conference to guide the development of our human
settlements. This special session is, therefore, an apt
occasion for us to see whether the vision of the Habitat
Agenda has been realized, as well as how much work
has been done — and still needs to be done — in
making the cities of the third millennium liveable and
sustainable.
We must therefore remind ourselves now and
again of our responsibility to ensure that our children
and wards inherit cities that are safe, have all basic
facilities and are free of fear.
The dawn of the twenty-first century found
Nigeria with an estimated urban population rate of
more than 40 per cent, coupled with a very high urban
growth rate, which is expected to raise the urban
population rate to about 65 per cent by the year 2025.
The implications of such rapid urban growth are often
manifested in increased poverty, environmental
degradation, traffic congestion, overcrowded housing,
crime and homelessness. In addition, Africa as a
continent is still categorized as the least urbanized,
because only 35 per cent of its people live in urban
areas. However, with an urbanization rate of 5 per cent
annually, the continent has recorded the fastest urban
growth rate in human history. It is estimated that by the

The greatest challenge to sustainable human
settlements development between now and 2015 is how
to provide adequate shelter for all in the face of a world
population that will increasingly reside in cities. This
challenge was the subject of the workshop held at
Abuja in tandem with the launching of the Global
Campaign on Urban Governance. The workshop
highlighted emerging issues in human settlements that
cannot be ignored if meaningful progress is to be made.
Those issues include urban security and safety,
partnership, advocacy, participation, transparency and
accountability, the empowerment of youth, women and
the urban poor in urban governance, decentralization,
poverty eradication and capacity-building for local
governments and civil society organizations.
It is therefore crucial that a favourable external
environment supportive of developing countries’
programmes to implement the Habitat Agenda on
human settlements be put in place. In this regard,
urgent action should be taken by the developed
countries that have not yet done so to achieve the
internationally agreed target of official development
assistance. It is also important that the international
community should address the critical issue of the debt
burden facing developing countries, in order to make
more resources available for the implementation of
human settlement programmes in their respective
countries. Equally important is the need to improve the
finances of, and strengthen, the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements so as to enable it to perform its
functions effectively.
In conclusion, the emergence of inclusive cities,
as they are currently contemplated, will depend to a
great extent on the outcome of consultations and
negotiations such as we have embarked on during this

7

A/S-25/PV.5

special session, particularly as we consider the draft
declaration on cities and other human settlements in the
new millennium. My delegation is looking forward to
constructive and fruitful deliberations in the course of
this session. We are hopeful that the deliberations of
this session will provide additional impetus to the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda for the benefit
of humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Dragoslav Šumarac, Minister of Urban
Planning and Construction of Yugoslavia.
Mr. Šumarac (Yugoslavia): The Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia pays particular
attention to the issues related to human settlements and
Habitat activities. We uphold all the decisions of the
Istanbul Conference, and we are striving to implement
them. We underscore the importance of a structured
and comprehensive approach to human settlements
problems in all parts of the world. Those problems are
inextricably linked to respect for human rights and
directly affect economic and social safety, peace and
security. Unfortunately, no sufficient efforts have been
made up to now to translate the results of the Istanbul
Conference into practice, especially as regards the
situation in the least developed countries. We are
convinced that this special session will contribute to a
better understanding of those problems.
Yugoslavia, as a European country in transition,
is facing problems similar to those faced by other
Central and Eastern European countries. There can be
no doubt that the transition from a centrally planned to
a market-oriented economy has brought about severe
economic and social hardships affecting the population
and human settlements. The situation in Yugoslavia in
this regard is very serious because additional adverse
factors have had an impact on it.
As the Assembly knows, due to Milosević’s
misguided politics, Yugoslavia has been isolated for a
long time, and United Nations sanctions and other
restrictions have been imposed on it, with devastating
effects on the economic and social situation. The
bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 further aggravated the
situation and has directly contributed to the destruction
of human settlements and to environmental
deterioration. As a result of the wars waged in the
territories of the former Yugoslavia and the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija, we now have the burden of more
than 700,000 refugees and displaced persons from

8

Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, and Kosovo and
Metohija, all living in inadequate accommodations.
Immediate action is needed to offset these effects. My
Government expects even greater involvement on the
part of the international community, first and foremost
through Habitat and the United Nations Environment
Programme, but also through other programmes.
The situation in the southern Serbian province of
Kosovo and Metohija, which has been administered by
the United Nations since June 1999 in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), is an added
source of concern. Serbs and other non-Albanians had
to leave their homes and properties in Kosovo and
Metohija under pressure and find shelter elsewhere in
Yugoslavia. Their dwellings and other property in
Kosovo and Metohija have been seized and occupied
unlawfully by ethnic Albanian tenants.
In order to resolve that difficult situation, it will
be necessary for the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Habitat and other
agencies present in Kosovo and Metohija to undertake
effective measures, in cooperation with the authorities
of Yugoslavia and of the Republic of Serbia and in
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999). In particular,
conditions should be created for all expelled and
displaced persons to be able to return in safety and
without hindrance, while at the same time the
protection of all their property rights should be
ensured.
Despite all these hardships, my Government is
resolved to continue to build a democratic society
based on the rule of law, respect for human rights and a
greater role for non-governmental organizations. Work
is under way on a series of laws dealing with local selfgovernment and decentralization, with an emphasis on
greater competencies for municipalities, especially in
the field of housing and other issues related to human
settlements. A long-term plan for proportional regional
development is also a priority.
We hope that Habitat will increase its activities in
Yugoslavia. For its part, my Government stands ready
to support Habitat and to ensure that its activities are
unimpeded. This will also contribute to protecting the
property rights of internally displaced persons from
Kosovo and Metohija and to linking Habitat activities
to the Stability Pact for South-Eastern Europe.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
Government’s
determination
to
cooperate

A/S-25/PV.5

constructively with the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements and with all other relevant
organizations in the implementation of the Istanbul
decisions. To that end, we support the proposed draft
declaration on cities and other human settlements,
which is to be adopted at the end of this session.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
The Honourable Kwamena Bartels, Minister of Works
and Housing of Ghana.
Mr. Bartels (Ghana): Ghana is delighted to
participate in this debate, and to share its views on the
further implementation of the Habitat Agenda, agreed
to in Istanbul in June 1996.
The right to adequate housing is such a
fundamental part of the right of individuals to an
adequate standard of living that Istanbul must stand
along with the Cairo, Copenhagen, Rio and Beijing
Summits as a milestone in our struggle to reaffirm and
assure to each and every human being a life of dignity,
security and social justice. The dreams and ambitions
that drove the outcome of Habitat I represented the best
of our values as a civilized community. There can be
no doubt that there has been an increase in urban
poverty, a worsening of the problems of human
settlements in rural areas, as well as an upsurge in
natural and human-made disasters since Istanbul. The
estimated rate of increase in the urban population over
the next 20 years alone constitutes an urgent call for
action to address the huge need of planning to address
issues of poverty, disease and sustainable development.
Water and waste management and maintenance of
the ecology, particularly the preservation of our forests,
are today approaching a state of crisis in many of our
countries. Clearly, the Habitat Agenda is as relevant
today as it was five years ago, if not more pressing, and
we are pleased that the negotiations on the draft
outcome successfully avoided the trap of debating the
Agenda.
With the necessary political will, the objectives
we are about to set ourselves are not overly ambitious.
They are indeed doable. Mobilizing political will,
particularly at the international level, will be absolutely
critical. As the national reports have clearly
demonstrated, the capacity of developing countries like
mine to provide adequate shelter for citizens depends
on a successful strategy of partnership and policy
frameworks.

In the case of Ghana, our commitment to meeting
our objectives of sustainable human settlements
remains at the centre of our national planning
objectives. Since its assumption of office barely six
months ago, the new Government of Ghana has put in
place a number of policies to assure an open and
transparent Government, take the country out of its
current economic difficulties and contribute to
subregional peace, stability and socio-economic
development with a view to expanding opportunity and
fostering greater wealth creation.
We remain committed to the efforts that have
been made in the past five years to improve access to
housing and better living conditions in human
settlements through direct investment and by
facilitating and promoting partnerships with the private
sector.
Since houses formerly built by the private sector
are largely out of the reach of many Ghanaians, the
Government is addressing the main contributing factors
to the high cost of housing: the high cost of land,
building materials and lack of long-term construction
financing. To this end, the Government has come out
with a national land policy to improve land supply and
security of title. It has also embarked on a large-scale
acquisition of land to constitute land banks to support
rental housing and affordable ownership by lowincome families. Over the next three years, the
Government intends to increase investment in shelter
through enhanced facilitation and support of the private
sector, civil organizations, community groups and nongovernmental organizations and other actors in the
sector.
The country is also exploring various sources of
long-term concessionary funding to support lowincome housing and service delivery, and so far over
$250 million has been obtained to deliver over 20,000
housing units within the next three years. We are
working towards extending assets to infrastructure and
basic services, especially water, sanitation and
electricity, by all our citizens.
With regard to access to water, the country has
achieved 76 per cent coverage for urban areas and
about 46 per cent coverage for rural populations. While
extending access to water, we intend, through the
Water Resources Commission, to protect the country’s
water bodies, regulate water use and develop joint

9

A/S-25/PV.5

strategies for water-sharing and management with
neighbouring countries.
Ghana’s new local government system make the
people the centre of development, and local
government institutions have become vital focal points
for the attainment of national development objectives
and the realization of the aspirations of the people. Our
decentralization programme has raised political
awareness, the spirit of popular participation and the
feeling of empowerment among communities at the
local level, and we are convinced that it constitutes the
critical link to the achievement of the goal of our
Habitat Agenda.
The Constitution of Ghana provides for the
central Government releasing at least 5 per cent of the
total revenue of the country to various district
assemblies to assist them with their developmental
projects. In pursuit of the Habitat Agenda, the
Government has directed district assemblies to use at
least 20 per cent of this district assembly’s common
fund to provide local housing to the poor.
Again, in Ghana we set up a Habitat committee,
made up of officials of both the Ministries of Works
and Housing and Local Government and Rural
Development to achieve the Habitat Agenda. Even
thought the Habitat office is part of the Ministry of
Works and Housing, the Committee is chaired by the
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development
to ensure greater coordination and collaboration.
As we recommit ourselves to the further
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, the issue of
poverty eradication must take centre stage in our
strategies to promote equitable, socially viable and
stable human settlements. In Ghana, poverty continues
to be a major problem. The latest surveys indicate that
about 22.8 per cent of the urban population and 51.6
per cent of the rural population live below the poverty
line. The most vulnerable groups are women, children
and the disabled. The Government, in collaboration
with the United Nations Development Programme, has
been implementing a national poverty reduction
programme to address the challenges of poverty in our
society. To underscore the importance it attaches to
issues affecting women and their impact on standards
of living, the Government has created a ministry for
women’s affairs with Cabinet rank, headed by a highly
respected woman minister.

10

In the area of disaster preparedness and
mitigation, for instance, the recent Accra Stadium
disaster in my country, in which 126 people died, woke
us up to the realization that there is a lot to be done,
and quickly too. Despite the structures we have
established since 1996 to work towards preventing or
minimizing the risk of disasters, experience has shown
that the structures require a great deal of support and
resources. Our ability to monitor the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda has also suffered from inadequate
resources. My ministry is, however, systematically
building data on the key indicators identified.
It is obvious that the decisions that are made in
other forums are processes to address issues of external
trade, debt, international development cooperation and
private capital flows, as well as the restructuring of the
financial architecture, will determine to a large extent
the success of our efforts collectively to meet the major
crisis facing human settlements globally. It must be a
win-win situation or we will all be the losers in the
end. The state of the world gives us all frightening
evidence of how easily our urban areas can quickly
become the construct of the Hobbesian state of nature.
We hope and we will work in construct with
others to ensure that the end of this review process will
mark the beginning of a new effort to create conditions
for human settlements worthy of our values. That is the
way to realize the Habitat Agenda, of providing
adequate shelter for all and ensuring the development
of sustainable human settlements in the rapidly
urbanizing world.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
The Honourable Mopshatla Mabitle, Minister of Local
Government of Lesotho.
Mr. Mabitle (Lesotho): I join the speakers before
me who have congratulated you, Mr. President, on your
election to the stewardship of this special session, a job
that you are doing most enviably. It is indeed a great
honour and privilege for me and my delegation to
address this special session on the progress achieved in
the implementation of the Habitat Agenda in Lesotho,
five years after the city summit.
In our quest to improve the quality of life in the
cities, towns and villages of our country, and within the
context of the commitments made at Istanbul, which
include the provision of shelter, social development,
the eradication of poverty, environmental management,
economic development, governance and international

A/S-25/PV.5

cooperation, we are grateful to share our efforts with
this gathering.

with training to empower them to plan and execute
their development projects.

With regard to shelter, we have established a
broad-based National Habitat Committee to draw up a
national shelter policy. This policy, which seeks to
create an enabling framework for effective and
sustainable shelter delivery, has already received initial
endorsement by the Cabinet. In like manner, a broadbased Commission was set up to review the national
land policy with a view to aligning it with the
principles and commitments of the Habitat agenda.

In the area of environmental management,
Parliament
has
recently
passed
a
National
Environmental Bill for purposes of incorporating
environmental considerations into development
activities.

In the operational area, the Government has
resuscitated the low-cost housing schemes that had
been abandoned as a housing solution. The
Government is also encouraging the private sector to
participate in housing delivery by creating a conducive
investment climate. Government is further negotiating
with commercial banks to provide mortgage financing,
an aspect which was hitherto a preserve of a nowprivatized government bank.
The Government is also working on a policy to
relinquish responsibility for the direct housing of civil
servants and to encourage home ownership amongst its
employees. Furthermore, the Law Reform Commission
and the Land Policy Review Commission have
proposed that all laws prohibiting women from
enjoying access to land, shelter and credit be repealed.
One of the key interventions in the area of social
development is the introduction of free primary
education. Today, no child must miss primary
education because their parents are poor. Every child
who attends school also gets a free meal at school. The
school feeding scheme provides much-needed income
at the local level, as the local communities are
responsible for the feeding programme. Free primary
education is open to all age groups. Consequently,
school enrolments have swollen and you can find
children and parents learning together in tents all over
the country, where there is a shortage of facilities.
Suffice it to mention that, in the area of poverty
eradication, the Government has, in the course of
developing a poverty reduction strategy, established the
Lesotho Fund for Community Development, financed
through royalties earned from the sale of water to the
Republic of South Africa. The Fund is used to finance
community-based development projects, especially in
the rural areas. The rural communities are provided

Another area of great significance to the Habitat
Agenda is good governance. My Government has
embarked on a public-sector improvement reform
programme, which, among other things, aims at
improving delivery of services, decentralization and
the establishment of democratic local government, as
well as improvements in the administration of justice.
Parliament enacted the Local Government Act in
1997. While it is difficult at the moment to hold local
government elections, a process is in place to establish
transitional urban government structures to uphold
principles of public participation in the administration
of public affairs. These transitional local government
authorities are directly elected through processes that
are managed at the community level rather than
through conventional election processes.
Another major milestone in the activities of
Government is the restructuring of the economy
through the privatization of State-owned enterprises,
such as utility corporations. This process has released
resources for supporting social programmes, as
Government no longer subsidizes these enterprises.
The privatization programme has attracted major
capital injections in the economy, as well as
management expertise. It is hoped this policy will
result in the stimulation of economic growth, efficiency
and job creation. The Government has further created
facilities to enable local participation in the privatized
state enterprises.
Last but not least, in April this year, the President
of South Africa, Mr. Mbeki, signed a landmark
agreement with the Prime Minster of Lesotho on
cooperation between the two countries. The key
objective of this agreement is to lift Lesotho out of the
category of least developed country in five years. This
is a mammoth task for the two countries and their
peoples. Five years is not a long time, but our people
are ready for the challenge. Human settlements will
play a critical role in the pursuit of this goal and in
manifesting its achievements.

11

A/S-25/PV.5

It is our sincere hope and desire that all our
development partners, including the international donor
community, will engage together with us in this
ambitious endeavour.
The President: I give the floor to The
Honourable Ophelia Hoff Syatumah, representative of
Liberia and Acting City Mayor of Monrovia.
Ms. Hoff Syatumah (Liberia): I bring you
fraternal greetings and warm felicitations from the
President of the Republic of Liberia, Charles Ghankay
Taylor, the Government and people of Liberia on this
important and unique occasion of Istanbul +5, the
twenty-fifth special session of the General Assembly.
I also wish to express our heartfelt
congratulations and deepest sense of appreciation to
Mrs. Anna Kajumulo Tibaijuka, Executive Director of
the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat), Ms. Axumite Gebre-Egziabher, Coordinator
of Istanbul+5, the Conference secretariat and the entire
Habitat family for the excellent manner in which this
session was organized and for the kind reception and
hospitality accorded us since our arrival to participate
in these deliberations.
Since this session is being convened to review
and assess the implementation of the results of the
Second United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II), held in Istanbul, Turkey, in
June 1996, I would like to take this opportunity to
apprise the Assembly of actions taken and progress
made by my Government since the convening of
Habitat II, as well as in preparation for this Istanbul+5
session.
As a country emerging from civil conflict and
confronted with the challenges of rehabilitation,
reconstruction and recovery, the issues of shelter and
human settlements were accorded high priority in our
National Reconstruction Programme 1998-2000, which
was submitted to the donor community meeting on
Liberia held in April 1998 in Paris, France. Similarly,
shelter and human settlements have again been given
high priority in the five-year Medium Term Plan 20012005, which is currently being formulated.
In preparation for Istanbul+5, we undertook a
national review of our Habitat programme, prepared
and submitted a country assessment report on the
implementation of the Habitat programme in Liberia
and updated our National Plan of Action and the urban

12

indicators for Monrovia. We also participated in the
Istanbul+5 preparatory meetings.
It is an honour for me now to present to the
Assembly an overview of the implementation of the
Habitat programme in Liberia and its constraints and
problems. In order to ensure effective coordination,
collaboration, networking and partnership among the
various partners and stakeholders involved in the
rehabilitation and reconstruction of housing and human
settlements, and to ensure the maximum utilization and
application of the limited resources available, an
initiative was undertaken by the Government of Liberia
to establish the National Habitat Committee of Liberia,
chaired by the Ministry of Planning and Economic
Affairs. The composition of the Committee is broadbased; it consists of members of civil society and nongovernmental, private and community-based entities.
The work of the Committee is facilitated through welldefined subcommittees with clearly defined sectoral
functions, work programmes, expected outputs and
targets. Additionally, as further support for the work of
the Committee and the implementation of Habitat
programmes and projects in the country, the
Government provides budgetary appropriation as
counterpart funding. Although the Government is
constrained by limited resources, this appropriation is
increased on a yearly basis to reflect the commitment
of the Government to the programme.
With regard to specific programmes and projects,
the United Nations Development Programme and
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) have provided technical and financial
assistance to the Government of Liberia, which has
resulted in the preparation of programme support
documents for the reconstruction of housing
infrastructure and services. The total value is $11.924
million. At the moment, there is an ongoing
$1.5 million Government of Liberia-UNDP-Habitat
Capacity Building Programme for the Reconstruction
of Rural Housing in Liberia. This project is building
capacity at both national and local levels for the
reconstruction and effective delivery of housing in
Liberia. This project also deals with the transfer of
appropriate local building material technology and
trains local artisans and community residents in the
production and utilization of improved local building
materials, as well as simple construction techniques.
There is also a microcredit component that is providing
credit
assistance
to
construction-related

A/S-25/PV.5

microenterprises for employment and incomegeneration to reduce poverty among the beneficiaries.

and local institutions and structures to cope with the
challenges of the reconstruction process.

Habitat
For
Humanity
International,
an
ecumenical non-governmental organization based in
Georgia, United States of America, is providing
building materials and loan assistance to rural dwellers
for the construction and ownership of simple, decent
and affordable homes. The beneficiaries are to repay
the loans over an extended period of 10 years. The
repayment funds are placed in a revolving fund for the
expansion of the programme in targeted communities.
The loans are interest-free. Shelter Afrique, a
pan-African housing finance institution of which
Liberia is a member, has agreed in principle to provide
a $1 million line of credit to the Liberian Bank for
Development and Investment for onward lending to
potential beneficiaries for the rehabilitation and
restoration of damaged housing units in Monrovia and
its environs.

The full resettlement and reintegration of
internally and externally displaced Liberians cannot be
achieved without successful shelter and human
settlements programmes. I should therefore like to
appeal to the international community, particularly our
development partners, UNDP and the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements, to seek further
assistance on our behalf for the successful
implementation of Habitat programmes in Liberia, as
they relate to the implementation of the Habitat
National Plan of Action, which was reviewed and
updated for this Istanbul+5 session.

A number of private investors and developers are
also negotiating with the Government, through the
National Housing Authority and the National
Investment Commission, for the construction of
various types of housing estates on the basis of a
variety of models.
Despite the efforts made for the successful
implementation of programmes and projects, there are
problems and constraints. There is a funding gap which
is inhibiting the expansion and replication of these
programmes and projects in other parts of the country
where there is a dire need for housing and services.
Furthermore, the prevailing poor road conditions in the
country are also having a negative impact on
rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes. The
impact of the civil conflict has contributed to weak
institutions and structures in government, thereby
affecting its ability for planning and programming and
its provision of complementary support and
backstopping services for reconstruction and
development initiatives.
Despite support by the Government and the
international community for Habitat programmes and
projects, additional assistance will be required for the
formulation and development of a national housing
policy and shelter strategy for the effective
implementation of shelter and human settlements. The
Government of Liberia would also appreciate technical
and capacity-building assistance to strengthen national

I should like to take this opportunity to call for
greater cooperation and networking among regional
Member States and partners in order to ensure proper
coordination to achieve the best possible results, taking
advantage of the UNDP Technical Cooperation among
Developing Countries initiative.
Finally, on behalf of the President, the
Government and the people of Liberia, I wish to extend
our thanks and appreciation to the international
community and our development partners, in particular
for their continuous support for our reconstruction
process. I also wish to reaffirm the Government’s
commitment to and support for the Habitat Agenda. We
will take appropriate action to accelerate the
implementation of the Habitat programme in Liberia.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Bouathong Vonglokham, Minister for
Communications, Transport, Post and Construction of
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic.
Mr. Vonglokham (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (spoke in French): The goal of this special
session is to enable Member States of the United
Nations to appraise the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda and Istanbul Declaration, which were adopted
in that city in 1996. On this occasion, we, the Member
States, are being asked to outline the housing policies
we will be implementing in the years to come.
We believe this to be a great challenge for all
countries, organizations and stakeholders because the
world’s population has grown rapidly. In addition, the
economy has entered an era of globalization and active
competition, the environment is in a worrisome state,
and non-renewable natural resources are being over-

13

A/S-25/PV.5

exploited. It is high time for Governments,
representatives of local authorities and civil society
partners to exchange views, mobilize world opinion
and draw up more effective plans of action to make
more rapid and concrete progress.
The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is,
economically speaking, among the least developed
countries. We are a land-locked country whose
geographical features are not conducive to good
transportation or agricultural production, as two thirds
of our land area is mountainous. It is only in the last 25
years that communications systems have been
developed. The building of national, regional and local
roads is helping to link provinces and districts.
Our country experienced a long war of aggression
for three decades before attaining total liberation, in
1975. The war left millions of tons of buried bombs
and other unexploded ordnance, a fact that has been a
major obstacle to the socio-economic development of
the country. Every year at least 100 persons are victims
of explosions caused by these weapons.
In 2000, the population of the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic was estimated to be 5.2 million,
consisting of three main ethnic groups. The rural
population makes up 80 per cent of the total
population, with the other 20 per cent living in cities.
Generally speaking, people in the north live without
electricity or sources of energy. Living conditions there
are harsh, the economy is less developed, income is
low and people are very close to nature. The
Government is therefore determined to develop the
economy of the northern regions in future years.
Due to the difficult economic situation in recent
years, the Government has adopted a policy of
encouraging investment in order to develop urban
infrastructure and facilities in a number of cities. Those
investments have improved the quality of urban life,
trade, communications, and tourism. With regard to
governance and institutions, the Government
established a policy of decentralization that shifts
authority to district and village leaders, who in turn
implement the Government’s policies.
Our Government’s long-term plans for the period
2001-2020 set out the major goals in the areas of
infrastructure
development,
restructuring
the
telecommunications system, urban development,
potable water provision, transportation, environmental
management, economic development, the establishment

14

a new institutional framework, and the solving of
housing problems. The main challenge for local
authorities is therefore the management of cities.
By 2020, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
will have about 8.3 million inhabitants. Solving
housing problems is therefore a major challenge for the
Lao Government. Many existing homes do not meet
basic standards. Generally speaking, those houses are
made of makeshift materials and lack proper sanitation.
The Government’s social development policy
seeks to have no poor families by 2010. Another goal is
to have our country graduate from the group of least
developed countries by 2020. This policy includes
stopping slash-and-burn methods of agriculture and
creating new professions or stable jobs for the
population.
We
sincerely
believe
that
the
implementation of such a policy will help in the
international effort to preserve the environment.
We are also implementing a poverty reduction
policy and a policy to promote the status of women and
children.
These are all major problems that we must
confront in the first decade of the twenty-first century.
Our Government will make great efforts to implement
these policies, as well as the Istanbul+5 declaration to
be adopted by the General Assembly at this special
session.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General, the Executive Director of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements and all
the representatives and participants present here for
their active contributions to help make this special
session a success.
The President: I now give the floor to Her
Excellency Mrs. María Eugenia Brizuela de Ávila,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of El Salvador.
Mrs. Brizuela de Ávila (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): The holding of this special session of the
General Assembly on the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda is a good opportunity for us to reiterate
our commitments and adopt innovative initiatives and
measures that can make it possible to redouble efforts
to achieve the broad objectives of adequate shelter for
all and sustainable development for human settlements.
El Salvador has taken important steps to comply
with the commitments entered into at the “Urban

A/S-25/PV.5

Summit”, held at Istanbul in 1996. Our achievements
include a modest but sustainable reduction in the
housing deficit, which decreased by 4 per cent from
1996 to 2000, even though in 1998, due to the impact
of Hurricane Mitch, the deficit rose by 0.8 per cent.
Furthermore, urban development plans have been
elaborated for five cities of national importance — San
Salvador, Santa Ana, San Miguel and Usulután —
which constitute technical orientation instruments for
the development of human settlements.
We have also devised a Salvadoran housing
policy whose programmes emphasize support for the
lowest-income households. Its priority areas include
savings; housing subsidy and financing; land
legalization; neighbourhood improvement; human
settlements; housing without borders; property leasing;
high-altitude
housing;
lot
certification;
and
management of environmental hazards.
Other advances are linked to the process of
drafting
and
subsequent
implementation
of
El Salvador’s national plan for territorial organization
and development, a joint project of the Ministry of
Environment and Natural Resources and the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Development. This is being
carried out in coordination with all relevant
governmental
and
private
institutions.
The
implementation of this plan will begin in the second
half of this year, and within its framework we will
organize our urban areas, natural preserves, areas of
agricultural development and areas containing other
natural resources. The plan also includes a system of
collectivity among regions. This will help to determine
the geographical location of investments in order to
promote the balanced development of our national
territory.
Along those same lines, we have formulated a
plan for the territorial development of the San Andrés
valley in the sub-basin of Rio Sucio, which is a
tributary of the Lempa River — the largest river in the
country — adjacent to the metropolitan area of San
Salvador. Twelve municipalities and approximately 100
governmental and non-governmental organizations and
agencies are participating in the plan, as well as
interested private companies that working in that
particular area.
These are some examples of what El Salvador has
done in compliance with the Habitat II agenda. We
would like, however, to emphasize the importance

taken on by the question of human settlements in El
Salvador since January 2001, because of the disaster
caused by the two earthquakes that recently occurred in
the course of a single month. This was the worst
natural disaster in our recent history.
As a Government, our first priority was to save
lives and to help the wounded. Then we rescued those
people who were buried but were still living, and set up
an airlift to rescue communities trapped by landslides.
After the emergency, our greatest challenge was to
provide housing for 200,000 families that had lost their
homes. We built 160,000 houses during the first stage;
the families concerned and the local authorities
participated in this project. Secondly, we put up 75,000
new temporary housing units in towns and
neighbourhoods that needed particular attention.
This effort was unprecedented in our national
experience. The country’s historical housingconstruction capacity is 20,000 units per year. But in
the space of four months, we provided minimum
temporary housing to more than 225,000 families —
that is to say, one-fourth of the population.
Thanks to United Nations Member States,
international solidarity, Salvadorans living abroad, and
international and non-governmental organizations, we
have begun the process of reconstruction.
The reality is that, in developing countries,
human settlements are growing quickly, particularly in
urban areas. For this reason, that we are convinced that
promising results will be achieved at this special
session on the Habitat Agenda.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Péter Szaló, Deputy State Secretary of the Ministry
of Agriculture and Rural Development of Hungary.
Mr. Szaló (Hungary): First of all, I would like to
express my gratitude to those who participated in the
preparations for this special session of the General
Assembly, which offers us an excellent opportunity to
discuss human settlement issues in the new century.
Hungary, a Central European country which has
been a modern State for more than a thousand years,
falls into the medium category of European countries
with respect to its population and size. Its urban
population represents 63 per cent of its 10 million
inhabitants.

15

A/S-25/PV.5

We are in full agreement with the statement
delivered by Sweden on behalf of the European Union
presidency. I should like to highlight some aspects of
Hungarian activities in the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda.
Building a multiparty democratic constitutional
State and a market economy in the 1990s brought about
far-reaching changes at all levels of society. As a result
of the comprehensive changes which took place in a
short period of time, radical regroupings of the socioeconomic spatial structure have taken place.
Hungary had already taken measures in the spirit
of Habitat even before the Habitat Agenda was
conceived, but the worldwide process which was
launched in Vancouver in 1976, and strengthened in
Istanbul in 1996, has undoubtedly had a great impact
on regional and housing policy decisions in most
countries. Hungary has learned a lot from the Habitat
documents and has done its best to fulfil the goals and
implement the policy measures which were discussed
at a number of conferences organized by the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements.
Hungary’s intention to accede to the European
Union also required the modernization of its regional
policy. The European Spatial Development Perspective
is considered a guiding document for the future. The
actual requirements of that Perspective fully met the
principles defined in the Istanbul Declaration,
especially as regards sustainable development. The
Habitat Agenda accelerated the transformation, which
consists of the regulation of the regional institutional
system and the modification of the legal background
and financing system. It also strengthened international
contacts and initiated the elaboration of a spatial
information system.
At the governmental level, several measures were
taken to establish a decentralized institutional,
financial and decision-making system for regional and
settlement development policy. The following
objectives give the appropriate direction for the
practical implementation of regional and local policies:
enlargement of local employment possibilities through
job creation; enlargement of the basic infrastructure;
improvement of the quality of life; elaboration of
regional information technology strategies; improved
communication in rural areas; rehabilitation and
protection of local values; decrease of migration from
rural areas; increased qualification level of the rural

16

population; village development and reconstruction;
reduction of spatial differentiation within regions and
municipalities; improvement of conditions of equal
access to infrastructure services; decrease in nonregulated land use; and the strengthening of partnership
relations in development efforts.
These objectives have been adopted by the
Parliament, within the framework of the National
Regional Development Perspective, and will be
implemented in the form of regional development
programmes. In implementing the idea of sustainable
development, the Parliament has regulated the land-use
system and the spatial structure of sensitive and
urbanized areas.
At the millennium, the protection of the
environment and the conservation of natural resources
are major challenges in Hungary. With special regard to
future accession to the European Union, Hungary has
to take appropriate measures to improve environmental
quality and eliminate existing deficiencies in
legislation and its implementation, while ensuring
extension of social welfare and increased economic
competitiveness. Although the Act on Nature
Conservation and Environmental Protection is in
conformity with European standards, the majority of
practical measures are still ahead of us, especially
regarding air quality, water quality, ground waters,
waste water, soil, waste, noise, nature conservation and
biological diversity.
In Hungary, the negative social consequences of
the transformation to a market economy have resulted
in the emergence of a social group that has found itself
outside the labour market. The poorest strata amount to
four to five per cent of the population, and one third of
them are of Roma origin. People living in the
countryside in weak labour markets, people who are
permanently unemployed, families with handicapped
members or with three or more children, single-parent
families, single elderly women and so on are
particularly vulnerable to increasing poverty. In order
to ease the above social difficulties, new components
of the social welfare system have been introduced in
the health care and pension systems.
To protect families and children, the Hungarian
Parliament adopted a law on the protection of children
and management of the system of guardianship.
Equality for women with regard to education,

A/S-25/PV.5

employment, or other kinds of situations in which they
may face handicaps is also regulated by law.

to Habitat, one of the fundamental global movements
of the contemporary world.

In 2000 the Hungarian Government worked out a
comprehensive economic development plan. The
housing programme of the plan envisages the
construction of 40,000 new homes every year. The
quality targets of the plan are similarly important.
These include: ensuring the possibility of obtaining a
first home in market conditions and by using State
subsidies, increasing the share of tenement sectors in
harmony with the characteristics of different regions
and towns, increasing mobility through housing policy
instruments, strengthening the equality of opportunity
for elderly and handicapped people, and improving the
quality of the natural and developed environment. All
these development efforts are in close relationship with
Habitat goals as defined in the Istanbul Declaration.

Sustainable development of settlements and
adequate shelter for everyone are the goals which
motivate us all. These are also the goals that call for
stability in the country, good-neighbourly regional
relations and the merger of the vectors of national and
global development. Sad to say, from this standpoint
much fails to come within the range of possibility for
small countries. The fate of 300,000 displaced persons
from the Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions, and the
problems of providing them with accommodations,
workplaces and minimal subsistence, now bear hard on
our settlements and accommodations, and these
difficulties have to be solved with assistance from the
international community.

Our experience is that severe problems of a
society cannot be solved separately. An integrated
approach is needed in planning and implementation to
find solutions to economic and infrastructure
development
questions,
unemployment,
social
problems, poverty and crime.
Today, Hungary is a successful country with a
growing economy. The local authorities, who enjoy a
large degree of autonomy, have made significant
contributions to economic development, improvement
of the infrastructure and implementation of
environmental measures. They play a crucial role in
regional policy to create a balanced spatial structure in
partnership with Government institutions.
Five years after the second United Nations
conference on Habitat, Hungary is aware that the
conference has made essential contributions to the
results of development measures in all countries of the
world.
The President: I give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. David Aptsiauri, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Georgia.
Mr. Aptsiauri (Georgia): The antecedents of my
country and its spiritual and material culture go back
many a millennium, but the new history of Georgia,
like that of the other post-Soviet countries, covers only
a decade. It is worth noting that precisely half of this
decade has passed since Habitat II. It was truly a period
of historical importance for Georgia, singling out and
bringing to the fore the problems of immediate interest

The representatives of the countries going
through the same situation will agree that such a
background does not in any way contribute to the
sustainable development of settlements and the
provision of adequate shelter. However, the systemic
reforms within the last five years in Georgia have
acquired an irreversible character. In 1997, a new civil
code was enacted which created a firm legislative
environment for the recently established and
multitudinous stratum of real estate owners. In the
same period the Parliament of Georgia adopted a series
of laws that recognized private ownership of urban
lands and regulated the principal relations in the sphere
of land utilization. By the end of this year legislation
will have largely covered the problems mentioned
above.
A legalized real estate market is now under
development. Competitions and auctions are held to
acquire plots of land, mortgages are becoming
established, and so on.
One priority for public development is the
decentralization of authorities and of competence,
which extends to urban development, housing, the
communal economy, the delegation of engineering
management to the local level, and communications
infrastructure.
The protection of the cultural heritage has
traditionally been a highly successful field in Georgia.
Today too, new forms of activity have been developed.
Georgia has joined the field-specific international
conventions and agreements. The UNESCO list of
World Heritage Sites includes the unique mountainous

17

A/S-25/PV.5

region of the Upper Svaneti, the ancient capital of
Georgia, Mtskheta, and the Gelati architectural
complex, and Tbilisi may also be included in this list.
The pilot project of Georgia and the World Bank in the
protection of cultural heritage is being carried out
successfully.
The system of urban indicators established in
Georgia in 1996 opens up new opportunities for the
management of the development of the country’s
settlements. This system forms the basis of the practice
of annual national reports on urban development, to
which Georgia returned in 2000. The general census of
the Georgian population scheduled in two years will
facilitate obtaining reliable statistical data, laying
special emphasis on such fields as population
migration, displaced persons, domestic economies,
sanitation conditions, etc.
High on the list of positive development is the
mobilization of our public at large and of community
and non-governmental organizations. This is of
paramount importance given the negative social and
psychological impact of 70 years of the Soviet system
on city populations, the results of which have been
indifference, the weakening of city awareness, a
sponging mentality and so on. This is what lies at the
very root of the tough condominium ideology that has
emerged with the privatization of nearly 90 per cent of
apartments and the slow pace of setting up partnerships
with property owners.
Broadly speaking, the ongoing reforms in the
country are not duly reflected in terms of territorial
organization and urban development. On the contrary,
we are faced with such challenges as increasing
poverty in cities, the emergence of homelessness,
unauthorized construction, a reduction of public
spaces, the destruction of green and recreational zones,
the absence of a public housing system, et cetera.
Adding to our society’s concerns is the high level
of corruption, which manifests itself in the urban
development sphere. The international organizations
rendering assistance to Georgia often take note of this.
There also exists a sort of imbalance in the priorities of
these organizations. Their projects give scant, and
often only pro forma, attention to the problems of
urban development and housing. The assistance of such
countries as the United States, Germany and others has
produced more results in this regard.

18

Note should also be taken of the fact that our
local specialists are fully conversant with the current
situation in the urban development and housing sphere.
This entitles us to raise the question of altering the
foreign assistance format and carrying out a
reorganization. In our view, today it would be more
effective to move from the level of consultations with
foreign experts to that of concrete targeted projects.
It is impossible to block social and urban
development for even a day. I therefore believe that the
Assembly will understand me if I compare my country
to a car that badly needs to have parts replaced in order
to keep running.
It is in that political, social and economic
framework that we should study the management of
urban development and housing — not only from an
administrative perspective, but also by employing
objective criteria suitable to our society and our cities.
We in Georgia hold out the hope that we shall soon join
those countries with high living standards, dignity,
happiness and hope — with regard to both city
environment and families. What leads me to speak in
this way is respect for our history, the will of our
citizens and a sense of responsibility towards future
generations.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Marjan Dodovski, Vice-Minister of
Environment and Physical Planning of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Mr. Dodovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): It is my great pleasure and privilege to
address this special session of the United Nations
dedicated to an overall review and appraisal of the
progress achieved in the five years since the holding in
Istanbul of the Second United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements.
Allow me, at the outset, to express the conviction
of the Republic of Macedonia that the preparatory
process that led to this session, the fruitful discussion
at this session, and the draft declaration that we are to
adopt will contribute to finding adequate solutions for
the problems of the development of human settlements
at the beginning of the new millennium. That will
provide new impetus for the implementation of the
goals set forth in the Millennium Declaration of the
United Nations — above all with regard to the
eradication of poverty and securing adequate shelter
for all people.

A/S-25/PV.5

Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
At the national level, the goals, principles and
recommendations contained in the Habitat Agenda and
the Istanbul Declaration, as well as the level of their
implementation, constitute the basis for the preparation
of the national report of the Republic of Macedonia.
The strategic orientation of the Republic of Macedonia
is to act in order to enable and promote adequate
habitats for all citizens by developing safer, cleaner,
healthier and more sustainable human settlements.
Population policy is one of the basic elements in
planning the country’s future. By pursuing an
integrated population policy, maximum effectiveness is
achieved in the utilization of the space and resources
available, in humanizing living conditions for families
and society, in reducing tendencies to migrate and in
creating conditions for more equitable regional
development.
The basic regulatory framework defining the
spatial organization of the State for the period up to
2020 is provided for in the spatial plan of the Republic
of Macedonia, which is currently in the process of
being approved by the Parliament. The plan sets out the
goals and concepts of spatial development in different
areas, as well as the conditions for their realization.
The territory of the Republic of Macedonia
covers 25,713 square kilometres. Its population, which
in 1998 was estimated to be 2,015,000, is projected to
reach 2,225,000 by the year 2020. The country’s
population is concentrated predominantly in urban
areas, primarily in the city of Skopje, the capital and
main administrative, economic and cultural centre of
Macedonia. This trend is leading to a decrease in the
population of other urban and rural areas in the
country, as well as to their overall economic sidelining.
At present, 59.7 per cent of the population lives in
urban areas, and 40.3 in rural areas.
The enactment of the new State spatial plan and
the new law on local self-government, as well as the
designing of adequate programmes and projects aimed
at improving housing conditions in human settlements,
and in particular the quality of life in small urban and
rural areas, clearly define the Government’s policies
that field.
As a country with an economy in transition, the
changes that have taken place in the political and

economic environment in the Republic of Macedonia
are adequately reflected in its housing policy and in its
policy on sustainable human settlement development in
general. The housing policy is based on a new
approach to housing development and investments in
this field, a new methodology to appraise location and
the harmonization of housing and land policies.
In this context, in pursuing the housing policy at
the national level, the Government of the Republic of
Macedonia pays particular attention to providing
shelter to persons living on social welfare by allocating
25 per cent of State housing properties built annually to
that end. As part of this policy, the Government of the
Republic of Macedonia has developed a programme to
provide shelter to young couples, and it is also making
efforts to provide favourable conditions to solve
housing problems by granting loans to that end.
An integral part of the Government’s overall
policy for the sustainable development of human
settlements includes environmental protection and
environmental impact assessment. Several strategic
documents have been adopted to that end, including the
national environmental action plan, with special
emphasis on preparation of local environmental action
plans, and the national strategy for solid waste and
waste water. The national strategy for sustainable
development is in the process of preparation.
The Republic of Macedonia, being situated in the
troublesome Balkan region, faced extraordinary
challenges during the Kosovo refugee crisis in 1999,
when for a short period of time the country provided
shelter to more than 360,000 refugees from Kosovo,
equivalent to 18 per cent of Macedonia’s population.
This, of course, had a negative impact on the
economic, social, health and environmental conditions
in the country. In spite of these problems, nine refugee
camps were built, encompassing an area of more than
90 hectares, with complete infrastructure, roads to
access the camps, water supply and sewage systems
and electrification. More than 160,000 persons were
sheltered in the camps and others accommodated in
private houses and families. The Macedonian
Government acted responsibly and succeeded in coping
with the extremely difficult situation imposed during
the Kosovo crisis.
Regrettably, as is known, today my country is
faced with terrorism by Albanian extremists. Despite
being condemned by the Security Council, the

19

A/S-25/PV.5

European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, other regional organizations and the
Governments of all the countries in the region, and
despite the unanimous calls for them to lay down their
arms and to disband, they continue to pursue their
terrorist activities.
At present, Kumanovo, a city of 100,000
inhabitants north of Skopje, is facing severe water
shortages due to the terrorists’ blocking and cutting off
the water supplies from the nearby reservoirs, and their
taking civilians hostage in the villages surrounding the
city and using them as human shields, thus using
human settlements and their inhabitants for their
terrorist aims. Agricultural activities in the area have
been badly affected.
This, of course, has a very negative impact on the
overall situation in the country, endangering the lives
of Macedonian citizens, democratic development,
economic reforms and social stability. However, the
Republic of Macedonia is determined to overcome the
present difficulties. In this context, our efforts to
further implement the goals of the Habitat Agenda will
continue.
The Republic of Macedonia has accepted the
challenges of developing human settlements at the
global, regional and local levels, fully aware of the
important impact cities and the villages have on
cultural, economic and social life in every State. The
Republic of Macedonia is making efforts to contribute
actively to building more human settlements in the
global village and to reaffirm existing partnerships and
create new ones for action at the international,
regional, national and local levels, aimed at improving
the human environment.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to Mr. Henrique Cossa, Vice-Minister of
Public Works and Housing of Mozambique.
Mr. Cossa (Mozambique): Allow me to
congratulate Mr. Holkeri on his election to preside over
this special session of the United Nations on Habitat. I
am confident that under his skilful guidance and with
his outstanding experience, our deliberations will be
crowned with success.
Despite the substantial progress made since
Istanbul, much remains to be done. Today millions of
people in developing countries still live in abject
poverty without adequate shelter and basic services.

20

Moreover, the increasing flow of people into urban
areas dramatically increases urban poverty, having a
major impact on women and children and causing
social conflicts and environmental degradation.
The challenge for sustainable human settlements
development is still far from being fully addressed, and
we believe that this is the proper time for us to
strengthen our commitment to the Habitat Agenda. The
overall goal at this special session should be to ensure
its further and effective implementation.
The world leaders who assembled at the
Millennium Summit identified the reduction of poverty
as the overriding challenge that humanity faces. With
regard to the provision of adequate shelter for all and
sustainable human settlements, they resolved to
achieve by 2020 a significant improvement in the lives
of at least 100 million slum-dwellers. Mozambique
fully endorses these commitments and calls upon the
international community to spare no effort to ensure
their operationalization.
In following up the recommendations of the
Second United Nations Conference on Human
Settlements (Habitat II), the Government of
Mozambique adopted a national plan of action on
human settlements. With this plan we focused our
actions on various relevant areas.
The Government approved a Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper for the period 2001 to 2005. The actions
and activities foreseen in the Paper cover economic,
social, political and cultural aspects, to be carried out
in programmes and projects at the local, provincial and
national levels. The target is to maintain an average
growth of 8 per cent, which will reduce the poverty
rate to below 50 per cent by the end of this decade.
The Government has established a national
housing fund to provide land and financial credit for
housing construction and rehabilitation for low-income
people and young couples. The Government has
transferred about 70 per cent of its real estate stock to
Mozambicans at highly subsidized prices, and the
income generated from these sales has been allocated
to the national housing fund.
A national council for sustainable development,
which comprises Government institutions, civil society
and the private sector, has been established within the
country, with a view to coordinating implementation of
the Habitat Agenda.

A/S-25/PV.5

Similarly,
a
national
programme
for
environmental management is being implemented, with
a view to controlling the environmental degradation
and creating a local management capacity. The
dissemination of educational programmes on
environment and on the use of natural resources has
also played a crucial role in the protection of the
environment.
In 1997, 33 local autarchies in 23 cities and 10
towns were established, and in 1998 their
representative organs were elected. These local
authorities play a crucial role in urban and peri-urban
planning and management. In this regard, we have
witnessed an improvement in the living conditions of
the populations in the urban centres, including the
better provision of services, sanitation and clean water.
In Mozambique, women have been involved in
the promotion of sustainable human settlements and
adequate shelter by carrying out various projects and
programmes of a social and economic nature. They
also play an important role in the sustainable use of
natural resources, as well as in the preservation and
management of the environment.
Women, particularly widows, single mothers and
those heading households, benefit from a considerable
share of the national housing fund for the construction
or rehabilitation of their houses.
Mozambique was affected by floods for two years
running — 2000 and 2001. The floods seriously set
back the implementation of the aforementioned
programmes, projects and actions.
To avert this situation, we have fully directed our
efforts towards the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
roads and social infrastructure, the promotion of
income-generation activities and the encouragement of
populations to abandon areas of risk and settle
themselves in more secure ones. Allow me to seize this
opportunity to thank countries and the international
community in general for having extended their
support to minimize the suffering of the Mozambican
people in those tragic moments of our history, as well
as for helping us in the post-flood reconstruction
process.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
Government’s commitment to the goals of the Habitat
Agenda and I hope that the outcome of this special
session will guide all nations in their efforts aimed at

achieving sustainable human settlements and adequate
shelter for all.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Birhanu Tamrat, ViceMinister, Ministry of Work and Urban Development of
Ethiopia.
Mr. Tamrat (Ethiopia): First of all, on behalf of
the Government and people of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia, it is a great honour for me to
address this very important session, which is expected
to deliberate on vital issues of human settlements
development five years after the adoption of the
Habitat Agenda and the Istanbul Declaration.
The Government of Ethiopia is committed to
implementing the Habitat Agenda through the
progressive realization of the right to adequate housing,
providing legal security of tenure and equal access to
land for all people. My Government welcomes the
principle behind the campaign for improved urban
governance and secure tenure. In fact, this is consistent
with the ongoing measures taken by my Government.
However, in order to address these principles and those
of the Habitat Agenda in general, much remains to be
done in the translation of the global plan of action into
local and national urban development strategies
focusing mainly on institutional capacity-building.
The African regional ministerial conference on
the implementation of the Habitat Agenda, held in
Addis Ababa from 6 to 8 November last year, has
provided us with an excellent opportunity to assess the
progress made since 1996, the challenges and the way
forward in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda in
Africa. This conference demonstrated that the period
after Habitat II was characterized by a high degree of
partnership and participation in devising follow-up
activities, resulting in the adoption of a common set of
approaches and exemplary contributions from a wide
range of partners. The conference was concluded with
the adoption of the Addis Ababa Declaration on
Human Settlements in the New Millennium. I am sure
all will agree with me that this document is a
significant
milestone
on
African’s
road
to
implementing our common identified agenda.
Taking this opportunity, I would like to explain
some of the important issues which would reflect my
Government’s position related to the Habitat Agenda
implementation.

21

A/S-25/PV.5

Since 85 per cent of our population live in rural
settlements, we believe that promoting the role of our
urban-rural linkages is of crucial importance to
sustainable human settlements development. As we
have clearly mentioned in our national report for the
preparation of this special session, the second five-year
programme of my Government has focused, among
other things, on strengthening the efforts made in urban
areas to enhance their contributions towards increasing
social and economic development activities and
improving the living conditions of the urban
population.
Although there is a strong belief that the
developing nations of the world, including in Africa,
are being urbanized rapidly, people in that part of the
world are still predominantly living in rural areas.
Hence, we would like to take this opportunity to
remind the General Assembly at this special session
that urban development and shelter strategies favouring
the poor and the rural dimension of sustainable urban
development deserve due attention and consideration.
Although massive and strenuous efforts have
been undertaken to implement the Habitat Agenda at
different levels, there should be a strong and proper
mechanism put in place to ensure the mobilization and
coordination of external financial resources and
technical assistance. International cooperation should
increase its efforts to strengthen and improve the
capacities of developing countries. Direct overseas
investment should be channelled to the provision of
better shelter for all, urban infrastructures,
environmental improvement and institutional capacitybuilding.
Finally, I would like to express my Government’s
wish that this special session come up with decisions
that could pave the way for addressing successfully the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda in different
countries, which in turn would contribute to the
improvement of the lives of our people. Furthermore, I
also hope that this session will help to develop better
understanding and cooperation between the developed
and developing States and other important partners in
our joint effort to meet the global challenges of human
settlements.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Adlan El Siddig
Elkhalifa, Secretary-General of the National Council

22

for Physical Development, Ministry of the
Environment and Physical Development of the Sudan.
Mr. El Siddig Elkhalifa (Sudan) (spoke in
Arabic): It is an honour for me to address this
Assembly on behalf of the Government of Sudan. I
wish this session every possible success.
Ever since the first United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat) in Vancouver 1976,
which called for the development of human settlements
in urban and rural areas, great changes have occurred
because of population growth and socio-economic,
cultural, political and environmental transformations.
Many citizens in developing countries now live below
the poverty line and in inadequate shelter. Thus, in
1992 the General Assembly adopted resolution 47/180,
calling for the convening in Istanbul of Habitat II.
Two important principles were adopted at that
Conference, relating to the need to provide adequate
shelter for all and to ensure sustainable human
settlements development in a civilized world. That is
why a global strategy must be based on rehabilitation,
transparency and the participation of all. The Sudan
took an active part in the work of the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II), and we
have played an active and distinctive role at the local,
regional, Arab, African and international levels.
Our activities have been supported by the
President of the Republic, and a national committee
was set up under the chairmanship of the Minister for
Social Planning, representing all governmental and
non-governmental bodies, as well as volunteer, civil
society and women’s organizations, the private sector
and the media. Five years after the 1996 Istanbul
Conference, the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements (Habitat) invited us to review and appraise
progress made in the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda. Given the magnitude and importance of this
question, we have reactivated the national committee in
order to draw up a national report, which was mandated
to follow up on the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda so as to provide continuity in the development
of human settlements.
We hope that at this special session the General
Assembly will work to assess the achievements of the
Istanbul Agenda, and we strongly commend the
initiative of the Centre for Human Settlements to act as
a focal point within the United Nations system for the

A/S-25/PV.5

implementation of the Habitat Agenda. We welcome
the two Global Campaigns launched by Habitat.
The Sudan took a number of steps in
implementing the Istanbul Agenda. At the national
level, we elaborated a comprehensive human
settlements development strategy covering the period
from 1999 to 2002, in which we stressed national unity,
peace, decentralization and subdividing the country
into 26 provinces with equal distribution of wealth. We
have also drawn up human settlements and urban
development action plans. We have set up several
bodies, including a national urban development
council, a national land-use body, a national committee
for geographical surveys and a body to deal with
federal lands.
As part of our overall national strategy, we are
making a very significant attempt to provide economic
reform; it will liberate our economy, increase the
availability of investment and strengthen the private
sector. It incorporates production, monetary and
income-production policies. We have also been
implementing incremental policies of privatization in
various economic sectors and have been working to
reformulate State institutions.
I would like to say that my Government is doing
everything it can to provide adequate shelter and land
ownership for all. We have carried out a number of
activities to this end, including a project to provide
prefabricated housing, other Government housing
projects and a programme to provide housing for all.
Mindful of the importance of sustainable human
settlements, we have tried to work within the
provisions of the Khartoum convention for peace and
to provide the necessary conditions to support peace
throughout the country. Within this framework, the
programme to create villages of peace in the southern
part of my country is supported by the State and by
United Nations agencies, as well as by the United
Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations
Development Programme and some local and
international non-governmental organizations.
Our State’s policies stress social development
issues in particular, as well as the idea of integrating
sectoral plans and programmes. We have also
elaborated a poverty-reduction programme to try to
support disadvantaged people and eliminate begging.
To that end, we have created a programme and a
specialized fund to protect families. We have set up a

national fund to provide pensions and one to help
students. We have also set up a zakat body and a
savings bank, as well as a mechanism to provide health
insurance.
Turning to the environment, our national strategy
seeks to optimally use, invest in, preserve and protect
our natural resources, and we have drawn up
programmes to achieve that goal by setting up an
infrastructure to provide facilities, drinking water,
sanitation and adequate drainage and implement
environmental protection plans. The Sudan has been
working to reduce the power of the central authorities
in the interests of implementing the principle of
decentralization. We have provided local authorities
with greater power and created funds to support State
and local authorities.
I should now like to refer to voluntary work
programmes that are attempting to expand popular
participation and the role of civil society organizations.
We have called upon all volunteer organizations and
other national organizations active in the promotion of
human settlements to learn from best practices.
Regarding the fulfilment of our national
objectives to create adequate shelter for all of our
citizens, we recognize that future prospects for the
development of human settlements will depend on
future economic conditions. The implementation of the
Habitat objectives should not be disregarded in the
consideration of oppressed peoples, particularly the
Palestinian people, who have been struggling under
Israeli occupation for a very long time now, and this is
why we appeal to the international community to
support the Palestinian people in their struggle for
peace and safe living conditions.
In conclusion, we would like to say that the
implementation of the Habitat II Agenda and
programme of action will depend on the sense of
responsibility of our local governments, the
international community, donors and international
organizations, all of which are working to attain these
noble objectives.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): Before
calling on the next speaker, I would like to remind the
Assembly that speakers should stay within the time
limit of five minutes.

23

A/S-25/PV.5

I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Cristián
Cordova Cordero, Vice-Minister of Housing and Urban
Development of Ecuador.
Mr. Cordova Cordero (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I would like to
express our thanks to the President for his very skilful
guidance as the head of this special session to review
and appraise the implementation of the Habitat
Agenda. Its relevance will make it possible to improve
quality of life, particularly in countries where there are
still undeniable imbalances affecting the liberties and
well-being of individuals and communities.
The Ecuadorian Government is committed to
meeting the goals put forward in the Habitat Agenda.
As concerns aspects directly related to housing, we
have pledged to strengthen local and provincial
governments and the decentralization of the State,
among other significant issues.
The system of housing incentives in urban and
surrounding areas is an example of our work. For lowincome families the State provides a one-time, direct
subsidy that does not need to be paid back. This is a
tool that guarantees the right to housing. It also
reactivates the economy by stimulating the private
construction market and redistributes revenue towards
the lower-income sectors. It encourages saving and
stimulates the private financial sector to grant
mortgage credits.
In order to overcome the crisis in rural sectors, of
which one of the visible impacts is accelerated urban
growth, there are also rural housing programmes. In
addition to this direct subsidy, they involve selfmanagement and community participation.
Modernizing the State — by reconceptualizing
what it is and what it does, and by transferring
responsibilities and powers to society and local
governmental bodies is one of the most important
challenges being taken up by Ecuador. The
decentralization of the State, participation of the
citizenry and accountability are all tools that are in the
process of being implemented or elaborated. Some
immediate goals for this year, however, will obviously
require a long time to be totally consolidated. To that
end, we have begun looking at the consequences of the
transfer of competencies and resources from the central
Government to the provincial and municipal levels, and
proposals are being formulated.

24

Some municipalities are likewise carrying out
plans to strengthen and improve their management and
capacities, and they are implementing concrete policies
and actions, with positive and visible results in the
efficiency of local management. They have defined
governmental, non-governmental, social and private
participatory bodies, with a view to guaranteeing a
systematic connection between the population and the
local government in planning, implementation, followup and assessment of policies, programmes and
projects.
The Ministry of Urban Development and
Housing, together with the State Bank and the
Association of Ecuadorian Municipalities has devised a
programme for technical and credit assistance, which
should be implemented this year for community
improvement. A national system of property taxes is
envisaged as a basis for planning and tax collection.
Thus, we have a set of activities designed to
achieve the genuine practice of democratic principles,
to ensure good governance and to increase social
equity and environmental sustainability by means of
rationalization, modernization and transparency in our
government actions, and also through the participation
and shared responsibility of the citizenry.
However, the achievement of these objectives
does not depend solely on the political will of the
national Government or other government bodies, nor
solely on technical resources or the possibilities
inherent in the private sector.
Ecuador has economic and financial limitations in
its public and private sectors, and resources are
severely limited for different reasons. One example is
the burden on the national budget represented by
external debt servicing, which absorbs more than 40
per cent of the country’s resources.
We should also mention obstacles to access to
new markets, to the expansion of sales and to the
diversification of exports. These obstacles originate
from the policies of industrialized countries that
establish exceptionally high tariffs, quotas, health
restrictions, technical restrictions, or defensive
measures, all of which have protectionist aims. Above
and beyond these obstacles, the competition is unfair
because of the high subsidies that those countries grant
to inefficient and non-competitive sectors.

A/S-25/PV.5

It is necessary for international actions and
commitments to be integrated so as to ensure coherent
qualitative and quantitative results over the long term.
The external debt, international trade, science and
technology, official development assistance — in sum,
all questions relating to development must be
addressed and, above all, resolved effectively on the
basis of the fundamental values mentioned in the
Millennium Declaration. This includes solidarity and
shared responsibility in order to lay a solid foundation
leading to competitive economic growth; otherwise, the
facts will be incongruous with Governments’
expressions of will, their national macroeconomic
policies and their intentions to make Government and
administration more transparent and more efficient, and
the results will be null — or at most, very modest and,
what is even more serious, not sustainable.
Our countries must answer these crucial
questions, and the institutional machinery of the
international community must support us actively in
this endeavour.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to Ms. Myrna Pitt, Chief Executive
Officer of the Central Housing and Planning Authority
of Guyana.
Ms. Pitt (Guyana): On behalf of the Government
of Guyana, allow me at the outset to express our warm
congratulations on the excellent chairing of this
meeting, which is certainly ensuring that our debates
are constructive, and that they lead to action-oriented
programmes.
It has been five years since the Istanbul
Declaration was endorsed by participants at the United
Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat).
That Conference, we recall, was notable not only for
the high quality of the debates which characterized it,
but also for the very high level of participation by nongovernmental organizations, city mayors and municipal
authorities in the work of the Conference. The City
Summit, as it was then known, was more than an
intergovernmental summit; it was a meeting of all
stakeholders, peoples and their representatives, who
endorsed the Habitat Agenda: “adequate shelter for all”
and “the development of sustainable human
settlements”.
Over the past five years, the Government of
Guyana has fashioned programmes and interventions in
the settlements sector which targeted low-income

households and households in unplanned settlements as
primary beneficiaries. To this end, approximately 91
settlements were established, making 50,000 house lots
available to persons with pressing shelter needs.
Indeed, a central pillar of the Government of Guyana’s
housing programme has been the provision of house
lots, with basic services, to the dispossessed; the
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure; and the
regularization of unplanned settlements.
Our achievements, however, could have been
much greater in a more enabling international
environment — one that allowed Guyana to obtain fair
prices for its main exports of sugar, rice and gold. As
the Assembly is aware, the prices of those commodities
have fallen in recent years, but our efforts to ensure
that the right of shelter is affordable to all Guyanese, in
a progressive manner and within the limits of our
budgetary strictures, have had an impact on the
reduction of poverty in our country.
Today Guyana is working with its development
partners to ensure that our country is no longer
burdened by external debt. This has entailed close
negotiations with creditor nations and the international
financial institutions, and has enabled Guyana to
complete work on its Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper. The strategy is an expression of the
Government’s strong commitment to reducing poverty
within the context of accelerated economic growth and
improved social conditions. As a Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative country, we are
working hard to ensure that Guyana’s poverty strategy
is nationally owned and that it is representative of the
wishes of our people, meeting in particular the
aspirations of the poorest for improved living standards
and a better quality of life. Consultations with our
partners and with a variety of civil society groups are
currently ongoing. An earlier period of consultations
on Guyana’s development path led to the publication
last year of the country’s National Development
Strategy. In these consultations, one element appears
clear: the right of shelter is of paramount importance
and cannot be overemphasized. It is important for the
achievement of our development aspirations, and,
indeed, it has emerged as an important platform for
urban stability in the past few months.
The National Development Strategy is the
framework within which programmes and projects will
be implemented, with the primary focus being to

25

A/S-25/PV.5

improve the quality of life of the nation’s citizens. It
embraces all groups and seeks to bring about equity.
Another important element in these consultations,
in the National Development Strategy and in the
finalization of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
has been the very clear links between shelter policy
and other aspects of a balanced development strategy.
From Guyana’s perspective, the right to shelter
involves the development of security of tenure for the
population: urban, rural and hinterland. It also involves
the desire of all Guyanese for improved governance in
urban areas, in the management of municipal budgets,
and in the collection of taxes and other dues that make
urban government possible.
An important issue that has also arisen in our
national consultations is the right of urban dwellers to a
decent standard of living. For urbanization means more
than the provision of shelter: it also means the creation,
through partnerships between government, municipal
authorities, civil society and the private sector, of an
environment in which all can find decent employment
that meets rising expectations for a better life. In
addition to the Government’s shelter strategy,
consideration is being given to the strengthening of
public-private sector partnerships in settlements
development. Emphasis is also being placed on
empowering communities and on promoting an
enabling environment to intensify and accelerate
housing development for low-income groups.
Guyana supports the Declaration on cities and
other human settlements in the new millennium. We
have based our shelter policy on a participatory
approach, integrating housing and shelter with the
provision of development opportunities for the poor,
especially women, who make up the large majority of
the urban poor in the informal economy. Local
authorities are being strengthened through the support
of our development partners and have their say in the
determination not only of development policy within
their areas, but also in the national Poverty Reduction
Strategy.
Guyana is pleased to support the Habitat Agenda
as part of its comprehensive development policy. But
we are constrained in our action. Unplanned
settlements formation is increasing faster than we are
able to upgrade these settlements and provide adequate
housing. Our constraint is neither lack of will nor the
lack of imagination to envision a future of prosperity

26

for all Guyanese. Our constraint is in the international
marketplace, where the continuing decline in our terms
of trade means that less will be available to meet the
urgent needs of our peoples. The international
community has been a solid partner of Guyana, but
development resources are in short supply. We are
therefore convinced that success on the Habitat Agenda
is intimately linked to success on the agenda of the
forthcoming International Conference on Financing for
Development.
Greater efficiency in our development resources
is important. We also need capacity-building to enable
us to utilize in a better fashion the modest but effective
resources of our domestic private sector. Most of all,
we need open markets and greater investment in
Guyana to enable us to stand proudly at the next
Habitat conference and demonstrate our achievements
in meeting the goals of this Agenda.
The examples we have reviewed in the course of
this special session and the ambitious programmes of
international development organizations such as the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(UNCHS) and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) allow us to envision a future of
adequate shelter for all – a future of prosperity for
urban and rural dwellers. Guyana is committed to this
future and invites all development partners, bilateral
and multilateral, to accompany our country on its road
to development.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jorge Lara-Castro,
Chairman of the delegation of Paraguay.
Mr. Lara-Castro (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of the Republic of Paraguay is deeply
honoured to participate in this very important gathering
devoted to the review of the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda, which was adopted at the United
Nations
Conference
on
Human
Settlements
(Habitat II), held at Istanbul in 1996. I can assure the
Assembly of our determination and our resolve to work
to achieve the specific objectives to which we deeply
aspire and to those which we have committed
ourselves.
At the Istanbul Summit, it became clear that the
urbanization process, particularly in the developing
world, poses a major challenge to most of the countries
on the planet. Paraguay has been affected by this
phenomenon and has faced this challenge through the

A/S-25/PV.5

speedy formulation of new national strategies, always
bearing in mind the values enshrined in our national
Constitution and guided by the principles set out in the
Habitat Agenda.
According to current demographic indices, it is
estimated that in the year 2005 57 per cent of the
population of Paraguay, more than 6 million persons,
will be living in urban areas. Similarly, it is estimated
that the urbanization rate will remain high in the
coming years, to such a point that by 2025, two thirds
of the population will live in urban areas, probably
strongly concentrated in the major centres, such as the
capital and a few other important cities.
Given this demographic situation, the prevailing
economic model has been enable to meet growing
social demands. On the contrary, it has led to a
considerable increase in general and extreme poverty,
both in rural and in urban areas. Approximately 1.8
million inhabitants are currently living in poverty. The
urbanization process has also brought great pressure to
bear on the natural resources of the country and on its
environment, and it has clearly increased negative
effects in these areas.
As an essential tool for dealing with urbanization
challenges, a new assessment has been made of the
State’s role in providing basic necessities, including a
governmental decentralization initiative that facilitates
local administration and the distribution of important
resources. Currently, health and education services,
communications, transportation, infrastructure and
industry are concentrated in the capital, Asunción.
Under these conditions, a large percentage of the
population lack services and opportunities for their
development and well-being. Decentralization and
reform are essential tools for better distribution and
administration.
Another important objective is the inclusion and
integration into the country’s housing agenda of the
groups that run the greatest risk of being marginalized.
The main factors associated with the lack of social
integration in Paraguay fall within the urban-rural
context, language, age, gender and ethnic status.
It should also be mentioned that all housing
initiatives are carried out in full respect of the
environment, incorporating the principles enshrined in
Agenda 21.

Undoubtedly, poverty, which has grown and
worsened rapidly in recent years, is the main obstacle
to the successful implementation of national housing
strategies, as well as to all economic and social
initiatives. A major cause has been the expansion of
market relations on an unequal distribution structure
for resources, such as land and credits; for income,
such as salary and agricultural prices; and for
opportunities, such as education, health, housing and
employment. Another cause of poverty is the expansion
of speculative activities, particularly financial and
fiduciary activities. External factors have also
contributed to the worsening of poverty.
The Government of Paraguay has made various
efforts to overcome poverty. A national structural
reform process has been initiated to that end, beginning
with the national Constitution, and has included the
adoption of a series of legal norms. The entry into
force of tax reform laws and labour legislation, as well
as the new penal code and penal procedures, must also
be emphasized, without overlooking the law on the
privatization of State enterprises and the law on capital
markets. Also worth noting is the creation of many
institutions engaged in social work and development,
such as the Secretariat for Social Accion, the
Secretariat for Women, a sub-Ministry of Youth and,
particularly, the Secretariat for State Reform and the
Secretariat for the Environment.
Also to be mentioned is the important initiative to
foster the establishment of public/private organizations,
geared towards supporting productive employment
opportunities and the noteworthy work carried out by
the National Housing Savings and Loans Bank and the
National Housing Council in planning and executing
national strategies in housing priorities.
International cooperation is a vital factor for the
successful implementation of the national agenda and
the achievement of fundamental objectives set forth in
the Government programme through the economic and
social strategic plan. International cooperation must
give priority to administrative and economic
decentralization, State reform, the incorporation of the
marginal sectors, the productive process and the
classification of human resources. The priorities for
establishing international cooperation for human
settlements are the drafts of laws, territorial
arrangement, urban development, support for
intermediary cities, protection and cleaning up of the

27

A/S-25/PV.5

environment, improvement of traffic and transport
thoroughfares, education, health and housing.
Finally, Paraguay reaffirms its commitments
made in the Habitat Agenda, but it also encourages the
international community and the United Nations Centre
for Human Settlements to continue the search for new
strategies and resources to confront future challenges.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to Mr. Jamal Al-Bader, representative of
Qatar.
Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am
pleased to extend to the President, on behalf of my
delegation, our congratulations on his presiding over
the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth special
session, on the comprehensive review and appraisal
outcome of second United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (Habitat II).
This conference is taking place five years after
our last meeting in Istanbul, which took place in June
1996. We are meeting to evaluate our implementation
of the recommendations of that Conference. We should
ask ourselves if we have provided adequate shelter for
all, within each country’s potential. Have we
established clean human settlements away from the
crowding and tumult of urbanized areas, as provided
for in the recommendations of the Conference? The
answer is no. We still see a large percentage of
homeless people, particularly in developing countries.
More than 1 billion people are still living in
inadequate housing, with very limited services or, at
times, none at all. More than 100 million people, most
in developing countries, are also displaced or
homeless. These are painful numbers, particularly
when we see that the international community cannot
reduce the percentage of those who still lack the most
basic services and who are still homeless.
Given the poverty and the declining living
standards in many countries, and their Governments’
inability to respond to demand, particularly in remote
village and rural areas, we are witnessing reverse
migration of population towards large cities, in search
of a better life. This trend, of course, places more
pressure on the service sector as urbanization has
become more acute in developing countries.
Approximately 40 per cent of the population live in
cities, and, regrettably, the number is increasing.

28

Regarding the implementation of the outcome of
Habitat II, which took place in Istanbul, Qatar, since
the discovery and production of oil in the country, has
done everything to take care of its population,
providing a dignified life and prosperity for the
Qataris. This includes the provision of adequate
housing for citizens, in accordance with the most
modern architectural designs for family homes. The
State also implements housing projects for senior
government officials, low-income families, the elderly
and orphans. One of our most important achievements
was the building in 1998 of 340 low-income housing
units and the granting of 413 lots and 20 million riyals
to the benefit of 380 citizens. Some 4,200 housing
units, costing approximately QR2.2 billion, have been
provided for state employees, while some additional
900 units have been built in accordance with the
highest environmental standards, at a cost of QR495
million. Some 8,000 additional citizens will receive
housing units within the next three years.
In this context, the Qatari Government provides
interest-free loans for housing construction. These
loans may be paid off over a long period and are thus
no burden to the families receiving them. In many
instances, outstanding payments on these loans are
forgiven by royal decree when the borrower is unable
to make them.
The draft declaration to be adopted at the end of
this session states that
“We further resolve to seriously address the
challenges posed by wars, conflicts, refugees and
human-made disasters on human settlements, and
commit ourselves through enhanced international
cooperation mechanisms to support post-conflict
and post-disaster countries, with special emphasis
on the provision of shelter and other basic
services, particularly to vulnerable groups,
refugees and internally displaced persons, as well
as to facilitate restoring security of tenure and
property rights.” (A/S-25/2, sect. VII.C, decision
2/1, para. 53)
In this context, I wish to recall the situation of the
displaced Palestinian people, whose lands in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip have been occupied by Israel
since 1967. Their circumstances are very germane to
the issue of adequate housing under discussion. Illegal
settlements are being built on the occupied territories,
further exacerbating the already complex problem in

A/S-25/PV.5

the Middle East. We therefore call on Israel to halt the
building of settlements so that everyone throughout the
region can live in security, stability and peace.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kishore Mahbubani,
Chairman of the delegation of Singapore.
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): By our rough
count, this Assembly has already heard over 160
speeches at this Istanbul +5 session. Most of the major
points have been made. We live in an urbanized world.
Two hundred years ago, only 2 per cent of the world’s
population lived in urban areas. Today, more than 50
per cent of the world’s 6 billion people do so.
Unfortunately, 1 billion of these are housed in slums or
squatter communities. Fifty years ago, metropolitan
New York was the only urban centre with a population
of more than 10 million; today, there are 19 such cities.
During the same 50-year period, the number of cities
with more than 1 million inhabitants increased more
than fourfold from 80 to 365.
Singapore is one of these cities. We therefore
believe that the most helpful contribution we can make
at this late stage of our discussion is to briefly describe
our own experience in urban management. There is a
common romantic view that city living is inevitably
inferior to rural life — less healthy, less happy, less
morally grounded, more isolated, more selfish and
more dangerous. We have done our best to prove this
conventional wisdom wrong.
Singapore is the most densely populated country
in the world. We are also, probably, the world’s only
city State. On a small island of only 680 square
kilometres, we have to provide homes for 4 million
people. Therefore, at the beginning of our existence as
an independent State, it was decided that housing had
to be a priority of the new Government. We initiated a
major building programme, which continues in
modified form today and will probably never be
terminated. At present, about 86 per cent of our
population now live in public housing, principally
apartment blocks in discrete housing estates, while the
remainder live in private housing. Among the residents
of public housing, 92 per cent own their homes, while
the
remainder
live
in
subsidized
rented
accommodations.
This high percentage of residence in public
housing — which in Singapore’s case, incidentally,
always means Government-built housing — has made

it necessary for us to pay great attention to the
standards and conditions of public housing. To
encourage home ownership, for example, Singapore
developed a compulsory social security saving scheme,
the Central Provident Fund scheme, which enables
workers to buy their own homes. Home ownership has
made each citizen a stakeholder in the nation’s
development and gives everyone a strong interest in
both social harmony and a healthy physical
environment. As our population has grown and
developed, we have tried to adapt our policies to take
changing attitudes and needs into account. Housing
estates are now designed with all the necessities and
amenities of daily life and we have tried to encourage
some industries and firms to relocate away from the
city centre, so as to achieve a more balanced
distribution of settlement and employment within our
territory.
Singapore is also probably the most land-scarce
country in the world, relative to its population. To
ensure optimum utilization of land, Singapore has a
land-use blueprint called the Concept Plan. First
developed in 1971, this Concept Plan is reviewed once
every 10 years to keep up with changing trends and
aspirations of the people. The current review is
expected to be completed in late 2001. From the
Concept Plan, the planning intention for individual
plots of land is translated into a detailed Master Plan.
The Master Plan is reviewed and updated every five
years.
However, we are acutely aware that, in any
society, there exists a bottom 5 to 10 per cent of lowincome earners who need assistance in housing.
Singapore’s public housing authority, the Housing
Development Board, has an array of housing-assistance
schemes designed to give the lower-income groups a
chance for upward mobility, including housing
subsidies to help lower-income households own their
first home. For instance, the authority buys flats back
from the open market to sell to poorer families at
subsidized prices and allows its tenants to purchase
their rented apartments at a discount proportional to
their duration of tenancy.
Singapore’s housing programme began and
continues out of necessity. Because of the
environmental constraint of a large population relative
to available land area, we have always had to take an
active approach to urban planning. Laissez-faire has
never been an option for us. The constraints that we

29

A/S-25/PV.5

face, however, have also had their positive side. Since
we lack a hinterland, the problem of rural migration to
urban areas is not a difficulty that we have had to face.
Our small land area has made the management and
control of our environment easier. Feedback from our
population is immediate and problems can be identified
and dealt with relatively quickly.
In conclusion, because of our unique and peculiar
circumstances, we could never presume to suggest that
our own experience could be a viable model for larger
cities and countries. In the case of smaller-scale urban
environments, however, we may have some valuable
experience to share, not least in avoiding the many
errors and problems that we have made and
encountered along the way. The management of urban
environments can never be more than a work in
progress. Practices and policies have to evolve along
with the individuals and the society that they serve.
Adaptability, determination, perseverance and the
careful husbanding of resources will continue to be our
watchwords in this endeavour.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to Mr. Norberto Walter Pazos, UnderSecretary for Urban Planning and Housing, Ministry of
Infrastructure and Housing of Argentina.
Mr. Pazos (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I should like to express my pleasure at having
the opportunity to represent my country, the Argentine
Republic, in the General Assembly during this special
session to review and appraise the implementation of
the Habitat Agenda agreed to in Istanbul in 1996. The
world Conference on Human Settlements, which took
place in that city, set out a relevant framework that
enabled us to become acquainted with and organize the
important work that was being undertaken in this area
throughout the world.
I should like to emphasize that, in my country in
the 1950s, we included in the national Constitution the
explicit right to housing for all the inhabitants of the
country, and that right was ratified in the last
amendment to that document. The recommendations
made in Istanbul provide an incontestable set of
guidelines for the formulation of specific policies for
the sector that deals with settlements.
Being
responsible
for
elaborating
and
implementing such policies, I should like to take this
opportunity to give a brief account of the ground
covered by Argentina, as a signatory to the document

30

adopted during the Istanbul Conference, in fulfilling
our commitments.
There have been favourable developments in
security of tenure and access to land, housing and basic
services in the Argentine Republic. Indeed, with regard
to conditions of tenure, the recent trend has been
favourable: the percentage of households living in
conditions of insecure tenure has dropped from 17.6
per cent in 1991 to the current figure of 16.7 per cent.
As for the right to access to housing, the number
of housing units funded by the National Housing Fund
increased from 27,000 to 53,000 a year between 1990
and 2000. An important factor in this increase was the
decentralization of that Fund towards the provincial
governments.
Although public activities in the area of housing
have increased, there has been only a slight
improvement in the housing situation as compared with
the situation in the past. Indeed, according to recent
estimates, the percentage of households suffering from
an “absolute deficit” — households living in derelict
buildings or sharing with another household — has
decreased from 12.1 per cent to 9.3 per cent.
In order to focus specifically on that segment of
the population, in 1996 the Government embarked on a
programme for the improvement of housing and basic
infrastructure to help those with low incomes who are
not in a position to obtain funds from the National
Housing Fund. The aim of that programme is to make
adequate provision for housing needs and strengthen
and develop social planning, the productive and
technological sectors, employment among members of
such households, and groups acting on behalf of the
target population.
With regard to designing and deploying
innovative financing methods, in the mid-1990s the
real estate market began to expand quickly, and
legislation was adopted to encourage the provision and
expansion of resources destined for construction and
real estate activity. Furthermore, mortgage availability
was increased to make it easier for sectors previously
excluded from such financial means to gain access to
them.
The use of international credits from the
Inter-American Development Bank and the World
Bank in support of basic infrastructure and equipment,
in particular programmes for municipal financing and

A/S-25/PV.5

for the support of privatized water and sanitation
services, has resulted in a significant increase in
coverage for the population.
In an attempt to deal with the housing deficit, the
Government of Argentina is working to develop
programmes aimed at improving the quality of housing
for the lowest-income sectors and ensuring a reduction
in the cost of the housing units that are built so as to
increase productivity and obtain a greater yield from
the limited budgetary resources, thereby enabling
people with more limited economic capacity to gain
access to housing.
In this context, the national Government has
embarked on a low-cost housing programme that is
producing housing units that cost less than $9,000, with
repayment rates set at about $25 a month. These units
are well-designed and built of good-quality materials.
This ongoing project will contribute to the solution of
the housing problem. We are attempting to use
appropriate technology adapted to local conditions in
this project, including in terms of the materials used.
I should now like to emphasize some particular
aspects of other measures that have been adopted as
part of the housing policy currently being
implemented. Decentralization is being emphasized
and local government strengthened in order to optimize
the use of resources and ensure the implementation of
programmes. We are according importance to land
planning and the need to make progress in the creation
of local land funds that, by promoting social equity,
can help to prevent the spontaneous migration that is
resulting from changes taking place in the country
because of globalization and the prevailing form of
economic development. We are also working to include
environmental considerations in urban policy.
We believe that a State housing policy must
necessarily provide for continuity in order to ensure the
efficient fulfilment of the programme goals. Our
country can assure the Assembly that the main
programme objectives are shared by the principal
political parties, despite understandable differences in
other fields. Our Government has also been developing
a policy of openness and consultation with all those
involved in activities relating to settlements so that we
can learn about their opinions, proposals and creative
initiatives in the search for appropriate ways of finding
solutions for people.

The guidelines adopted by the national
Government in order to improve competitiveness will
certainly help to increase housing construction. We are
convinced that the secondary role played by the State
in helping to provide a solution to the main problems
of settlements for all will continue to help the many
sectors of the population that are unable to overcome
their poverty and exclusion so that they can gain access
to a better quality of life and enable them to look to the
future with hope.
We would like to support the request made by the
Minister of Housing of Panama to include in the report
on the special session the Declaration of Santiago with
regard to the updating of the regional plan for the
countries of Latin American and the Caribbean.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm the will
of Argentina, as expressed in Istanbul, to work towards
the fulfilment of the recommendations made at that
meeting, to which we will certainly contribute through
our analysis and evaluation, as well as what we have
learned from this special session.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmed El-Atrash,
Chairman of the delegation of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya.
Mr. El-Atrash (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): It is a great honour for me to represent my
country at this very important session to review
progress in the implementation of the outcome of the
Istanbul Conference and the Habitat Agenda.
I wish first of all to stress that, in any society,
shelter is among the fundamental issues related to
sustainable development. Shelter is something that
individuals and households need; it can have either a
positive or a negative effect on a society’s socioeconomic situation; it is a factor in determining the
urban fabric of any society, in conjunction with the
services provided by the society in question.
Rehabilitation of cities and the improvement of the
environment are a complex issue that must be
addressed to attain a sustainable social system and an
economic environment in which it will be possible to
bring about changes that revolve around the human
being.
The challenge we face here is not merely a
technical one. It relates also to empowering people to
enjoy a better life. Human beings are God’s mirror on

31

A/S-25/PV.5

Earth; they are the instrument, motor and purpose of
development. Thus, Libya’s policies emphasize that
shelter is key to sustainable human development.
Adequate shelter consistent with respect for human
dignity and promoting self-esteem is a fundamental
human right. Our policies have been supplemented by
the adoption of a number of laws on the provision of
adequate shelter for all. We have adopted a long-term
housing plan consistent with our policy of economic
restructuring. Here, we have set up credit and financing
programmes and have invited and encouraged financial
institutions, private-sector entities and individuals to
provide needed funding. We have also put in place
direct funding for housing for low-income groups. We
have concentrated not only on the quantitative side, but
are also taking account of qualitative elements in
urban, rural and desert areas.

participation in the economic activities of our society
was less than 4.15 per cent; as of mid-1995 it had risen
to 14.52 per cent. The percentage of women in schools
at various levels is about 50 per cent.

Let me now speak of our comprehensive health
strategy. We have set up a national programme of free
comprehensive preventive health-care services. We
have done what is necessary on the legislative,
management and organizational levels to provide
nutrition services, housing, environmental protection,
sanitation, drinking water, sewage facilities, waste
disposal and food inspection, industrial safety, among
other services, along with developing national capacity
in those areas.

Here, I would mention also the importance of the
issue of the landmines that remain from the Second
World War. These are found in large areas of Libya and
prevent us from harnessing our own agricultural,
forestry, grazing and underground water resources,
among others. They have also caused the death or
disability of hundreds of citizens. We continue to
appeal to the world’s conscience to help us remove
those mines. We were extremely happy at the recent
agreement between my country and Italy, by which
Italy promised to help demine these areas and to
provide compensation for their inhabitants.

To increase social integration and strengthen our
support for vulnerable groups, we have formulated a
human-resources development policy aimed at
attaining
sustainable
development
through
a
comprehensive approach. In Libya, as in other
societies, city dwellers account for a majority of the
population, in our case 85.4 per cent. Per capita income
averages $8,100. Individual income has grown thanks
to all the free social services that are provided, such as
free education, free health care, free housing and free
or cheap energy. The supply of jobs is high, and our
unemployment rate is lower than 5 per cent. We have a
comprehensive social security system along with a
variety of subsidies, including for food, education,
housing, et cetera.
On the question of gender, we have taken a
number of radical steps to empower women to attain
their rights as effective participants in society. Women
fully enjoy their rights, such as inheritance and
ownership of capital and movable assets such as land
and real estate. Those rights were established by
almighty God in the holy Koran. In 1964, women’s

32

We have prepared a country report on these
matters, which will be distributed in due course. The
report covers shelter, social development, poverty
eradication, environmental planning, economic growth,
good governance, decentralization and international
cooperation.
All these achievements have been possible in
spite of the unjust sanctions imposed by the Security
Council in 1992 and the unilateral sanctions imposed
by the United States of America in violation of all
international instruments and United Nations
resolutions.

Yesterday, the representative of the Zionist entity
launched an indiscriminate attack, using hateful
language about “terrorism” and accusing the victims
themselves of being terrorists — while it is his Zionist
entity that is based on State terrorism. It is there that
weapons of mass destruction and settler policies are
used. Let me remind the representative of the Zionist
entity of the massacres his country has committed.
Perhaps he will recall the destruction of the King
David Hotel and the Deir Yassin, Sabra and Shatilla
and Qana massacres. To date, his country has refused
to provide compensation for the victims of those
massacres. That is in addition, of course, to the Zionist
entity’s scorched earth policy, as epitomized by the
killing of children, women and old people and by the
destruction of houses, farmland and infrastructure in
order to replace the original inhabitants with new
settlers. That is why we were extremely surprised to
hear that representative say what he said.

A/S-25/PV.5

Since we want to support Habitat and United
Nations principles, we invite the international
community to take the necessary steps to help put an
end to the Israeli occupation of occupied Palestine,
including Holy Quds, and to provide the Palestinian
people with the assistance it requires for
implementation of the Istanbul Declaration.

National Housing Authority and the Government
Housing Bank. Moreover, the Thai Government has
established a Community Organizations Development
Institute as part of a governmental mechanism to
alleviate poverty by supporting communities in terms
of technical knowledge and funding in order to realize
community empowerment.

My country is striving hard to play its part in the
field of sustainable development, including in
economic, social and capacity-building areas, so that
we can be part of the international effort to achieve our
goals and serve our citizens. We shall cooperate with
all concerned parties on the regional and international
levels
to
achieve
comprehensive
sustainable
development. I am confident that the cooperative spirit
prevailing here at this special session will be conducive
to the creation of new principles and the charting of
new, safe roads enabling us to achieve our goals in this
millennium.

A liveable and healthy community is our priority
objective in the development of human settlements.
The Thai Government has undertaken necessary
measures to strengthen the social foundation and
promote equal distribution of economic benefits within
the society. His Majesty the King’s philosophy of
“Sufficient Economy”, which suggests a moderate way
of living, has been followed and has become the key
strategy for sustainable development and the wellbeing of the Thai people. This development approach
will promote people as the centre of development.

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Nathanon
Thavisin, Deputy Permanent Secretary of Bangkok
Metropolitan Administration of Thailand.
Ms. Thavisin (Thailand): I have the honour to
share with you, on behalf of the Thai delegation,
information on Thailand’s progress in implementing
the Habitat Agenda since the United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements (Habitat II) in 1996.
Thailand has experienced rapid urbanization, with a
current urbanization rate of 38 per cent of the total
population. Such rapid urban growth adversely affects
human settlements by creating many economic, social
and environmental problems.
The Thai Government has initiated and
implemented a number of policy measures in order to
fulfil the Habitat Agenda goals of achieving adequate
shelter for all and sustainable human settlements. It has
established the National Urban Development
Committee, one of the major assignments of which is
to monitor the overall implementation of the Habitat
Agenda.
With respect to the goal of adequate shelter for
all, Thailand recently achieved a country-wide home
ownership rate as high as 80 per cent — that rate is
56 per cent in Bangkok — with the collaboration of
both the public and private sectors and of partnerships.
The Thai Government will further implement its home
ownership strategy through such key agencies as the

With respect to environmental management, we
are introducing measures that encourage local
authorities to make their own decisions on
environmental land use and city planning and on their
implementation. The liveable and healthy city initiative
has been carried out successfully by the Bangkok
Metropolitan Administration, which has helped the city
of Bangkok to rise from the twenty-sixth place to
thirteenth in the ranks of the most liveable cities in
Asia. This was done under the auspices of the Bangkok
development programme contained in Bangkok’s
Agenda 21 plan, whose key principles, goals and
indicators for sustainable development involve
significant support to maximize the involvement and
participation of local communities in our policymaking and cooperative efforts, in order to improve the
quality of life.
Through our partners, which Thailand calls civil
society participants, many different programmes and
measures of good governance have been put into
practice. The involvement and participation of civil
society is guaranteed by law in all of these processes
and procedures, because it shows that such partnership
is vital to building the consensus required to achieve
civic development. The infrastructures cover economic,
environmental, health and other types of development,
and sustainable growth.
Thailand supports decentralization. The new Thai
Constitution, which was promulgated in 1997, provides
important roles and duties for local authorities and

33

A/S-25/PV.5

more public participation in the governmental
administration, thus leading to good governance. As
the head of the Thai delegation, I appreciate the
significance of the draft declaration on cities and
human settlements in the new millennium. The
dedicatory paragraphs also relate to support for the
consideration and protection of the family as the basic
unit of society, as well as to the importance of the
family in planning, development and management of
human settlements. I also appreciate the significance of
decentralization for the decision-making process and
transparency on the part of public authorities, and I
fully support the paragraphs speaking about the law of
sustainable development.
Thailand is preparing its Ninth National
Economic and Social Development Plan, a five-year
development plan that will cover the period from 2002
to 2006. The Ninth Plan’s Restructuring Strategy for
Sustainable Rural-Urban Development identifies key
issues to be addressed in order to improve the standard
of living and quality of life of the Thai people in both
rural and urban areas. It will emphasize the
empowerment of communities and civil society in rural
and urban development, rural and urban poverty
reduction, strengthened rural and urban linkage and
rural development, and urban competitiveness and
liveability, as well as area-based collaborative
planning. To ensure sustainable rural and urban
development, we need to strengthen rural areas as
effective agents of poverty reduction and urban areas
as key engines of economic competitiveness and
growth.
My delegation would like me to urge the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNCHS) to
play a more active role in supporting the
implementation of the Habitat Agenda, especially in
the Asia-Pacific region, which is a vast region with
more than 60 per cent of the world’s population. We
also recognize the important role of regional
commissions, in particular the Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, in assisting their
members, as well as in promoting regional cooperation
in the areas of urban and rural development and human
settlements.
Since international funding for human settlement
development programmes is declining, it is essential
for us to investigate innovative ways and means of
international cooperation. In this connection, there are
a number of institutions in Thailand, in particular the

34

Centre for Housing and Human Settlements Studies of
the National Housing Authority, the Housing
Information and Research Department of the
Government Housing Bank, and the Community
Organizations Development Institute, which stand
ready to cooperate with other Habitat Agenda partners.
However, there are many more United Nations bodies
that collaborate and work with Thailand under Habitat,
such as the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United
Nations Environment Programme, the Secretariat’s
Department for Economic and Social Affairs, and
various non-governmental organizations.
I am also pleased to inform the Assembly that
Thailand is going to host the Fifth Congress of the
Regional Network of Local Authorities for the
Management of Human Settlements, or CityNet, from
28 October to 3 November this year in Bangkok.
Finally, allow me to reiterate Thailand’s firm
commitment to enhancing the implementation of the
Habitat Agenda and to enhancing international support
and cooperation at every level in Thailand. Our downto-earth approach — or, as my friend from Indonesia
said, being truly sincere in action — will enable us to
implement this Habitat Agenda.
I would like to say to all United Nations Members
that I refuse to use the word “no”. I am opposed to
there being only talk, and never action. We should
commit ourselves to take action and to enjoy working
together as partners in support of the continuing
implementation of the Habitat Agenda.
I could not conclude my statement without
emphasizing the need to empower women, as I myself
was fully supported by my local government to rise to
my present position. The policy goal of every country
should include gender equity — that is, the
involvement of women and men and giving attention to
issues of concern to both. In addition, the gap between
women and men should be narrowed, as should be the
gap confronting vulnerable groups — children, the
elderly and the disabled — and the gap between rich
and poor. We cannot achieve success without helping
the least developed countries. I therefore request all
Habitat partners here to make a greater effort to work
with sincere minds, to take action and to increase
participation, in order to serve as a driving force for the
improvement and development of human settlements
worldwide in the twenty-first century.

A/S-25/PV.5

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to Mr. Tõnis Kõiv, Vice-Chairman of the
delegation of Estonia.
Mr. Kõiv (Estonia): It is a great pleasure to
participate in this meeting devoted to the fifth birthday
of the Conference on Human Settlements held in
Istanbul. I believe that this forum serves a useful
function in providing participants with an opportunity
to discuss in an open-minded and friendly setting
questions related to issues that are of concern to
everyone.
We fully support the statement made by the
Minister of Housing of Sweden, who spoke on behalf
of the European Union, and Estonia agrees with the
principles outlined therein. In this short presentation I
am going to try to define some of the issues and
indicate the role of local governments in the
elaboration and implementation of housing policy in
Estonia. Particular attention will be paid to current
trends with regard to the prognosis for developments in
housing policies in the immediate future.
On the national level the development of housing
policy in Estonia is the concern of the Ministry of
Economic Affairs. The Minister is responsible for
arranging for the involvement of different stakeholders
in the policy-making process. As a matter of principle,
representatives of both the private and voluntary
sectors are included in the development of policies.
The main principles of the housing sector are to
guarantee affordable dwellings, to increase the
administrative capacity of the third sector and to
specify public functions and improve the efficiency of
legislation on the basis of the Development Plan for
Estonian Housing to 2010. The plan was developed by
a broad-based expert committee, but it has not yet been
approved by the Parliament.
The central Government develops overall housing
policy, collects and analyses statistical materials,
informs the public about the situation in the housing
sector and about regional differences, helps guide the
privatization process, monitors housing policy
implementation and facilitates the renovation or
establishment of dwellings by residents. The interest on
housing loans is totally tax-free.
The Board of Consumer Protection should also be
mentioned. Its task is to protect the legal rights of
consumers and to speak on behalf of these rights. The
law on local government arrangements stipulates that

local authorities are responsible for local development
plans, the management and administration of local
housing policies, drinking water and sewage systems,
the commonweal, street cleaning, land-use planning
and the coordination and monitoring of construction
activities.
In addition, local authorities are responsible for
arranging the overall administration of the municipal
dwelling stock. Its financing is arranged as follows.
Municipalities finance commonweal expenses, street
cleaning, maintenance and repair work and the
maintenance of street lighting systems. Consumers
finance everyday repair work and the renovation of
dwellings, drinking water and sewage. Voluntary
organizations have been authorized to administer and
maintain dwellings, in particular via apartment
associations.
One noteworthy trend is that the share of nonprofit dwelling associations is predicted to increase.
Representatives of the non-profit sector are actively
participating in the legislative process. It is difficult to
define clearly the division of roles in the private sector
as compared to other sectors. The role of the private
sector in housing policy today is characterized by the
provision of financial services, including special
affordable loans. In the real estate business, the private
sector’s share of maintenance activities is increasing.
Nevertheless, in the larger cities, municipal enterprises
still account for a remarkable share of this work.
The role of arranging for housing today in
Estonia is mostly allocated to local authorities. When
comparing the functions of the public, non-profit and
private sectors, one can see that the dwelling stock and
municipal real-estate maintenance businesses are being
privatized with notable rapidity, and this trend is
predicted to continue in the future.
As an example of the national housing policy, I
would like to note the tax relief provided in relation to
interest payments for loans for housing or dwellings.
This programme is considered to be a clear indicator of
the Estonian national approach to solving housing
problems, and thus this programme involves the direct
implementation of the Habitat Agenda’s principles.
In observing the allocation of functions between
the public and private sectors, a direct conclusion can
be drawn — namely, the public sector’s share is
decreasing in every part of the housing sector. This

35

A/S-25/PV.5

trend is supported by the national policy’s clear support
for the non-profit sector.

of aggression that has been waged against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since August 1998.

In order to implement the Habitat Agenda, to
guarantee adequate shelter for all and develop
sustainable human settlements in an urbanizing world,
the Republic of Estonia has chosen to increase the role
of its residents so as to implement the principles of the
Habitat Agenda.

I should like here to take this opportunity to thank
and pay warm tribute to Secretary-General Kofi Annan
and the international community as a whole for their
tireless efforts to re-establish a lasting peace in my
country.

The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to Mr. Atoki Ileka, the Chairman of the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): It is an honour for my delegation to
address the General Assembly at this special session
devoted to the review and appraisal of the Habitat
Agenda.
My delegation would like to congratulate the
President and all the members of the Bureau on their
brilliant election and on the organization of this
important event, which is already serving as a
significant symbol and making a substantial
contribution to human development. As our work is
drawing to a close, our thoughts go out to all those
women and men who stepped forward, doing their best
to make it possible to hold these meetings. My
delegation would like in particular to congratulate the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Centre for Human Settlements
(Habitat) and all their staff for the high quality of the
preparatory work and for the efforts they made to
provide delegations with a pleasant and suitable
working atmosphere.
My country played an active part in the Istanbul
Conference on Human Settlements. There it endorsed
the universal objectives related to guaranteeing
adequate housing to all and the attainment of the
objective of ensuring the development of human
settlements that are more secure, healthy, livable,
equitable, sustainable and productive.
With respect to the question under consideration
by the Assembly, the absence of peace in my country
has been one of the major obstacles to the
implementation of the 1996 Habitat Agenda.
The poor results to date in this sector are but one
of the direct consequences of the multifaceted crisis
that has been gripping my country for more than a
decade — a crisis that is greatly exacerbated by the war

36

My Government, which hopes and believes that
peace will be restored very soon, has elaborated —
with the assistance of the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Centre for Human
Settlements — a national plan of action for human
settlements whose short-term priorities will be the
reconstruction of those structures that were destroyed;
the relocation of disaster victims and the homeless; the
revitalization of urban poverty zones; and the
strengthening of the capacities of local populations
through the establishment of the training and
facilitation structures necessary to create an enabling
environment.
The implementation of this plan requires
considerable funding, which the Republic of the Congo
cannot, unfortunately, provide by itself because of its
current situation. That is why my Government is
launching an urgent appeal to the international
community to commit itself, in a spirit of international
solidarity and at a scale commensurate with existing
needs, to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
attain the minimum objectives that it has set itself and
to provide the Congolese the right to a better life,
which they have been denied these many long years.
This should be done in particular through a resumption
of consistent structural cooperation, both multilateral
and bilateral, and access to the various mechanisms for
debt alleviation, including the modalities available to
countries emerging from armed conflict in the
framework of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
(HIPC) Debt Initiative.
Over the long term, the national human
settlements action plan advocates the following series
of actions.
As regards housing development, my Government
will be putting into effect appropriate policies for the
promotion of local building materials, the expansion of
rental housing, and the establishment of mechanisms
and structures for the financing of housing.

A/S-25/PV.5

Turning now to sustainable urban development,
the many deaths caused by the torrential rain last
month in Kinshasa served as a wake-up call to my
Government regarding the urgency of dealing with this
question. The elaboration of sound land-use policies is
now under way, and these will be crucial.
The development of institutional capacities
represents another important aspect of the plan. My
Government is now organizing training and retraining
seminars. Studies are also being carried out with a view
to the establishment of a national human settlements
monitoring agency, a school of urban planning and land
management, and the reform of structures for urban
planning and urban management.
Lastly, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
intends to resume international cooperation in this
field, in particular through the establishment of
partnerships with public and private institutions for the
development of real estate and the transfer of
appropriate building technologies; the resumption and
continuation of relations with the United Nations
system in the framework of strengthening the capacity
to fight against poverty; and through a revitalization of
structural cooperation to support the promotion of
human settlements in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to assure the
Assembly that my Government commits itself to the
full implementation of the recommendations we will be
adopting at the conclusion of this session, which will
guide our future work.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I give
the floor to His Excellency Mr. Basile Ikouebe,
Chairman of the delegation of the Republic of the
Congo.
Mr. Ikouebe (Republic of the Congo) (spoke in
French): It is in a constructive spirit, and feeling very
hopeful about the outcome of our current discussions,
that my delegation is participating in this session
devoted to the review of the implementation of the
global plan of action adopted at Istanbul five years ago.
The delegation of the Congo believes that this
session gives us the opportunity to send out a strong
signal in favour of a key aspect of human development:
the right to housing and the right to adequate shelter
for all.

After a grim period of civil war, which caused the
massive destruction of the social infrastructure,
housing, school and hospitals, and led to the massive
displacement of peoples, my Government would like to
seize this opportunity to reaffirm its full support for the
message of Istanbul as well as its commitment to be
guided by the principles therein in order to implement
the programme of rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development that was adopted.
The growing level of urbanization in the world
has not bypassed the Congo, 70 per cent of whose
population is concentrated in urban areas, mainly in the
two main cities — 40 per cent in the capital,
Brazzaville, and 20 per cent in Pointe-Noire. We must
manage this trend in order to minimize its attendant
risks.
The strategy for human settlements development
in the Congo has four aspects: security of tenure,
adequate shelter for all, the promotion of equal access
to credit, and essential urban services for the
populations involved.
The principles underlying our policies can be
summed up as follows: the preparation of an adequate
institutional, regulatory and legislative framework for
the development of human settlements; the
improvement of urban services — water, electricity,
telephone, transport infrastructure and road safety; the
fight against poverty; the safeguarding of a balanced
environment and the reduction of urban pollution; and
the strengthening of international cooperation and of
partnership between the State, the private construction
sector, decentralized local authorities and nongovernmental organizations.
Sectoral action is undertaken in a very complex
context. With regard to housing, emphasis is placed on
the need to guarantee secure land tenure; the
revitalization and reactivation of national programmes
for housing construction; assistance to people building
their
own
houses
through
labour-intensive
programmes; financing guarantees for housing for a
greater number of people; and access to essential urban
services.
With regard to social development and poverty
eradication, we need to support efforts to enhance
security and safety, particularly by giving victims of
war, and youth in particular, an alternative to violence.

37

A/S-25/PV.5

The development of community action and the
involvement of local authorities in urban development
constitute crucial priorities, and, in this framework, my
country attaches considerable importance to the
principle of gender equality, as set out in the basic law
of the Congo.
With regard to the environment, its clean-up
through the reduction of urban pollution, urban
planning and the alignment of policies and actions will
guarantee an environment conducive to the prevention
of disasters, both health-related and related to urban
growth.
Finally, we aim to strengthen small and microcompanies in order to stimulate job creation.
But given the challenges, the needs and the means
available, it is clear that a lot remains to be done.
However, the post-conflict programme which is
currently being implemented over a period of three
years demonstrates the desire of the authorities and of
the people of the Congo to move from a crisis situation
towards one of political and social stability, which has
to precede development. This programme is now in its
second year of implementation and has already enabled
us to reinforce the peace-building process and to regain
the trust of the people; to repair and rebuild basic
infrastructures — roads, railways, ports, airports; to
bring together bilateral and multilateral partners,
primarily those within the United Nations system, to
support the Congo; and to create conditions for
implementing urgent activities to benefit as many
people as possible, in particular those who were
victims of the war, as well as young people, women
and children. These programmes are being carried out
in other areas in order to bring about the transition to
development, particularly sustainable development.
I wish to conclude by launching an urgent appeal
to the international community, particularly to the
United Nations system, to provide substantial support
to my country’s efforts to eradicate urban poverty and
to implement the interim post-conflict programme.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 1st plenary
meeting, on 6 June 2001, I give the floor to Mr. Klaus
Toepfer, Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme.
Mr. Toepfer (United Nations Environment
Programme): First of all I would like to extend my

38

congratulations to the President of the General
Assembly, Minister Holkeri, and to the members of the
Bureau for the excellent leadership they have provided
to this special session of the General Assembly.
I am fully aware, of course, of the outstanding
importance of this special session of the General
Assembly, five years after the City Summit in Istanbul,
Habitat II.
There are at least three very good reasons for me,
as Executive Director of the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and as DirectorGeneral of United Nations Office in Nairobi, to
participate in this special session and to address this
plenary meeting.
The first reason is simply that the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat) and UNEP are
both headquartered in Nairobi, Kenya, in Africa; we
are the only two institutions of the United Nations
family headquartered in that great continent and
headquartered in the developing world.
We in Nairobi are all convinced that this location
is a great asset. It is a challenge to prove that the
development
of
human
settlements
in
an
environmentally sustainable manner is a precondition
for sustainable development and for fighting poverty.
We are aware, too, that we must have open and
constructive cooperation and that we can use
effectively the synergistic advantages of our colocation, as was requested by the General Assembly in
its important resolution 53/242, operative paragraph 9,
on the report of the Secretary-General on environment
and human settlements (A/53/463). In that resolution
the General Assembly
“Reiterates the importance of strengthening
the capacity and capability of the United Nations
Environment Programme and the United Nations
Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat), within
the framework of their existing mandates, in the
areas of information, the monitoring and
assessment of global and regional environmental
and human settlements trends”.
It is important to recall that the Assembly also
stressed in this regard, in paragraph 11 of that
resolution, “the need for adequate financial resources
as well as the need to avoid duplication of efforts”. It is
my sincere hope that the outcome of these deliberations
will also assist in achieving these objectives.

A/S-25/PV.5

I can inform this meeting of the special session
that we are committed to implementing these
recommendations in building on the work that has
already been done.

related to the management of transport and traffic, and
therefore to reducing air pollution, as well as creating
more effective approaches to waste and waste-water
recycling.

The second reason for my participation is that
five years ago in Istanbul I had the chance to be the
head of my country’s delegation to the City Summit. I
had the chance to learn a tremendous amount
concerning the global situation, the expectations for
human settlements and the urgent need to implement
the Habitat Agenda. There was, especially in the
developing world, the huge urbanization process, due,
on one hand, to the population increase and, on the
other hand, to the migration of people from the rural
areas to the cities. This was motivated by the hope for a
better life in the city, because those in rural areas were
faced with fewer job opportunities and the lack of
urban services such as electricity, clean water,
sanitation, health and education.

Sustainable cities also require social integration.
This is the challenge for local authorities, for
decentralization, for the principle of subsidiarity.
Mayors of cities and villages are directly linked to the
needs and burdens of citizens. They are courageous
enough to ensure transparent decision-making and to
encourage the needed participation of their citizens.
There must be ownership by the people living in urban
settlements, who must be proud of their cities or
villages in order to engender a cultural identity and
social inclusion in their neighbourhoods. These are
more important preconditions for safe cities linked to
functional integration than is the availability of
policemen or legal regulations.

This has resulted in the mushrooming of cities,
and the social disaster of divided cities full of social
tensions instead of cities with integrated functions and
social groups, which in turn results in the rapid
development of urbanization, the feminization of
poverty, social tensions and environmental burdens
with tremendous consequences for human health.
Therefore, there is an urgent need for balanced
development between the rural and urban areas. We
must bring city and urban functions to the rural areas.
Otherwise, the rural population will come to urban
areas.
Not only is this a problem in developing
countries, but more and more in cities in the developed
world too. The need to overcome the divided nature of
a city and to stimulate development to overcome
poverty requires a legal basis for secure tenure and
property rights such as those relating to home
investment and micro-enterprise, the people-driven
upgrading of slums and the need for microcredit that is
mainly targeted at women, who also have to play a
major role in city planning and development.
I learned in Istanbul that we must find ways to
decrease the ecological footprints of cities and urban
agglomerations that will increasingly burden the rural
areas in their future development. We must review our
efforts to make the population density of cities an
opportunity to maximize ecological efficiency, which
requires clear strategic decisions in city planning

There is an urgent need for the integration of all
groups of civil society — the young and the old,
families, especially women, professional planners and
elected parliamentarians and, last but not least, private
business — in the planning, management and running
of the urban infrastructure of settlements.
This, among others, is the message I learned in
Istanbul; a message even more important in the new
millennium, with the Millennium Declaration asking
for a world without slums. It was also a great privilege
for me to be asked by the Secretary-General to be
responsible for the revitalization process of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat). This
two-year endeavour fully benefited from the support of
Governments, through their permanent representatives,
especially in Nairobi, but also here in New York, and
was underpinned by the staff members of Habitat, as
well as by a competent revitalization team. Therefore,
it was a great pleasure for me last year to hand over the
responsibility for Habitat to my good friend and
colleague Anna Tibaijuka, totally in line with General
Assembly resolution 53/242, which asks that those
organizations have separate Executive Directors.
I want to congratulate Anna for her excellent
work and for her friendship and to extend my best
wishes for the great success of this special session here
in New York, with the hope that it will provide a
further impetus to the important tasks facing habitat for
the future of humanity.

39

A/S-25/PV.5

Finally, the third reason why I am here is that
there are huge synergetic effects between our two
respective mandates. I mentioned the Habitat Agenda; I
mentioned General Assembly resolution 53/242; but I
also have to mention Agenda 21 and, of course, its
chapter 7 under the headline “Promoting sustainable
human settlement development”.
This is the basic precondition for our common
dedication. This is the need for sustainable city
development as a precondition for sustainable
development overall. There is a need for the integrated
provision of an environmentally sustainable structure
of cities, sanitation, drainage and solid-waste
management. There is the urgent need to promote
sustainable energy and transportation systems, knowing
that, at least in the developed world, one third and even
more of all greenhouse gases are linked to
transportation. We know the interrelation between
poverty, shelter, environment and human health. There
is a need for environmentally oriented city planning. I
have mentioned only a few of the needs we have
identified. Therefore, I believe that our cooperation in
Nairobi between the Habitat Centre and the United
Nations Environment Programme is most needed, too,
in the preparatory work for the World Summit on
Sustainable Development to be held in September next
year in Johannesburg. I am looking forward to that
good cooperation and to the outcome of that meeting.
The success of this special session will be a huge
contribution to this process, as well as a tremendous
signal of the commitment of Member States and civil
society to addressing the challenges of human
settlements in close cooperation with local authorities
and in the framework of ensuring a sustainable future
for our cities, for our villages, for all people in their
shelter.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 1st plenary
meeting, on 6 June 2001, I give the floor to Ms. Jan
Peterson, President of Grassroots Organizations
Operating Together in Sisterhood.
Ms.
Peterson
(Grassroots
Organizations
Operating Together in Sisterhood): I am proud to
represent the Huairou Commission, which was actually
born over the past five years, starting in Huairou,
China, when Wally N’Dow had a vision for this
Commission, and got its legs in Istanbul. So we think
that, with all the struggles that many here have been

40

having in the implementation of the Habitat Agenda,
for the past five years we are one of the successes of
having started from an idea. We have built a global
partnership coalition of networks that includes
Grassroots Organizations Operating Together in
Sisterhood International, the Habitat International
Coalition Women and Shelter Network, the Women’s
Environment
Development
Organization,
the
International Council of Women, the Women for Peace
Network and the Asia Women and Shelter Network.
We now consist of more than 11,000 grass-roots
women’s groups and non-governmental organizations
working
together
with
local
authorities,
parliamentarians,
development
institutions
and
agencies.
At the heart of our approach is the mainstreaming
of grassroots women’s groups and poor communities in
addressing habitat issues, such as shelter and basic
services. In fact, while participants here have been
going over some of the documents line by line, we
have just come out of a five-day grass-roots women’s
international academy that started last Tuesday, where
more than 75 women from the North, South and East
got together to share good practices. We therefore feel
very fortunate to have the Habitat Agenda be a place
that actually gives real meat to the work that we know
that grass-roots women are doing everywhere. 0ur
focus has been on local governance, security of land
tenure and post-disaster and -conflict reconstruction.
We are about linking grass-roots women on the ground
through pure learning, identifying best practices and
facilitating grassroots women’s exchanges and
international academies so that grass-roots women can
really build their capacity by learning from each other.
We now come from across 55 countries in Asia,
Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, the European
Union and North America. The Huairou Commission
and its networks are at the centre of efforts to scale up
the implementation of the Habitat Agenda through
forging new community-State partnerships. In fact, we
call our three-year strategic plan a “new way of
partnering”. We are doing local-to-local dialogues with
local government, pure exchanges across countries and
within countries and transfers of knowledge from good
practices. These are key tools that we use to build
capacities, reshape policies and transform communities
and cities.
We believe that we have drawn lessons from
community-driven initiatives to secure land, shelter

A/S-25/PV.5

and basic services, build permanent housing and
community-owned infrastructure and counter myths
that are held by policy-makers. The first myth that we
are countering is that grass-roots efforts are small
scale. We know that grass-roots efforts are huge; there
are all different sizes and shapes of grass-roots efforts.
The problem they have had up until now is that they
have not had a chance to link up and to build networks
regionally and globally. The second myth is that grassroots women’s initiatives are necessarily low-tech. The
third myth is that grass-roots women’s groups are
beneficiaries and not partners. As can be seen from the
Slum Dwellers International housing display in the
lobby of the General Assembly building, most of the
innovations and practices are led by the poor. I would
add a fourth myth that, if you focus on women, you are
not strengthening the family. We know that women are
at the heart of the family and that having strong women
creates strong families.
Given that the majority of the settlements
interventions that work for the poor are communitydriven, we submit that grass-roots initiatives, in the
context of poverty reduction and gender-equitable
human settlements for all, are the mainstream.
Resources and opportunities are needed to ensure that
grass-roots women’s groups and communities have an
opportunity to publicly demonstrate the richness of
their strategies and solutions so that they can become
the basis for creating innovative, effective and
sustainable ways of implementing the Habitat Agenda.
We are not only in a globalizing world; we are in
a decentralizing world. Today, we are entering a new
institutional context where there is increased potential
for grass-roots women to scale up and upgrade their
settlements development initiatives by partnering with
local authorities and other public institutions. We have
been pleased with the new direction of the United
Nations Centre for Human Settlements (Habitat). We
certainly are pleased that the first woman Executive
Director, Anna Tibaijuka, has been appointed to that
position. We are pleased with the new direction of the
campaigns on local governance and secure tenure.
However, we are concerned that the Women and
Habitat Programme at the United Nations Centre for
Human Settlements (Habitat), the platform from which
large numbers of women’s groups could strengthen
their capacities and contribute to the institutional
process of mainstreaming gender-equitable settlement
practices, has disappeared. Moreover, by rescinding the

Women and Habitat Programme, we are concerned that
we might have delinked institutional knowledge from
interaction with the constituency that has produced
these innovations in the field of settlements, because
these programme changes carry the risk of
marginalizing the efforts at the grass roots, the work of
grass-roots women and communities. By these actions,
we think that Governments are seriously losing the
capacity to realize the opportunities to attain the full
implementation of the Habitat Agenda.
Thus, we call for concrete measures that seek to
transform public institutions and processes so that
women and poor communities worldwide are seen at
the centre of the transformation, fuelled by economic
growth and resource investments in habitat and cities.
This requires a strategic rethinking of the way we
work. We need to view grass-roots women and
communities as the problem-solvers in their
communities, rather than as clients or beneficiaries. In
redesigning policies, Governments need to recognize
that grass-roots women’s groups are the engines of
development in their communities.
The only choice that Governments have is to
exercise their commitment and show their political
will. We learned, for example, about how two women
from Mathari in Kenya met in the tent in Beijing.
GROOTS Kenya now has 200 local groups that have,
with very limited resources, formed a network. We
have seen groups like the Mother Centres in Germany
start with an idea that led to the setting up of 400 such
centres in Germany and 105 in the Czech Republic,
providing self-help services. We know that there is
tremendous energy on the ground with grass-roots
groups that are just looking for an opportunity to link
up and find partners.
We call for urgent action by which Governments,
the United Nations and multilateral agencies can
facilitate
the
mainstreaming
of
grass-roots
interventions and enhance sustainability and efficiency
by taking the following actions. They can create
institutional mechanisms for participation and
negotiation — that is part of what we are beginning to
do; we are considering how to look at those
institutional mechanisms in local cities. They can
establish decentralized financial mechanisms to
mainstream and scale-up grass-roots initiatives to
address habitat problems in cities — for example, we
forged a church alliance with churches and religious
groups in the United States who are going to create a

41

A/S-25/PV.5

fund to work in partnership with grass-roots groups in
Africa on the ground.
They can increase accountability through the
recognition and empowerment of grass-roots women’s
groups in the planning and monitoring of public
resources with local government. We have seen, in
India and other places, how bringing women into
power and building links with women in the
community has enhanced the efficient functioning of
those communities overall. Governments and
intergovernmental organizations can extend policy
support to grass-roots initiatives through information,
credit and capacity-building. They can facilitate new
community-based public and private partnerships to
ensure optimum utilization through the piloting of
efforts and scaling-up. We have successful groups; they
mainly need to be scaled-up and networked. Each
country represented here has many groups that are
doing successful work. They need to be able to share
their experiences with groups in other countries, build
capacity, get the technical people out of the middle and
let the people at the grass-roots level learn from each
other.
We would like to conclude by stating that those
recommendations are the key to the successful

42

implementation of the Habitat Agenda, and that people
would not be as depressed about the Habitat Agenda if
they looked to the ground and saw the successes that
are taking place there. We have come out of the first
five years, and we are now launching local-to-local
dialogues. We are looking to establish partnerships
with local authorities in different countries to hold
dialogues with grass-roots women’s groups. We are
continuing to identify good practices of women at the
grass-roots level, and we do not want them just to be
on a database; we want to make sure that the good
practices actually become part of peer learning and
grass-roots academies. We want to establish a
commission on women to ensure that they are at the
centre of disaster response, because we have found out
from our groups in India and Turkey that when we
include women in disaster response we get a three-fold
return on the dollar — the women live in those houses
and communities. That does not mean we do not want
the men there.
We are going to continue our grass-roots
academy, and we welcome partnership from the
Governments and cities that really want to move
towards this new vision.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.
