TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

st

MEETING: 15 AUGUST 1969

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1501) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . . . .

Page

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , , . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . .

1

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon
addressed to. the President of the Security Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9387) . . . . . + . . . . . .

S/PV.l501

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appearsor in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Sent&y Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN

HUNDRED

AND FIRST

Held in New York on Friday,

MEETING

15 August 1969, at 10.30 a.m.

President: Mr. J. DE PINIES (Spain).

you how much I look forward to taking part in the debates
of the Security Council, particularly under your most
distinguished chairmanship. I have only just arrived in New
York, and I came straight to this extremely important
debate from an ocean liner. I do not have the experience
that you and my other colleagues have in the practice and
the work of the Security Council, and 1 hope you will make
due allowance for that.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 501)

4. However, today my task is a fairly easy one, because all
I have to do is repeat a policy of my Government which is
well known and ‘which has in no way changed. This is that
we deplore all violations of the cease-fire in the Middle East
and all acts of violence there. It is all too clear from the
recent history of the Middle East that violence breeds more
violence and that, so long as the spiral of attack and
retaliation is allowed to continue, so long will the people of
the area be denied the peace and prosperity which are their
birthright.

1. Adoption of the agenda.

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9385).
3. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent
Representative of Israel addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/9387).

5. My Government has watched with the greatest anxiety
the progressive breakdown of the cease-fire in the Middle
East in recent weeks, a situation to which our SecretaryGeneral has drawn attention in a series of messages to this
Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

6. As the distinguished representative of France reminded
us yesterday [1#99th meeting/, this unfortunate situation
flows from the fact that there is still no peace in the Middle
East. I need hardly repeat my Government’s pledge to do
all in its power to help bring about a comprehensive
political settlement, based on the principles and provisions
of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967 and leading to the establishment of a just and lasting
peace. But meanwhile it would seem to us, as evidently it
does to a number of delegations which have already
expressed their views in this debate, that constructive
thought ought to be given to means of preventing further
incidents in this sector, perhaps through reinforcing the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO),
or to any other means of conciliation.

The situation in the Middle East
letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of Lebanon addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9385)
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 August 1969 from the Permanent Representative of Israel addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9387)

1. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Spanish): In accordance with the decision taken previously by the Security
Council, I shall invite the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel to take places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon) and Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) took places at the Council
table.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from Spanish): The Council will now continue its consideration of the question on
the agenda.
3. Mr. WARNER (United Kingdom): Mr. President, allow
me, as the newest member of this important body, to tell

’ 7. Since my Government is opposed to the use of violence,
we naturally deprecate any policy of reprisals. It follows
that my Government deplores the actions complained of in
both the letters which are before the Council. If it is true,
as the Permanent Representative of Israel has stated in his
letter contained in document S/9387, that “f’bventy-one
attacks by shelling, firing and mining were carried out
against inhabited localities in Israel”, then in that casethere
has been provocation. But such provocation could not
justify the bombing attack on villages in southern Lebanon
which are described in the Lebanese letter contained in
1

thus acknowledging their special responsibility for prevent.
ing the conflict in the Middle East from endangering
international peace and security. Ambassador Jarring re.
mains ready to renew his efforts to assist the parties to
reach agreement in accordance with the Security Council
resolution of 22 November 1967. Maintenance of the
cease-fire in the meantime is the essential prerequisite for
progress on the political level.

document S/9385. My Government regrets the loss of
civilian life and extends to the Lebanese Government and
to the bereaved families its most heartfelt sympathy. It is
particularly sad to see that the area of conflict has been
extended to Lebanon, which, as we have been reminded in
this debate, has been foremost in the pursuit of peace and
conciliation.
8. Thus my delegation deplores acts of provocation and
deplores also acts of reprisal. This specific Israeli attack,
like all reprisal actions, will not achieve the effect intended.
It has simply led to deepened bitterness and suffering and
to loss of life among civilians. We hope that the Council will
recognize that all acts of violence are to be deplored.

13. The Secretary-General in his report of 30 July
[S/9368, para. 8/ appealed to-the members of the Security
Council, both individually and collectively, to do all within
their power to influence events in the Middle East in a new
direction. We now have an opportunity to respond to that
appeal. My delegation believes that we can best do so by
making it clear that no violations of the cease-fire can be
condoned or justified and by calling upon the parties to
co-operate constructively in the efforts to reach a peaceful
settlement.

9. Mr. JAKOBSON (Finland): The pattern of the events
that have led to the convening of this meeting is grimly
familiar to members of the Security Council. Lebanon
accuses Israel of unprovoked air attacks against Lebanese
villages. Israel claims that Palestinian commandos have been
permitted to use Lebanese territory for attacks against
Israeli villages. On both sides people have been killed,
among them civilians.

14. Mr. KHATRI (Nepal): The Government of Lebanon
has requested that the Security Council meet to consider
the Israeli air attack on its territory on 11 August 1969.
The Council meets in the wake of increasing violence in the
Middle East. The drift of events is unmistakably towardsa
serious aggravation of the situation. Long-term interests of
peace in that region are apparently sacrificed in order to
gain immediate political advantages which are, at best,
illusory and short-lived. Public statements attributed to
highly placed officials appear to be at variance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, and specifically with the pence formula set forth in
the November 1967 resolution of the Security Council. It is
sought to obstruct the peace efforts undertaken in terms of
that resolution. The cease-fire effected by order of the
Security Council is violated daily, particularly in the Suez
Canal sector. Repeated appeals by the Secretary-General for
respect for the cease-fire are disregarded. Targets of
violence include not only military installations but, more
often than not, civilians and objects of public utility.

10. The essential facts are not in dispute. The issue of
responsibility is another matter. The Government of Israel
seeks to justify its air raids on the grounds of self-defence.
The Government of Lebanon, while declaring its support
for the cause of the Palestinian commandos, disclaims
responsibility for their activities. Opinions differ on the
degree of responsibility that each party in this case must
bear for what has happened. But clearly both i:overnments
have an equal obligation to maintain the cease-fire which
both have agreed to respect. That, in our view, is the crux
of the matter.
11. The breaches of the cease-fire that have taken place
between Israel and Lebanon are serious enough in themselves. But to treat them in isolation would be to shut one’s
eyes to the realities of the situation in the Middle East.
Fighting occurs daily, on various levels and by various
means, throughout the area. The intensity and the scope of
violence have increased steadily. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly drawn the attention of the Council and of the
parties to the dangers of the situation. He has said that
there has never before been such complete and sustained
disregard for a cease-fire ordered by the Security Council.
He has also pointed to the unjustified risks to which the
unarmed observers of UNTSO are being subjected. In fact,
the present trend, if allowed to continue unchecked,
threatens to bring down the entire structure of the
internationally supervised cease-fire in the Middle East. If
that happens, it will put an end to efforts to establish peace
in the area by international action and through the use of
United Nations services.

15. The motives and policies of the Governments are
explained in terms of the concepts of self-defence, sclfdetermination and national security-concepts
which are
seemingly unimpeachable. But, judging from the prevailing
situation, it would appear that the actions of most
Governments in the Middle East are far removed from the
normal standards of conduct, Much as they have acted in
the very name of those time-honoured concepts, they have
regrettably failed to contain the situation, much less
improve it.
16. With regard to the present case, as evidenced by the
statements made by the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel and their letters to the President of the Security
Council in documents S/9385 and S/9387, the facts of the
matter before the Council are simple enough.

12. Of course a cease-fire by its very nature is a temporary
arrangement. It is a first step towards making peace, As the
months go by, the lack of progress towards agreement is
bound to strengthen those on both sides who do not believe
in the possibility of real peace or who do not want it. We in
this Council cannot afford to despair of a peaceful solution
of the ,conflict. The four major Powers, permanent members of the Security Council, will be continuing their talks,

17. The Government of Lebanon accepts that commando
fighters have their bases of operation against Israel in
Lebanese territory but maintains that it should not be held
responsible for their activities,
18. As for the Government of Israel, it accepts responsibility for the 11 August air attack on the commando
2

encampment in Lebanese territory, but insists that the
attack was a measure of self-defence carried out in answer
to the series of hostile armed activities from across the
border.

felt it desirable to bring the complaint concerning the
Israeli air attack before the Security Council.
26. Because of the foregoing considerations, and with the
highest regard for the views of the Government of Lebanon,
as well as those of the Government of Israel, we feel that
the present discussion in the Council will contribute to the
vital peace efforts if we renew our call for scrupulous
respect for the cease-fire and faithful implementation of the
decisions of the United Nations.

19. Those facts may be simple, but my delegation feels
that the Security Council is confronted with two basic
questions arising from them.
20. First, is a Government justified, in the name of
self-defence, in launching air attacks on hostile encampments in a foreign State whose official participation in the
hostile activities has been disowned?

27. The PRESIDENT (translated porn Spanish): The next
speaker on my list is the representative of Lebanon, on
whom I now call.

21. Second, can a Government claim immunity from
responsibility for the hostile armed activities carried out
from its territory against a foreign State?

28. Mr. GHORRA (Lebanon): We in the Lebanese delegation are most grateful to the representatives seated around
this table who have shown their concern about the
developments in Lebanon, and particularly for the sympathy which they have extended to the innocent victims of
the Israeli attack against villages in southern Lebanon. We
are also grateful to the various delegations that have
extended their support to Lebanon.

22. We deplore acts of violence and express our deep
sympathy for the victims of those acts, more particularly
for the innocent civilians. But in spite of our feelings of
repugnance for the violence and sympathy for its victims,
we in the Security Council cannot avoid seeking answers to
these basic questions. We may appreciate the motives which
guide the behaviour of the Governments and peoples of the
Middle East, but so far as the delegation of Nepal is
concerned we are inclined to answer both questions in the
negative.

29. The Lebanese delegation stated in its opening remarks
(1498th meeting] that Lebanon had scrupulously abided
by the Armistice Agreement of 23 March 1948 and the
cease-fire, and it still abides by them. The Armistice
Agreement is still valid in law; we respect it, and we respect
our obligations under it. Members of the Armistice Commission are still welcome and free to perform their duties
on Lebanese territory, But Israel has unilaterally nullified
the Agreement and obstructed the carrying out of the
duties of the members of that Commission.

I). 23. Violent actions on the part of a Government carried
out in an excessive concern for security cannot be justified,
as it would seem that fhe I1 August air attack on foreign
territory was far in excess of the strict requirement of
self-defence. We also think that no Government should
allow its territory to be used for armed activities against a
foreign State and that it cannot escape a measure of
responsibility for those activities.

30. In the discussion in the Council much emphasis has
been laid on the cease-fire. The cease-fire, in our opinion,
was not meant to freeze the lines of Israeli occupation of
the lands of free Arab States. Rather, it was meant to be a
prelude to a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. More
than two years have elapsed since the adoption by the
Council of resolution 242 (1967), which called for such a
settlement.

24. The concern of the Security Council for peace in the
region cannot, in our opinion, be limited to the recent
charges of violence and counter-violence between Lebanon
and Israel. The matter must be viewed in the broader
context of the worsening situation in the Middle East. We
must insist on absolute respect for the cease-fire and all
other resolutions of the Security Council. We must all
direct our efforts towards attaining an honourable peace in
the area. The formula for this honourable peace is
contained, in the most objective manner, in the 22
November resolution 242 (1967) of the Council, which
fulfils all essential requirements, including the withdrawal
of Israeli forces from the occupied territories, an end to the
claim or state of belligerency, and the right of each State in
the area to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries. The duty of all of us is to assist in the peace
efforts currently being made with a view to the implementation of that resolution.

31. The Israeli representative does not cease to repeat
before the Council-and he has done so again in the present
case-that the intention of his Government is to teach a
lesson to the Arab countries. The teaching of a lesson by
the self-centered and arrogant Israeli power has had only
one effect so far: to sharpen the resistence of the Arabs
against the ominous and criminal acts of Israel, It tends to
widen the area of conflict and increase the dangers to the
peace and security of the Arab people. The indiscriminate
bombing of economic projects, towns and villages, the
raining of death and terror and napalm and destruction
upon the civilian population can only heighten their anger
and their determination to resist, for self-protection and
defence.

25. In the conflict in -the Middle East, we have always
regarded the Government of Lebanon as a follower of a
policy of moderation least likely to aggravate the situation.
Lebanon is a small, non-military State and poses no real
threat to the security of any State. Therefore, we are
particularly sorry and concerned that this State became
involved in the continual state of warfare in the area and

32. Israel has to come to its senses and realize once and
for all that its acts of terror and intimidation will not yield
peace. Only by desisting from aggressive acts, by respecting
the edicts of this august body and this body itself, by
collaborating with the Powers seeking tirelessly to find a
3

and security, will do well to look at the root of the whole
Palestinian problem, at the sufferings and fate of the
Palestinian people, the rightful owners of the land, the
cities, the villages, the farms and the orchards which they
built and cultivated there, through a long lineage back
through history, with their blood, sweat and toil,

peacefui solution to the whole problem, can Israel hope to
see the beacon of peace which it claims it is searching. The
Security Council by resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967 has opened the way to reaching that goal, but Israel
keeps shutting the door and stifling every effort in that
direction. A declaration on its part that it would be ready
and willing to implement and facilitate the implementation
of that resolution would clear the way for an over-all
settlement on the basis of peace with justice for all-and
primarily for the most injured party: the Arab people of
Palestine. Let Israel remove its road blocks from the path to
negotiations; let Israel stop its ominious calls for annexing
this or that part of the occupied territory; let it state
emphatically its readiness to withdraw from the occupied
territories; let it heed the admonition of this Council that
territorial conquest and expansion by war are inadmissible
under the rule of law of the United Nations. Then a real
atmosphere for peaceful settlement will be created. Lebanon has done everything in its power to promote that
atmosphere for peaceful settlement.
1,

37. The latest attack on villages in southern Lebanonseven open, defenceless civilian villages-was unprovoked by
the Lebanese Government and people. As we have stated
before, we have done everything, and we are doing every
thing, in our power to promote conditions of peace in our
area. If Israel had any valid reason for complaint it should *
have brought its complaint earlier to the attention of the
Security Council and not waited until Lebanon submitted
its complaint.
38. Wehave great faith in the Security Council,It isby its
action in dealing with such murderous, wanton and
unprovoked attacks against Lebanon that the Security
Council can strengthen our confidence, at the sametime
creating the atmospherewhich is essentialfor a peaceful
settlementin the Middle East.

33. But the crux of the matter is that Israel still refuses to
submit to international legalities, to moral laws and to
United Nations decisions and resolutions. If any United
Nations Member State ought to comply most scrupulously
and devotedly with them, that Member State is Israel, for
Israel owes its very existence to this Organization. It is the
only State which did not have any territorial, political or
legal existence or status before the partition plan of 1947.
That plan fictitiously carved out of Arab Palestine an area
historically and legally belonging to the Christian and
Moslem Arabs of that land, and turned it into what has
become a springboard for Israeli expansionist plans in the
Arab Middle East. It follows that if Israel were really acting
in good faith towards its creator or its raison d’etre, the
United Nations, it would be the first to adhere to the
principles and provisions of the United Nations Charter and
to heed the calls and warnings to desist from a repetition of
its acts of violence against the Arabs and its practices
against the Arab people in the occupied territory which
violate their human rights,

39. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Spanish):The next
speakeron my list is the representativeof Israel,on whomI
now call.
40. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): The Council’sdeliberations
on
the Israeli and Lebanesecomplaints arenow in their third
day and the facts that have emergedare clear.Irregular
terror forceswhich have establishedtheir baseson Lebanese
soil, andcausedno few problemsfor Lebanonitself, havein
recent weeksunleasheda campaignof armedattacksagainst
Israel. Theseattacks have consistedfrequently of shelling
Israeli border villagesand towns from Lebanese
territory.
There hasalsobeen a seriesof ever-increasing
saboteurand
mining raids directed primarily againstthe civilianpopulation of Israel.
41. Despite attempts madeto impressupon the Lebanese
authoritiesthe needto put an end to thesegraveviolations
of the cease-fire,the actsof aggression
havecontinued.The
Government of Israel, responsible for the safety and
security of its citizens, found itself constrainedto act in
self-defenceagainstthe attackers.

34. The Palestinian liberation movement sprang and still
springs from the masses of Arab Palestinian refugees
numbering 1..Smillion. It also springs from the Arab people
inside Israel. The valiant resistance fighters are being joined
by their brethren everywhere; the movement is spreading
and growing stronger every day. The Palestinian people
have strong grievances. A great injustice has been done to
them.

42. What is the Lebanesereaction to thesefacts? There
wasno reaction at all availablein the statementmadetoday
by the representativeof Lebanon.In hisopeningstatement
on 13 August [1#98th meeting], the representativeof
Lebanon was allowed to ramble freely from the question
under consideration to attacks on the Jewishpeoplefor
supportingIsrael, to abuseagainstGovernmentswhichfeel
that Israel’s defencesagainst continuing Arab aggression
should not be allowed to falter, and to similar other
venturesin wanton hostility. On the subjectmatteron the
agendathere was in fact only one Lebanesereaction:a
ridiculous denial that armed attacks from Lebanese
terrltory against Israel have taken place and a somewhst
cautiousattempt to disclaimknowledgeof the existenceof
the terror basesin southern Lebanon. This is a methodof
argumentdevoid of both seriousness
andhonesty.It isnot
the first time that the delegationof Lebanonhasemployed

35. It has been argued during the debate that the rounds
of diplomatic talks which have taken place in the last few
months were essential in order to find a formula by means
of which the security of Israel would be guaranteed, But
what about guarantees for the security of one and a half
million Christian and Moslem Arab Palestinians? What
security is being sought for their future? Are they to rely
on the few miserable millions handed out year after year by
United Nations charity? Are they to rely on seven cents a
day per person for subsistence in the hope of a better, a
decent, future?
36. The Security Council, and especially the four big
Powers, which have assumed special responsibility for peace
4

it in the Council, Indeed, President Helou of Lebanon
himself testified that the Lebanese Government used this
method in the Security Council in the debate in December
1968. The Beirut daily,AZ-Uhlyaf, wrote on 1 July 1969:

force. There was no way of raising the issue in the open
since Lebanon had submitted a complaint against Israel to
the Security Council in which Lebanon insisted on the
argument that there were no saboteurs in Lebanon.”

“President Helou said inter alia: ‘On 3 November 1968
the number of saboteurs in Lebanon did not exceed a few
hundreds and we were then dealing with their problem.
But suddenly they began issuing propaganda publications
against us and their numbers rose over several thousands.’
The President added: ‘Lebanon had stressed in the
Security Council that there were no saboteur bases on its
territory in order to obtain a condemnation of Israef by
the Council.’ ”

47. Among the arguments put forward by the representative of Lebanon, in an obvious manoeuvre to veil and
distort the truth, is the allegation that, for some inexplicable reason, the Israeli defence action of 11 August was
directed not against the bases of the attackers of IsraeI, but
against civilian villages. As I indicated in my statement of
13 August by quoting from communiqu& of the terror
command, the saboteur organizations do not share the
Lebanese representative’s qualms about admitting that
they-not
civilian villages-were the targets of the Israeli
defence action. The Lebanese press itself has made no
attempt at all to conceal this fact. Thus the daily, AZiVahar,
of 12 August reports:

43. In the light of President Helou’s revelation, what
credulity can be attached to Lebanese denials and claims in
the present debate? In coming to consider the conclusions
from our deliberations, members of the Security Council
will undoubtedly weigh the facts as they are on the one
hand, and the frivolous attempts of the Lebanese representative to mislead the Council, on the other.
44. The existence in southern Lebanon of the encampments of terror organizations has been widely recorded and
reported. In addition to the eye-witness accounts and
statements cited by me on this matter on 13 August, I
should like to refer to a lengthy and detailed list of all the
terror bases in the area of Israel’s action, published on 12
August-three days ago-in the Lebanese daily, AZ-Hayat:
“The Saiqa group is concentrated in the Shiva fortress
which is used by the local population in winter time as a
school. The fortress is on a plateau looking towards Israel
and it contains fortified rooms. It is surrounded by
buildings; most of them are under the supervision of the
saboteurs or local residents supporting their actions.
‘<The Fatah group is concentrated mainly in Ein Kania
near Shuya, each of the villages 30 kilometres from the
Israeli border. Three days ago the Fatah group transferred
a part of its anti-air-craft guns to the Shiba farm, after it
was known that Israel might attack from the air. The
farm Shiba is on Lebanese territory.
“The bases of the Palestine Liberation Front are in
Rashia area.”
Then the Lebanese newspaper adds: “The Palestine Liberation Front on both its factions is concentrated in most of
the localities which were bombed by Israel.”
45. These are the localities which the Lebanese representative chooses to describe as “innocent villages”,
46. On 12 July 1969 the Beirut daily Al-Hayat reported a
statement by the former Lebanese Minister, Raymond
Edde, in which he said:
“The saboteurs had entered Lebanon in a small number
(sixty men) before the formation of the Cabinet of Four
of which I was a member. The problem of the saboteurs
was raised <during the term of that Cabinet, but the Prime
Minister, Abdallah El-Yafi, refused to expel them by

“People who came from the villages in the Aroub area
said that the Israeli attack against the terrorist bases took
place whilst the saboteurs were having their lunch.”
48. It seems that while the representative of Lebanon tries
to mislead the Security Council, as he did in the debate of
December 1968, the Lebanese public knows the truth.
49. As for the denial by the representative of Lebanon
that the attacks on Israeli towns and villages along Israel’s
northern border were carried out from Lebanese territory,
suffice it to refer again to the communiques published
almost daily by the various terror organizations and
broadcast by Radio Beirut, Damascus, Cairo and Ammanfor instance the “Voice of Al-Fatah” broadcast on 13
August over Radio Cairo, a statement in which, as in the
past, no attempt at all was made to conceal the presence of
their military bases on Lebanese territory and their responsibility for the attacks on Israel settlements and towns. The
AI-Fatah declared, inter-alia: “Our reply was given in the
attack against Qiryat Shemona before the blood of our
fighters in the hills of Lebanon had dried up,”
50. The facts are clear; the facts are undeniable; and the
question that still remains open is whether the conclusions
drawn from them will contribute to the observance of the
cease-fire or, regrettably, weaken it even further.
5 1. There is one important point on which the Lebanese
and Israeli delegations appear to be in agreement, as
evidenced by the Lebanese statement on 13 August and
again the one made today: Terror warfare, we agree-or
operations by fedayeen units, as the Arab Governments
prefer to call them-are not new; they have always been
part of the twenty-year conflict and the Arab warfare
waged against Israel since 1948. The Lebanese representative chooses to explain away this type of warfare by
presenting it as the action of disgruntled refugees from
Palestine. This is, however, an old and rather unconvincing
claim. It was used by Egypt with reference to thefedayeen
in the fifties, until, for internal reasons, President Nasser
began to speak freely and openly of the fact thatfedayeen
units constituted an integral part of the Egyptian armed
forces. And the same argument was put forward in the
Security Council in the sixties by Syria. That was belied by

the open, official support, training, financing and operational direction given to the Syrian Al-Fatah terror squads
by the Government and army of Syria.

tremendous economic resources and apply their capal&
ities to raise the standard of living of their peoples.
“.. .

One thing may help the Jewish people of PaIestine
-to resolve within themselves sincerely and whole.
heartedly to live in peace with their neighbours-and then
not a single aircraft will be needed.” [149&h meetillg,
paras. 28 and 37.1

52. The Lebanese admission that terror warfare has been
pursued against Israel for two decades, coupled with the
allegation that it has been carried on by Palestinian refugees
opposed to Israel’s very existence, has, of course, a sinister
connotation. And this is, in fact, the philosophy of the
Shukairy’s and such nazi collaborators and war criminals as
Hajimeen El-Husseini. The world must take note of the fact
that this is now an argument officially put forward by
Lebanon. Particular gravity must be attached. to it, in the
light of a statement by the President of Lebanon, broadcast
on Radio Beirut only last month. Mr, Helou declared on
5 July: “I have not been pondering, during the last two
years, the idea of a political solution. The conflict between
Israel and the Arabs does not concern territory or policy.”

“It is not too late to secure observance of the cease-fire
between Lebanon and Israel. It is not too late for the
Security Council to call on Lebanon to abide by its
cease-fire obligations. Such a call may well prove of
cardinal importance to future developments in the area.”
[Ibid., para. 87./
And indeed, only this morning we heard statements in the
same vein.

53. Now, that indeed is not mincing words. We are in fact
at the grass-roots of the conflict: Arab denial of the Israel
people’s right to independence and sovereignty. It is
evident, if this is the attitude, that efforts to settle the
conflict and to move from the state of cease-fire to a state
of lasting peace will be faced with considerable obstacles.
Members of the Security Council will undoubtedly ponder
over these facts before reaching a conclusion, for a
conclusion that could lend itself to an interpretation of
being an encouragement to a misrepresentation of facts,
disclaimers of responsibility, unbridled hostility and continued warfare may prove of the utmost gravity in the
present situation in the Middle East.

57. The two statements I have quoted, whatever be the
positions adopted by the persons who made them, when
put side by side are seen to have a very important strand
running through them: the desire for peace between the
two countries. That is our third consideration.
58. The fourth inevitable consideration is that one of the
parties to the conflict has reiterated before this Council its
respect for and adherence to the Armistice Agreement
between Israel and Lebanon. In the words of Mr. Ghorra:
“The Lebanon civil and military authorities have done
everything in their power to abide scrupulously by
both”-that is, the Agreement and the cease-fire-“and to
maintain and promote peaceful conditions on our soutlb
ern border.” [149&h meeting, para. 21.1

y 54. As for the remarks made today by the representative
of Lebanon concerning a peaceful settlement, it is superfluous to engage in an abstract debate on the degree to
which the respective parties desire peace. Labanon knows
full well that it can have peace with Israel right here and
now. All it has to do is sit down at the peace table with
Israel. Lebanon also knows that it can have tranquillity on
the border whenever it so decides. All it has to do is to
abide scrupulously by the cease-fire.

In short, machinery recognized by this Council does exist
for settling any conflicts between the two, provided both
are prepared to use it instead of resorting to arms.
59. The final consideration stems from the fact that this
conflict comes at a time when the Big Four, with the
blessing of this Council, are seriously searching for a
solution to the whole Middle East crisis. Is it appropriate
now to extend the theatre of war to the IsraeI-Lebanese
border, where a degree of relative tranquillity has been
apparent for a long time?

55. Mr. MUUKA (Zambia): As Zambia makes its intervention in this debate, we should like to be guided by the
following very important considerations: first, Zambia
enjoys fraternal relations with both Israel and Lebanon. We
cannot therefore but share in the miseries and successes of
both-a position quite untenable when the one is lodging a
serious complaint against the other. In the circumstances,
my Government can only adhere to the principle it always
cherishes: namely, to judge the case purely on its merits.

GO. Mr, President, I remain mindful of the very wise
counsel you gave yesterday: that this debate should not
degenerate into an unhelpful general one. Furthermore, I
am equally convinced-in the words used by my Ambassador when addressing this Council on 1 April 1969 when it
was examining the Jordanian complaint against Israel: “that
the tragedy before us needs cool heads, and whipped-up
emotions are certainly not likely to be in the interests of
peace in the area”. f 1472nd meeting, para. 24.1

56. The second consideration stems from our equally
firmly held conviction that’ force solves no problems;
rather, it aggravates situations. We believe that for there to
be peace among nations it is imperative for States to desist
from the use of force, in whatever manner, against others.
Also pertinent to the matter before the Council are two
statements made by the representatives of Lebanon and
Israel respectively, as follows:

61. After carefully listening to all the arguments, mY
delegation is extremely perturbed to see that one of the
parties to the conflict continues to believe in a PohCY of
reprisals across international boundaries and that it executed it, Israel continues to hold its neighbours fully
responsible for any action on the part of uprooted

“The Arab countries and peoples have sought, and
sincerely seek, peace; for in peace they can use their
6

Palestinians to regain their inalienable rights, irrespective of
whether those neighbours are involved in any such action.
It should be of interest to know what Israel would say if its
neighbours in turn pointed an aggressive finger at those
countries whose Jewish communities have been financing
its policy of so-called reprisals, However, perhaps this is of
academic interest. What is more disturbing is that Israel has
resorted to arms when it could have complained about
those twenty-one incidents to the observers under the
Armistice Agreement or to the Security Council itself.
62. The Israeli air attack, severe as it was, becomes even
more unpardonable when one realizes that napalm was
used-and on civilian villages. Apart from the tragic loss of
innocent lives such an attack usually causes,it is bound to
harden the feelings of the Lebanese people. Having seenthe
pattern elsewhere, the inhabitants of southern Lebanon
would naturally fear that this was a prelude to Israeli
annexation and occupation. For this reason the Council
must look beyond the tragic events of Monday, 11 August.
While we deplore the loss of civilian life and property, we
should strive to restore the confidence of the Lebanese
people in the world order the United Nations stands for.
63. Lebanon is a small country and certainly not a
militaristic
one. We note that even in the hour of this
outrage it has still raised its voice for peace with Israel. For
a country with at least 150,000 Palestinian refugees within
its borders, that is no mean task. When the combined effort
of the world community cannot provide for the basic needs
of the refugees in the area, Lebanon is sacrificing everything, including its own security, to answer the United
Nations call for assistanceto refugees. Surely we cannot fail
it, particularly as it has made humble demands at this

particular juncture. Besides, not to support it would be
tantamount to our acquiescing in the extension of the area
of conflict when our efforts should be displayed in the
opposite direction.
64. Zambia for its part remains firmly committed to the
search for a lasting, just and secure peace-just to both Jews
and Palestinians and secure to all the States in the area
within their true boundaries. In accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations, we remain opposed to the
use of force in international affairs. This Council, we feel,
should lend its support to the desire of all peace-loving
countries, especially weak ones, to live without fear of
attack from their militarily strong neighbours. In that
regard, Israel should be warned to use the available
internationally recognized methods for settling conflicts
instead of resorting to force on the slightest pretext. We
also hope that it is not too late for it to do so; for in doing
so it will be helping to reversethe trend of unhappy events
in that area,
65. Concerned as my country is with the escalation of the
conflict and desirous of assisting rather than frustrating the
peace efforts, we cannot but find Israel gravely at fault in
attacking Lebanon.
66. The PRESIDENT (translated fiorn Spanish): If no
other representative wishes to speak, I wish to announce
that, following the usual consultations, it has been agreed
that the Council will reconvene next Monday, 18 August, at
3 p.m. Of course, all the intervening time may be used to
conclude the consultations now in progress.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Notions
publications
the world.
Consult
your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
to: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente
dons les librairies
et ler agences
ddpositoires
du monde
enlier.
Informez-vow
aupr6s
de votre librairie
ou odrersez-vou,s
b:
Nations
Unies, Section
des venles, New York ou GenBve.
KAK

IlOJlYqHTb

M3AAHMFI

OPTAHMSA~HH

OSbEfiMHEHHblX

HAuHfi

~I:IJ~~IIII~I Oprnnw~a~~nn
067,c~nrici~m~s IIar~iril ~10;1i110 tiy~li~b
n I~IIII;KIII~I~ >iara3niiax
iIl'CIITI'TIIIIS
II0 IWCX ~1llilOllflS
JlllpfL
hlllO~llTC
rnpalllill
06 ll:l~8.llllllX
ll ll~llll'N
lillllilillOM
MZU'~:lIlllC
ILlI
llIIUlIITC
110 ll,QPX')
: OpraIlnanquH
06ae,$llllelllllas
IIal~lll"l.
CCliIIIIH
llpO,Ja;sC
Il:l~allllii,
IIblO-flOl)li
ILIll >hleBa.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de lar Naciones
Unidar
est6n
en todas portes
del mundo.
Consulte
a IV librero
Ventas,
Nuevo York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

IlO

UNIDAS

en venta en librerios
o dirijase
a: N&ones

$U.S. 0.50 (or equivalent

11

in other

y casas distribuidoror
Unidos,
Secci6n

currencies)

de

82190-December

1972-2,050
I
