PLENARY
MEETING
563rd

United Nations

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
Oficial

Saturday,

3 November
1956,
at 8 p.m.

Records
FIRST

EMERGENCY

SPECIAL

SESSZON

New

York

General Assembly today. Allow me to read you a few
passages from this communication, which has been distributed under the symbol A/3270. On the first page
we find the following passage:
45
“It was again clear that France and the United
President: Mr. Rudecindo ORTEGA
(Chile).
Kingdom encouraged the Israel attack to take it as
a pretext to intervene in the area and to attack and
try to occupy Egyptian territory, The plot was made
clear by the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
AGENDA ITEM 5
when he addressed an ultimatum to the Egyptian
Government asking for the cessation of hostilities
Question considered by tbe Security Council at its
between Egypt and Israel, the withdrawal of military
799th and 750th meetings, held on 30 Oetoforces ten miles from the Suez Canal and, furtherber 1956 (continued)
more, asking the agreement of the Egyptian Gov1. The PRESIDENT
(&an&ted
front spalzisrz) :
ernment for the occupation of Port Said, Ismailia and
This meeting has been called by the Secretary-General
Suez by French and British armed $&ces. The Britat my request in view of a communication
from the
ish ultimatum was calculated as not to be accepted
delegation of Egypt [A/3270].
by any sovereign State. The Egyptian Government
trranslated front French) :
used its right as a sovereign and independent State
ce of the matter I should
and refused the ultimatum. In spite of the indignation
like to refer to the two draft resolutions presented today
felt by world public opinion, the French and British
by the representative of the United States of America
Governments put their ultimatum in effect.
[n/327?,. 32731. I must confess that I hesitate to take
“On the night of 31 October, joint French and
any declsron here and now concerning these draft resoBritish
forces began their attack on Egyptian people
lutions since they have certain political implications
and
territory.
They launched systematic and barwhich compel me to consult my Government.
barous attacks ‘by air on all Egyptian airfields, de3. Following the armed attack by Israel upon Egypt
stroying property and causing casualties among ciduring the night of 30 October 1956, and the amed
vilians without discrimination.
So . far casualties
attacks of the British-French
forces, the General Asamount to 2.50 victims.”
sembly, at its 562nd meeting held during the night of
The letter further states:
1 to 2 November, adopted a draft resolution submitted
“In spite of this resolution, which represents the
by the United States ‘delegation [A/3256], which bedeep conviction of the en&-e world, Anglo-French
came resolution 997 (ES-I). The Egyptian delegation
air attacks continued and even increased in intensity
voted for this resolution, although we should at this
and frequency. Furthermore, it is also reported that
stage have liked at least an explicit denunciation of the
Anglo-French armed forces are taking part in the
attack and a statement that it was’ a violation of the
fight against Egyptian troops on Egyptian territory
United Nations ,Charter and inconsistent with its purin the Sinai peninsula.
poses and principles. An overwhelming majority
of
delegations, however, had stated that they were in fa“Faced with this continuous ruthless Anglo-French
vour of this draft resolution and we wished to follow
aggression, the Egyptian Government has decided to
the same course as the delegations supporting LIS in the
ask for an immediate meeting of the General Assemstruggle which has been forced upon us.
bly in order to take the actions it pledged itself to
undertake in order to uphold the principles of law
4. Paragraph 5 of the resolution requests the Secreand order and to stop the unprovoked attack to which
tary-General to observe and report promptly on the
Egypt is unlawfully subjected and to put an end to
compliance with this resolution to the Security Council
the deliberate massacre of peaceful civilians.”
and to the General Assembly, for such further action
as they may deem appropriate in accor,dance with the
6. The Secretary+General’s report [A/3267] states
Charter. Paragraph 6 states that the General Assembly
that, as I have already announced, Egypt has agreed
decides to remain in emergency session pending comto a cease-fire subject to a condition which I need not
pliance with this resolution.
repeat. France and the United Kingdom, on the other
hand, have sent the Secretary,General a negative reply,
5. I received instructions from my Government yesas can be seen in particular in sub-paragraphs (b) and
terday, 2 November, to inform the SecretarydGeneral
(c) of paragraph 3 of his report, which read as
of the United Nations that the Egyptian ,Government
follows :
agreed to implement the resolution adopted by the Assembly on condition that the armed forces attacking
l’(b) .The United Nations decides to constitute and
Egypt desisted from doing so ; and to this end my
maintain such a force until an Arab-Israel peace
,Government requested me, in a communication which
settlement is reached and until satisfactory arrangeI have received from Cairo, to ask for a meeting of the
ments have been agreed in regard to the Suez Canal,
45
AjPV.563
CONTENTS

Agenda item 5:
Question considered by the Security Council at its 749th
and 750th meetings held on 30 October 1956 (conti~ed)

Page

46

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

both agreements to be guaranteed by the United
Nations.
“(c) In the meantime, until the United Nations
force is constituted, both combatants agree to accept
forthwith
limited
detachments
of Anglo-French
troops to be stationed between the combatants.”
7. Thus the United Kingdom has not changed its attitude. The United Kingdom and France continue to
claim the right to maintain forces in Egypt on the false
pretext of separating the Egyptian and Israel armies
until a solution has been found to the Suez Canal question, The United Kingdom and France are still determined to act on their own initiative without any
authorization from the United Nations.
8. ‘What I say is borne out by the fact that BritishFrench forces continue to bomb Egypt and, according
to our information, have even tried to land on its territory, The cablegram sent to the Secretary-General
by
the representatives
of the United Nations in Cairo,
which has been distributed
by the Secretary-General
[A/3267, a?zltex] , also confirms my statement. The
cablegram says, and I quote:
‘I . . . British
radio has announced an imminent
switch to communication centres, railway stations and
telephone exchanges, many of which are located in
densely populated areas. In spite of warning to civilian population to keep clear of these areas, implementation of this policy will result in a terrific loss
of life. We urge you to use every means available to
you to restrain implementation
of this policy”.
Thus the brutal intentions and bad faith of the aggressors remain clear.
9. Similarly Israel, continuing its armed attack, has
occupied the town of Gaza in violation of the armistice
conventions and the United Nations Charter.
10. It is clear from what I have said, and above all
from the events which have occurred since the resolution was adopted, that General Assembly reSolution 997
(ES-I)
has not been implemented and has not stopped
the armed attacks against Egypt.
11. This bloody, brutal! premeditated
armed attack
has aroused general incbgnation among world public
dpinion. Even in the United Kingdom, the Opposition
is ma&g more and more strenuous efforts to persuade
Sir Anthony Eden to modify his attitude. Even ‘the
Archbishop
of Canterbury
has denounced this use of
force.
“We cannot ignore the fact”, he said, “that the
President of the United States thinks we have made
‘a grave error, that world opinion on the whole is
convinced we have made a grave error . . . The situation has produced a total political cleavage in this
country . . , Christian opinion is terribly uneasy and
unhappy. The point to which the Christian conscience
must most acutely address itself is whether or not
we are standing for the spirit of the United Nations
‘Charter.”
Mr. Nutting, British Minister
of State, is reported to
have resigned to mark his disapproval of his Government’s action.
12. Egypt is encouraged in its fight against aggression
by the evidence of sympathy and denunciations of aggression which have come from all over the world.
13. In the face of the behaviour of Israel, France and
the United Kingdom and their refusal to implement the
Assembly resolution, which Egypt has accepted, it is

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

for the Assembly to take further steps to stop aggres- ’
sion, arrest the bloodshed and re-establish peace, hu- i
1
manity’s greatest blessing.
14. Egypt, a peaceful country
subjected to brutal ’
armed attack, in violation of the United Nations Charter, by two great countries, permanent members of the
Security ,Council, is defending itself and will continue ;
to do so.
15. I shall not take up the arguments adduced by the \
United Kingdom and French delegations to justify this
attack. All my colleagues have answered them, and I fI
could not do better.
16. The situation is deteriorating;
the war may flare i,
up more violently at any moment. The peoples of the
\
world have placed their hopes in the United Nations,
,
Do not disappoint them.
17. The PRESIDlENT
(transZaGtrd from S+a*ish) : 1
Before I call upon the next speaker on the Jist, the 1
SecretaryaGeneral
would like to report to the General :
Assembly.
18. The SIXRETARYIGENERAL:
I have just re- I
YXiYY”‘r^X&ld
bring to the
ceived%%%
attention of the IGeneral Assembly. I could, of-course,
I
have waited to circulate it in the normal way, but 1
believe that this is information of which the members
I
of the Assembly would like to be seized.
I
19. It is a letter from the permanent representative
of the United Kingdom1 in which, on instructions
from
his ‘Government, he refers to the communication
from
the representative of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Cairo which is annexed to my /
report that is before the Assembly
[A/3267].
The
statement he encloses is a statement from the Minister
of Defence in London, issued at 11.45 pm. today. It
reads as follows:
“Reports have been circulated that Anglo-French
forces now intend to attack centres of communication, including telephone exchanges and railway
stations, where heavy civilian casualties would be inevitable. This is quite untrue. Anglo-French
attacks are
now being switched from air to army targets, and no
such attacks are to be made where civilian casualties
would be inevitable.”
20. This document will, of course, be immediately
circulated to members of the Assembly.

clear in the resolution adopted by the G,eneral Assembly
the other night [997 (ES-I)],
and so there is no need
for me to repeat it now. The United States deeply regrets the fact that that resolutio?, which represented
the views of such an overwhelmmg
majority
of the
United Nations, has not yet brought about a cessation
of hostilities. The United States earnestly hopes that
all parties in the conflict will be guided by the conclusive evidence of world opinion which the very large
vote the other night symbolized.
22. The United States is firmly convinced that the
problems which gave rise to the present situation
can
and
must
be
solved
by
peaceful
and
just
means.
A
SO. ..
4 .
..
.
._
lemon on any other 13asis wouIcL, at best, provide
only
a temporary respite: at worst, it would in all lilcelihood sow the seeds of even graver problems
in the
future. That is why the United States believes that,
while we should continue our efforts to obtain quick
compliance with the General Assembly’s cease-fire reso1 Subsequently reproduced
as document A/3274.

563rd

meeting-3

November

1956

47

lution,we must not lose sight of the problems and con-

Property left in Israel by those who are now Arab

25. The first draft resolution
[A/3272] proposes a
new approach to the settlement of the major problems
micaoutstanding between the Arab States and Israel with a
f staview to establishing conditions of permanent peace and
inevistability in that part of the world. We all know the
history of the long, conscientious but painful efforts
which have been made by the General Assembly, the
,aIties
Security Council and the subsidiary bodies. In the last
few years the majority of the deliberations of the Seycir1 curity Council have been devoted to the Palestine question, and each session of the ,General Assembly has
which we hoped
; The j found us engaged in deliberations
might
lead,
however
slowly,
to
better
relations in the
lantly :
area, But the fact that we have hostilities there today
:mbly
need , indicates that those efforts have failed. For this reason
ly re- ~ we must frankly look now to some new means which,
;ented I given the support of this body and the co-operation of
)I the i the parties concerned, may at last achieve a final and a
just peace in this part of the world.
scltion
j that i 26. The agency of this Assembly which has, si?ce
: con- ! 1945, been charged with the responsibility of workmg
large
out arrangements for a final solution of the problelns
outstanding between Israel and the Arab States is the
Palestine Conciliation
Commission. The United States
It the
was a member of that Commission, and, together with
11 call
A so- 1 the other two members, strove to fulfil1 its assignment.
During the eight years of its existence the Commission
’ only
iike&
: has achieved some few things. It has cIarified a number
$1 the 1 of issues between the Arab States and Israel which
stood in the way of a settlement. It has achieved the
that,
utlconclitionaI release of Arab accounts blocked in Israel.
q&ck
The Commission has also done a tremendous amount
; resoof slow and exact work in attempting to estimate and
evaluate the amount of compensation due on Arab

refugees. But despite this work, in paragraph 2 of its
fifteenth progress report [A/3199] dated 4 October of
this year, the Commission stated:
“The Commission . . . must report again this year
that, in view of the unchanged attitudes of the parties
and their failure to avail themselves of the Comn-&
Sk’s services, the Commission has had no opportudy
to exercise its general function of conciliation
with any prospect of success”,
27. This, in the United States Government’s view,
must be the final chapter of the Conciliation Commission’s efforts. We must try something new-something
free of the technical and procedural problems which
confronted the Commission-if
we are to have any
justifiable hope of progress towards a settlement of the
major problems outstanding between the Arab States
and Israel. We can say this because the United States
is a member of the Commission, The Commission has
failed, and, while we will keep what it has achieved
or is achieving, we must try something new.
28. For this reason the United States is suggesting in
its draft resolution the establishment of a new committee to be composed of five Members of this General
Assembly who will prepare recommendations, after consultation with the parties to the General Armistice
Agreements, regarding the settlement of the major
problems outstanding between them with a view to establishing conditions of permanent peace and stability
in that part of the world. We propose that that committee should submit its recommendations to the parties
concerned and to the General Assembly. If necessary,
or as appropriate, these proposals might be submitted
to the Security ‘Council, The purpose of this is to ensure that the parties themselves, the General Assembly,
or, if necessary, the Security Council may have an opportunity to accept and act upon them. Alternatively,
through the responses which the parties may make, the
committee may continue to seek a settlement satisfactory and just to all, and thus solve this critical problem
once and for all.
29. Two other matters are important in this connexion, and our draft resolution therefore addresses
itself to them.
30. We think that there have been no more selfless
and devoted international servants of justice and peace
than the Chief of Staff and the members of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization, as they have
sought to enforce the General Armistice Agreements
and to act as the agents of the Security Council. It is
not for this body to give them further suggestions or
guidance. It is, however, for this body to commend
them for what they have done and for the diligence and
the courage which they have shown in the face of many
trying obstacles, and to urge that the parties directly
concerned should co-operate fully with them as they
carry out their presently imposed future tasks. 1 refer,
of course, to iGenera Burns and the staff working
under him.
31. The second matter which warrants our concern is
the plight of the Arab refugees. In the name of humanity, it is important that through these critical and battletori1 #days those most directly concerned should be certain that the Arab refugees are cared for and safe. We
make a recommendation to that. end, and recommend
further that all Members of the United Nations consider
and fur+.h the additional assistance to those refugees
that may be necessary.

ditions which gave rise to the present situation.
rUta ’ 23. As Secretary of State DuIles stated at the 561st
:hap i meeting, the present situation has resulted from a long
and sad history of irritations
and provocations. The
t the / instability
of the armistice agreements is too well
:inue ;
known to require comment. They have been violated
repeatedly by Israel and by its Arab neighbours. The
armistice, which shoulcl have led to a peaceful settlenlent, has instead given rise to growing provocation
and increasing tension, especially since the ominous
rearmament of Egypt by the Soviet Union. The abrupt
seizure by Egypt of the Universal Suez Canal Company, and the failure thus far of efforts to find a solution to this important problem, have created a situation
of deep concern to many nations.
24. While the temptation is strong to place the whole
bltine on the States directly concerned, the fact is, as
Secretary Dulles reminded us, that the United Nations
must also share responsibility
for what has happened.
it t-be- 1 It is clear that we, the Members of the United Nations,
3 the 1 have not done all that should have been done to bring
urse,
about the setdetnent of these matters in accordance
jut I ; with the principles of justice and international
law.
hers 1 That is why the United States today announced that it
would introduce two draft resolutions dealing with the
substance of the problems which gave rise to the present
:atiW?
critical situation in the Middle East. These proposals
from
are now before the General Assembly, With these draft
from
resolutions we hope that we may begin now to lay the
uper0 my / foundation for the constructive action which must follow the cessation of hostilities, and I should like to
The
describe these two draft resolutions to the General
iistcr
Assembly,
1y. It
retwh

4.8

General

Assembly--First

Emergency

32. That concludes my observations on the first draft
resolution submitted by the United States delegation.
33. I shall now address myself to the second draft
resolution [A/3273].
This ,draft resolution offer, a
means of .finding a solution to the Suez ‘Canal qUestIOn.
The Security #Council has already made certain recommendations which could form the basis for a settlement, Recent events however, have linked this question with the host&ties now being waged in that
part
of the world, The Security Council’s resolution of
13 October [S/3675] emerged after many weeks of
study of the Suez question and represented the efforts
of many nations and many people. It sets forth the six
basic principles which, it is believed, are necessary for
a settlement of the Suez Canal question. We attach
great importance to these principles. That is why the
United States #draft resolution endorses the 13 October
resolution in its entirety.
34. The United States ,draft resolution then refers
to the resolution adopted by the IGeneral Assembly on
2 November, which, irtter a&, took note of the interruption of traffic in the Canal to the serious prejudice
of many nations, and urged that steps should be taken
to reopen the Canal and restore freedom of navigation,
upon the conclusion of a cease&fire.
35. Recognizing that the permanent solution to the
situation must be consistent with the principles of justice
and international law, the sovereignty of Egypt and the
rights of the users of the Canal, as guaranteed by the
Convention of lSSS? the -draft resolution would establish a committee composed of three Powers to assume
the responsibility
for, first, taking whatever measures
were necessary for the immediate reoplening of the
Canal as a secure international waterway ; secondly,
drawing up a plan, in consultation with the three nations most directly involved in the present problem, for
the purpose of operating and maintaining the Canal
and freedom of passage through it, in accordance with
the IConvention of 1888 and the six requirements adopted
by the Security Council on 13 October; and thirdly,
adopting and putting this plan into effect.
36. Finally, the draft resolution requests the comrnittee to report to the General Assembly and the Security
Council, as appropriate; invites the committee to make
recommendations for a just and permanent settlement
of the Suez problem, consistent with the purposes and
principles of the United #Nations; and requests the
Members of the United Nations to give the committee
all appropriate assistance.
37. I urge the General Assembly to seize this opportunity to make a start toward a solution of two of
the gravest issues threatening world peace, The time
to act is now, while the awful consequences of previous
failures and ,delays are so clear, Let us stop the futile
process of patching up previous agreements and understandings, which but serves to provide new pretexts
for further provocations. Let us face up to our responsibilities under the Charter. Let us work together for a
lasting settlement of what has become a dangerous
threat to the peace of the world.
: This is no time for either
f ,emotions. The situation is
so grave that every minute must be measured by the
extensive military destruction and the slaughter of innocent human beings. It is the paramount duty of this
Assembly to arrest the aggressors, while there is still
2 Convention respecting the free navigation of the Suez
Maritime Canal,signedat Cohstantinople on 29 October 1888.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

time, and to save the peace, the world in general, and
the Middle East in particular. Furthermore, it is the
duty of this Assembly to assert its authority? :incF only
through SUCK action can it save the only exlstlng International machinery which is in a position to operate,
If it fails to ,do so, the tragic responsibility will fall on.
every one of us, and thus we shall have led the world.
,back to the dark ages.
39. Everyone here and elsewhere is aware of the daD
gers involved in the refusal of the three aggressivt:
.Powers to abide by the decision adopted by this Assew
bly on 2 November. That decision, which was adoptetl
by a majority of sixty-four votes, shows beyond any
doubt that world public opinion was shocked by th{:
premeditated acts of aggression against a small Country
-the more so when it was realized that two pertnanent
members of the Security lCounci1 were responsible for
engineering the conspiracy. The fact that, SO far, :a
cease-fire has not been achieved in compliance with the
resolution is a clear indication that the Powers in ques,tion have no respect either for the authority of the
United Nations or for the law of nations. For these
Powers-and hei-e I refer particularly to the United
Kingdom and France-there
seems to exist no othel
binding factor than that of force. They have taken th.~
law into their own hands, despite the advice and warn
ing of large and small Powers. This is the law of the
jungle, and the Powers in question are persistent].]
applying that law by ‘means of their land, sea and ao
forces.
40. What makes the position even worse is the in
sistenceof these Powers on implementing a policy whirl
has been condemnedby this Assembly and world publi
opinion-and this includes public opinion in their ow
countries. What worse dictatorship can the world e:K
pect to find? When the Nazis and the Fascists plunge
the world into a total war of murder and clestructior
they defied the entire world, just as these Members c
the United Nations are now doing. But the Nazis a~1
the Fascists had never recognized the authority of tlh
League of Nations, had never accepted the bindin
moral force of the law of nations. They never spoke (
democracy; they ,despised it. And they stood alone i
their defiance of the entire civilized world, Where d
the Powers of whom I am now speaking stand in con
parison with the Nazis and the Fascists?
41. It would be neither fair not just to accuse al&1 repeat: all-the British and French people of fax&
These two great peoples have carried the torch j
civilization and democracy for centuries. The unfo
tunate fact, however, is that those in power have ber
motivated by imperialist policies-and imperialism
its ,&cadent and .rapidly declining stages. It is th
decline which they strive to avert, but this is not
conformity with the historical laws of human progre:
In fact, they want to put the clock back, as the Naz
tried to do at great expense. We are sure that the pi
of the peoples in the United Kingdom and France ut
mately will bring to reason the imperialist ruling
c&l
in those two countries. It is no longer a secret that if
vested interests are in flagrant contradiction with 1~
primary premises of international dvilized existent
The last fifty years have witnessed the great awaken;
of peoplesin pnder-developed parts of the world, a fl
torical necessity that can never be averted. Imperialis
policies refuse to recognize this human evolution. .[
the contrary, policies in the imperialistic countries ha
always been directed to stopping this evolution at I,
price. Unfortunately, this price has been paid by t

563rd

SLllkism.
h of
1for-

been
n ia
this
)t in
ress.
“$2
ultir&S
1: the
1 the
etlC+Z.

,iling
L hisJiStiC

On
have

meeting-3

innocent people in those countries, and it is a price that
is too high in terms of human life and progress ; but,
sooner or later, colonialism will pay its own price too.
42. With SUCK a background, it is easy to realize that
imperialism does not abide by international
or moial
collsiderations and decisions unless they suit its own
purpose, and its own purpose is to plunge the world into
a blood bath for profit or domination.
Is there any
proof needed other than the non-compliance of the
United Kingclom
and France with the resolution
adopted by this Assembly? While those countries are
still bombing towns and peoples in Egypt, they ,do not
bide their real intentions. That is why they have suggestedthe constitution of a United Nations armed force,
while their detachments occupy the territories of the
victh
of aggression. The conspiracy against Egypt
alld against peace is quite obvious. What is more obvious than the fact that the aggressors will not stop
their acts of war unless their policy of war is carried
to a conclusion ?
43, The calling of this special session was the outcomeof the abuse of the use of the veto in the Security
Com~cil. IGeneral Assembly resolution 377 (V), entitled “Uniting
for peace”, which was adopted in 1950,
has provided a way of avoiding the misuse of the veto
in the Security Council and enabled collective measures
for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace
to be undertaken. It calls, therefore, upon this Assembly to take in hand whatever powers the ICharter has
provided for such circumstances. It is time for this Asselnbly to consider the measures to be taken to remove
the threat to the peace and the breach of the peaceI refer in particular to Chapter VII of the Charterwith the object of applying such sanctions as may be appropriate to meet the requirements of the situation.
44, Any other procedure would be an endeavour to
divert the attention of this Assembly from the real problem. A diversion to other problems would be nothing
hut utter defeatism. When one cannot make an agressor abide by the rule of law, then one accepts his interpretation of the law and his method of implementation. What more can an aggressor ask than to commit
aggression and persist in carrying it out despite the
decisions of a world assembly? The first draft resolution.
submitted this evening provides ample evidence to
this effect, It ignores, or rather scraps, all that the
United Nations has done and endeavoured to do in the
past with regard to Palestine, That is because the aggressor persists in defying the decision of this &ssembly
in that part of the world. It is rather surpnsmg that
instead of recognizing the rights of the people of Palestine, it suggests, and then only 8% passant, that they
sllould be treated in a humane way.
45. While we had hoped that the Members of this
Organization would take a stand against the ‘defiance
by the aggressors of #decisions of this Assembly, we find
that all the elements of appeasement have been put together in the two draft resolutions before us. Appeasement has never been a successful policy; it has often
led to disaster. If we gave way to the spirit of appeasement, aggression would become the p~hcy of all;
at such a moment, alas, there remains no raisolz d’%e
for this Organization.

November

1956

49

the surrounding nations against the peace and territorial
integrity and, even, against the very existence of Israel.
It has been aggravated by the rash and indefensible action of Egypt in nationalizing the Universal Suez Canal
,ComPany and by the Soviet shipments of arms to that
country. Finally, it has persisted through the inability
of the United Nations as a whole to intervene and to
restore peace and order in that area,
47’. It is, therefore, nugatory to try to assess or to apPortion the blame for the difficulties that confront us,
Jbecause all of US, all Members of the Unit,ed Nations,
have to take some share in that blame. It would be
particularly unjust to single out either Israel or France
and the United Kingdom and to reproach the one for
having taken the action which it considered necessary
for its self-defence and survival and the others for having stepped in where the United Nations had failed
to act.
48. What is necessary is that we should find some
means of reasserting the jurisdiction of the United Nations over matters which plainly fall within its responsibility, and that we should do so in a manner that
provides not only for an immediate cease-fire without
a real settlement, for that would only perpetuate the
chaos, but also for a just and equitable solution of the
two main problems involved. Such a solution of the dispute between Israel and its neighbouring States and of
the question of Suez Canal should not be merely a
temporary expedient, but one that would give promise
of some permanence.
49. In the view of the Netherlands IGovernment, the
proposals contained in the reply made by the representative of the United Kingdom to the inquiry of the
SecretarydGeneral,
which are set forth in document
A/3267, form the best possible, step towarcds such a
solution. These proposals, as I may remind my fellow
representatives, are to the effect that, inter al&z, both the
Egyptian and the Israel Governments should agree to
accept a United Nations force to keep the peace; and
the United Nations should decide to constitute and to
maintain such a force until an Arab-Israel peace settlement is reached and until satisfactory arrangements in
regard to the Suez Canal have been agreed upon, both
agreements to be guaranteed by the United Nations.
50. During the ,debate on 1 and 2 ,November [561st
a& 562nd wzeetinp] both the United Kingdom and
the French representatives stated emphatically that their
Governments had no ,desire whatever that the military
action which they had taken should be more than temporary in its duration. The proposals which they have now
made prove that these Governments were sincere in
these statements and that they are prepared to act ln
accordance with them. If these proposals are accepted
by Israel and Egypt and if the United Nations force
for which they call is formed and dispatched to the
area then the British-French
intervention will case,
the ‘United Nations will take charge of a situation
where it is its plain duty to exercise its authority and
the basis will have been laid for a settlement of the two
questions which have for so long disturbed the peace.
51. As to the settlement of the Suez (Canal question,
the Netherlands Government remains convinced that that
could be and should be governed by the six principles on
which agreement was reached when the Security Cormcil dealt with this matter [S/3675] ; and. that r;he Proposals of the eighteen Powers [5/J@],
m $uch these
principles were embodied, provide a Just basis for uegotiation. One of these principles to which my Government

50

General

Assembly-First

Emerg.ency Special

attaches great importance is that Egyptian sovereignty
should be respected.
52. With regard to the draft resolutions which have
been presented, in common, I think, with most of my
fellow representatives, I have not yet had the time to
secure instructions from my Government.
I should
therefore like to reserve the right to speak on these
two draft resblutions separately later on.
nesl : When I received
““T”iom the Secretarv,General of the resumption of this emergency spe&l
session of the General Assembly at eight o’clock this
evening I must confess that I did not know what would
be ,discussed. However, since the adoption of the resolution by the ‘General Assembly on the morning of
2 November calling for a cease-fire by the parties engaged in the conflict, I have watched the developments
with almost b,reathless interes!, and so far there has
not seemed to be the slightest Indication of compliance
with that resolution.
54. In considering the nature of the action that this
Assembly can take in the circumstances, it might perhaps be worthwhile to consider by what authority this
emergency special session was called by the Security
Council and, also, the immediate motivation
for the
resumption of the session this evening. It will be noted
that this emergency special session was called to examine the question which had been considered by the
Security Council at its 749th and 750th meetings, held
on 30 October 1956. If I recall correctly, what was considered at the 749-Q meeting of the Security Council
was the United States draft resoIution [S/3710], which
was presented a few hours after the reported penetration
of Egyptian territory by Israel forces. That draft resolution was designed to call for an immediate cease-fire
and the withdrawal of the forces to the demarcation
lines, and it asked the Member States to refrain from
doing anything that might result in a breach of the
peace. The draft resolution was vetoed by the United
K-K;;$rn and France at that meeting of the Security
5.5. At the 750th meeting, if I also remember correctly, the subject that was dealt with was the letter
from Egypt [S/3712] in connexion with the ultimatum
which had been received by that Government from the
Governments of France and the United Kingdom. It
is therefore o.bvions that when the General Assembly
met the day following those meetings, the question to
be considered was the immediate hostilities, the actual
breach of the peace. Or, as far as the legal relevancy of
the issues is concerned, this emergency special session
of the General Assembly was called to consider the
military act of penetration of Egypt by Israel forces
and the ultimatum thalat was issued by the United Kingdom and France. It was with a view to considering
this breach of the peace that we adopted on 2 November
the resolution in which we asked for a cease-fire and
the withdrawal of the forces of the combatants from
the area of hostilities! and for all Members to refrain
from introducing mlhtary goods, and to halt military
movements, into the area.
56. This evening we are asked to consider two draft
resolutions presented by the United States delegation.
Before commenting on these resolutions, I must reiterate emphatically the consistent position of my Government as far as this crisis is concerned, which is that
its fundamental and primary aim is to help to seek the
restoration of peace. Wherever possible, in order to
avoid any aggravation of the situation, we will not

Session-Plenary

Meetings

express our views on who is right and who is wrong ’
in the controversy. We feel this is not the proper time ’
to do so. Any attempt on our part, as I announced in
my first intervention, to point to any particular
combatant as being in the wrong now would only aggravate
matters.
57. The first United States draft resolution, colltained
in document A/3272, seeks to deal with the Palestin@
question. It proposes in its operative paragrF@x
tQ
secure ‘(a just and lasting peace” by removing
tha
underlying causes of tension in the area with a view
to achieving a final settlement between the parties ts
the General Armistice Agreements, The reference ig
to Egypt and to Israel. The second draft resolutioq
[A/3273] seeks to consider the Suez Canal question,
also with a view to seeking a final and conclusive sob
tion of the outstanding issues between the parties. At
the outset I must say that I will not be in a positios
to express my views on the merits. of these tW0
pro*
posals for lack of specific instructions from my Government, I shall only comment on these two draft resolutions as far as the practical and procedural
aspects
are concerned.
58. From a procedural point of view I have seriou$
misgivings on these two proposals. First, with respect
to the Suez Canal question, it will be remembered
that
the Security Council is actually seized of this issue,
Egypt, the United Kingdom and France have agreed,
on six principles, and on the basis of those six principles they were in the process of continuing negoti?
tions when the hostilities broke out. But the outbreak
of hostilities did not remove this question from thf
Security Council, in which the issue is still pending.
I,l
is quite obvious from the relevant provisions
of thr
,Charter that the General Assembly cannot cotwider :
question of which the Security Council is actuall:,
seized. That is rather elementary.
59. It may be argued, of course, that this emergetIc:
ses*sion was called in pursuance of General Assembl:
resolution 377 A (V). But the main basis of that reso
lution lies in paragraph 1 of part A, which I shall real:
in part:
I‘ . . . that if the Security Council, because of la& CI
unanimity of the permanent members, fails to exercis
its primary responsibility
for the maintenance
CI
international peace and security in any case wher
there appears to be a threat to the peace, breach c:
the peace, or active aggression, the General Assembl
shall consider the matter immediately with a view t
malting appropriate recommendations to Members
fci
collective measures, including in the case of a breac
of the peace or act of aggression the use of arlne
force when necessary, to maintain or restore
inte:l
national peace and security”.
60. It is thus obvious that resolution 377 A (V’~
which was the enabling authority for the calling- of th
emergency session, provides as a basis an actual
breac
of the peace, and that the General Assembly
has 1
meet whenever it appears that the Security
coutmc:i
for lack of unanimity, fails to exercise and discharE
its responsibility to maintain international
peace ar
security.
61. Did the question of the Suez Canal, whcll it w;
first raised in the Security Council, present all aspe
such as would make it fall within the purview
General Assembly resolution 377 A (V) ? Undo&ted]
it did not. And as the Security Council was actud
seized of this issue, and there was no cllange
in tl
status, as well as m the progress, of the negotiat-0

\

1
:
563rd

meeting-3

-

ng betweenthe parties in the Security Council, I cannot
Bej understand how we can now competently consider the
in 1 $lez Canal question with a view to the ultimate and
final liquidation of its basic issues. Therefore, as far
1 i, as the procedural aspect of this United States draft
I reso1’ution 1s concerned, I have serious misgivings as
,edi to whether we can act on it at all.
ingi 62. #Off hand I can say that I view with great symtp pathy the noble motivation
of this draft resolution, No
ihr j onecall fail to share with the United States ,delegation
QVi the motive which lies behind its aims to liquidate a
tQ
(p.tion that nlay be a soul-Ce of Continuhg
friCtiOn
’ betweenthe Egyptian Government and the French and
iii United Kingdom Governments, a question that plagued
09 the parties even before the outbreak of hostilities. But
IlU? to the extent that the United States, draft resolution
A\ j seeksa final and conclusive settlement of the question,
ioo in the context of the actual hostilities now in progress,
lrb /i 1 doubt whether this special session of the General
ov. j Asselnblycould validly deal with it.
$
63. These remarks apply with equal force to the other
resolution of the United States delegation. This resof lution refers to the Palestine question and, as I have
oug) stated,it also seeks to achieve a final settlement of the
)eCt1 question. To achieve that end it seeks to create a com:hrdI mittee of five which will first prepare recommendations
jU@, with regard to the settlement of the major problems
eed betweenthe Arab States and Israel and then submit
litI- theserecommendations
ta the parties concerned, to the
Iti* General Assembly and to the Security Council. It will
eak be remembered that the Palestine question presents
the ) mally profound problems
of outstanding character.
‘I lt Foremost among these is the question, for example,
& ofthe repatriation or resettlement of the refugees, which
:r 8 for many years has defied solution by our body. There
ally are many intricate problems involved in the Palestine
qttestion which year after year it has been the task of
my , the United Nations to consider. As I said, as this
1bly; session was convoked only to meet the emergency
es@ arising from the hostilities as a result of the pene:eadi tration of Egyptian territory by Israel forces and the
; military action of France and the United Kingdom,
kof, the proposal that it should consider the long-standing
.ciseI Palestine problem with a view to its ultimate and final
II of settlement is open to serious question.
&re 64. I wish to express again my deep sympathy for
this draft resolution and for the noble motivation behind
it, Perhaps at an appropriate time in the future we
might favour its consideration.
I believe, however,
that this emergency session of the General Assembly
each1 should confine itself to the issues as they are now, the
lned j issueswhich were faced at the meeting on 2 November.
lte’ 65, The General Assembly has already adopted a
r cease-fire resolution
and should immediately concern
:q
itself with the question whether the parties to the conthis flict are disposed to comply with it. On the basis of
[A/3267 , who
each the report by the Secretary-General
s f” 1 wasrequested in the resolution so to report, t 17
iat the
td ; resolution has not been complied with, this emergency
arge sessionshould then consider how the resolution should
and J1 be enforced or whether or not it could be implemented.
’ That, in my view, should be the purpose of our m.eetwasj ing. To consider the United States draft resolutions
;peCt now, without making any reference to the cease-fire
v of’ resolutiotz which this Assembly has adopted would be
edly, to create the impression throughout the world that we
UdJY are evading the General Assembly resolution. The
the psychological impact of such an impression would *be
iions 1 enormous. Nothing would contribute more to 1OWerlng
I

November

1936

51

the prestige of this ‘Organization than an apparent aversion to meeting the situation squarely,
66. Therefore, in co-operation with other delegations,
we might submit within a few hours a draft resolution
of our own which would fundamentally reaffirm the
General Assembly resolution of 2 November. After
eighteen or twenty-four hours-or whatever period of
’
time we might agree upon-we
might request the
Secretary-General to report on the status of compliance
or non-compliance with that ‘resolution.
67. Allow me to summarize my views briefly. The
Philippine delegation cannot now comment on the intrinsic merits of the United States draft resolutions
as we have not as yet received our instructions. However, I commend those drafts for the noble motivation
behind them and, in all likelihood, I may recommend
to my Government that they be sympathetically considered at an appropriate time in the future. Procedurally, however, I entertain serious doubts as to
whether this emergency session could consider the two
draft resolutions. As they make no mention of the
previous resolution of this emergency special session,
I fear that they might be interpreted by the world as
an act of evasion, to the great detriment to the prestige
of this ibody.
: As I speak from this rostrum
Assembly, British and French
armed forces are setting upon Egypt, the vi&m of
their aggression, with the furious frenzy of a monster
mlchained. It is highly significant that the United Kingdom Government submits war bulletins to the United
Nations instead of informing it that it has complied
with the request of this Assembly to cease fire and
stop the aggression.
69. Despite the resolution adopted by the General
Assembly on 2 November, despite the condemnation of
the combined British-French-Israel
aggression by an
overwhelming majority of the Member States of the
United Nations, despite the formal order for an immediate cease-fire addressed to these three aggressors,
despite acceptance by Egypt, the victim of the aggression, of the order to cease fire in compliance with the
,resolution of the General Assembly-despite
all this,
the United Kingdom, France and Israel continue to
subject Egypt to armed attack, without ‘respite and
without discrimination
between military and civilian
targets! in contempt of the United Nations and of all
humatuty.
70. The United Nations is witnessing the almost
unbelievable spectacle of two of its most important
Members lined up with Israel in deliberate and open
subversion of it, in a move to undermine the very
foundations of morality and peace in the world. Unashamedly the accomplices confront the General ASsembly, as they confronted the Security Council, with
defiance and obstinacy.
71. This combined armed attack is continuing, and
intensifying, and is bringing in its train an irreparable
loss in human lives and material destruction of vast
encompassment. It threatens to degenerate into a general conflagration, not only within the region Of the
Middle East but throughout the entire world, m the
wake of those repercussions which will inevitably ,be
prodllced. According to a message received from Care
by the United Nations today, and annexed to Jhe repoft
of the Secretary-General
[:/3267],
the British rado
announced :
L‘. . . an imminent switch to include communication centres, railway stations and telephone exchanges,

52

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

many of which are located in densely populated areas.
In spite of warning
to civilian population to keep
clear of these areas, implementation
of this policy
will ,result in a terrific loss of life. We urge you to
use every means available to you to restrain implementation of this policy”.
72. It is indeed a mockery, it is an insult, to be told
by the United Kingdom and France that military operations in Egypt will be completed in one or two days
and that the landing of their aggressive
forces will
mean Egypt’s surrender, I feel assured that such claims
are not accepted even for home consumption. The truth
is that Egypt and the Egyptian army are strong, and
will continue to be strong. The Egyptian army has not
been destroyed, as the three aggressors
claim, I know
that the representatives
of these three aggressors themselves do not believe that. Every Egyptian man, woman
and child will fight the aggressors, not for one day, not
for one week, not for one month, but for a year,
perhaps for many years.
73. And Egypt is not alone, All the Arabs will take
up their arms in defence of Egypt and of their own
countries. Already a number of Arab Governments have
taken action. There will be more news bulletins to read
against the aggressors. Every Arab citizen is ready to
sacrifice his or her life, to repel this uncivilized, savage
triple aggression. This Arab participation, as legitimate
and collective defence, becomes every day more inevitable in the face of the tripartite
aggression which
threatens to destroy the very foundations of the Arab
world.
74. But this is far more than a conflict between Egypt:
and the three States which have attacked it. It is far
more than an issue between the Arab States in general
and those which have attacked one of their number.
The issue is whether there is to. be a double standard
of morality in the world-one
for the larger and one
for the smaller States-or,
to put it another way,
whether hypocrisy is to become the way of international
life, It is, to put it bluntly, the issue of the worth, the
effectiveness, of the United Nations, and the confidence
which peoples all over the world may have in it. If
there is to remain any hope for peaceful existence in
the world, we in this Assembly
must make it clear
beyond all doubt that an aggression is no less of an
aggression, no less of an international
crime, no less
an object of international condemnation, because some,
claiming to be great Powers, indulge in it.
75. The General Assembly is summoned anew today
to decide upon the measures that must be taken immediately, in conformity
with the United Nations Charter, to deal with the defiance cast at it by the United
Kingdom, France and Israel. The ‘General Assembly is
bound, as much by the provisions
of the Charter as by
those of the relevant resolutions : 377 (V),
entitled
“Uniting for peace” ; 378 (V), regarding the duties of
States in the event of the outbreak of hostilities ; and
380 (y) , relative to peace through deeds. The General
Assembly is bound t.o discharge its responsibilities
in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
with those resolutions.
It cannot divest itself of these
responsibilities
withouf: dealing a mortal blow to the
United Nations and to the peace of the world.
76. France, the United Kingdom
and their stooge,
Israel, have attempted, both before the Security Council and before this Assembly, to confuse the basic issue
on which we are meeting tonight, namely, their aggression, by referring
to the so-called provocations
by
Egypt and the other Arab countries.
Mr. Eban ap-

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

peared to be on the verge of shedding crocodile tears :
for that tiny little State which, according to him, has ;
been harassed for eight years by its neighbours.
77. I do not intend to take the time of this Assembly i,
to reply to a monologue replete with lies and distortion
of facts such as has been inflicted on our ears for many
years by the representative of Israel. In fact, he stood /
unabashedly before this august body the other day to I
repeat a song which he had already sung, word for \
word, a day earlier-and which he has done again r
1
lately-before the Security Council.
78. One cannot remain silent at the sudden change
of face by the United Kingdom and France. Is it not I
astound&g that the very countries which have con/
demned Israel on several occasions in the Seclirity
Council, and which have always associated their Gov- ;
ernments with the! reports of the Chief of Staff of the
Truce Supervision Commission-which invariably
put
the greatest blame on Israel’s provocaeive attitude for
the deterioration of the situation on the armistice lirlesshould now abjure their word and sell their conscience
to the expediency of the moment and, in order to attain
their selfish interests, turn to accuse the victim
of
aggression of having committed acts of provocation
to
justify their aggression.3 Those who seem to have the
audacity to defy the whole world, which condelrned
their aggression, should at least have shown the courage to stand by their previous position like lions, rather
than debasethemselves by manoeuvring like foxes turning to their prey.
79. I do not wish to answer now the malicious accusations of these aggressors.The facts are already in the
archives of the United Nations.
80. Let us now examine the conditions under which
the United Kingdom and French Governments “woUld
most willingly stop military action” [A/3268, 32691.
81. Among the conditions imposed by the French and
United Kingdom Governments for the cessation of
military action? undertaken by them in flagrant violation of the United Nations Charter, figures the unirllaginable, the unbelievable condition of the stationing
of
French and British troops to separate the combatants.
The stationing of such troops between the combatants
can only signily the stationing of these troops on Egyptian territory. Such an occuDation. if it came aborltwhich is an’ incredible and Ainad&ssible hypothesisand if it were tolerated, would
be a serious violatiotl
of
the natural right of legitimate defence which Egypt
is
called upon to use by virtue of Article 51 of
the
Charter. Now, according to this same Article, no provision of the Charter may violate the natural right
of
legitimate defence, individual or collective, when
a
Member of the United Nations is the object of an
armed aggression.The exercise by Egypt of this natural
and sacred right of legitimate defence has been rendered
necessary and inevitable by the aggression perpetrated
against
it by France,
the United Kingdom and Israel,
-__.
‘I’he exercise of this right has precedence, according
to :
Article 51 of the Charter, and in the initial hhase of the
aggression still in progress, over any measures that
the ‘i
Security Council would be called upon to take ilz con- I
formity with this Article of the Charter in order
to j
maintain international peace and security.
1
82. To tolerate the stationing of French and 73ritish
troops on Egyptian territory would be to perlGt
the
stationing of an aggressor on the territory of his vjctim,
1
when what the victim needs is precisely the aid of the I
United Nations in order to face the aggression and to

563rd meeting-3
a'

IIS
las
21
sty /
led ’
to 1
for i
ain !
t
1ge
not
3n-ity i
. !
FlIe 1
‘;:i 1
s--i
rice )
.ain 1
Of

to
;he i
ned j
lur- I
her
tmxu- )
the ;
lich
buld
I*
and
of I
Dhl~ i
lag- j
: of I
1ltSt i
mts $
$P- !
-i
is11 of

/
;

it is I
the
x0- 1
i of /
n a j
arl 1
ural
:red
ated
raelo j
Et;
the j
F.on- f
t to
\
itish
the
:tim, I
the j
dto’
E

make USA Of his natural right of legitimate defence in
order to repulse the aggressor. The inadmissible course
of tolerating the stationing
of French and British
troops would be, purely and simply, the acceptance of
a /@idWCOP@li,
a status brought about by the agpssioa. Toleration
of such occupation would go even
further than the aggression itself, for it would reduce
to nullity the right of legitimate
defence consecrated
by the right of self-preservation of States in the Charter, It would be in the highest degree immoral, unjust,,
alld in contradiction
of the provisions of the Charter
and of international
law.
83, Furthermore,
the United Kingdom and France
cannot pretend to set themselves up as policemen acting 011 behalf of the United Nations, at the same time
that they themselves have opposed every action that the
Security Council attempted to take in order to put an
eiid to the hostilities, and at a time when sixty-four
Melnber States of the United Nations out of a total of
sixty-nine countries-five
of which are aggressors or
accomplices of aggressors-have
openly and publicly
and vehemently condemned the infamous and cowardly
aggression perpetrated by the two Powers with the
complicity of Israel.
84, In these agonizing circumstances, what is the
General Assembly to do? Its resoltition has clearly been
rejected by the aggressors, and today we assemble
either to bury this great edifice of peace or to pull It out
of the abyss dug by the aggressors to be its grave. I
trust that Members will spare no effort and spare no
sacrifice to save the United Nations from the fate of
its predecessor, the League of Nations.
85. Is it not the irony of fate that Mr. Eden, who
raised his voice high to condemn Mussolini’s aggression on Ethiopia and who then asked the wor1.d to
honour the Covenant of the League of Nations by meeting the aggression with appropriate sanctions, stands
today as the master of a more serious aggression, the
horrible consequences of which are hard to calculate?
Tonight it is our duty to hearken to the vpice of
Mr. Eden in 1936 in order to atone for his crime on
31 October 19%.
86. The new situation which the General Assembly is
called upon to meet, under its responsibilities for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world, compels
us to adopt new measures. Actually, the measures prescribed by the resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 November, which constitute provisional measures in accordance with Article 40 of the Charter, have
not been implemented
by France, the United Kingdom
allcl Israel. By virtue of the same Article, the Geperal
Assembly is bound to take due account of this failure.
The General Assembly must, in accordance with paragraph 5 of the resolution already adopted, take new
nleasures to enforce its decisions.
87, These new measures are embodied in Articles 41
aad 42 of the ‘Charter. They may include complete or
partial interruption
of economic relations of rail, sea,
air, postal, telegraphic, radio and other means of communication, and the severance of ,diplomatic relations.
Should the Security Council consider that measures
provided for in Article 41 would be inadequate or have
proved to be inadequate, it may take such action by
air sea or land forces as may be necessary to maintain
or &store international peace and security. Such action
may include demonstrations, blockades and other operations by air, sea or land forces of Members of the Unlted
Nations.

November

1956

53

88. The responsibility of Member States to impose
such measures is stressed in the ‘Charter and the preViOUSlYmentioned resolution of the General Assemb]y.
It would be inconsistent with the provisions of the
‘Charter to have the Assembly discuss any measures
other than those embodied in its last resolution, or deal
with measures which do not aim at enforcing the resolution already voted upon by an overwhelming majority
of this Assembly. This resolution requests the immediate
cessation of the tripartite military action of the United
Kingdom, France and Israel. The Assembly may at this
stage, in so far as the cease-fire order has not been
carried out by the aggressors, only impose new measures
provided for in the Charter, namely, sanctions to enforce
the preliminary measures ,mentioned.
89. AS to the two draft resolutions submitted this evening by the representative of the United States, we feel
that at this stage, pending instructions from our Government, we are unable to express any views.
9
Less than forty-eight hours
a
pted a resolution which was
moderate in tone, which was restrained, which was
constructive, and which attempted not to worsen the
situation in any way but to do something to arrest the
damage to human life and property and the repercussions of that damage which were then beginning, It is
a matter of the gravest disappointment to us that that
resolution, moderate though it was, statesmanlike
though it was, and though it was introduced by the
leading Western Power, has not been complied with by
the Western Powers concerned. This is a matter of
gravest concern because the result of non-compliance
has led to a steady worsening of the situation.
91. Fighting has intensified. We note that there has
been a cablegram from the United Nations representatives in Cairo informing us of the intensification of
attacks [A/3267, annex]. We also note that the representative of the United Kingdom has published a
contradiction [A/3274] of this particular report, but
the statement he has given us in itself indicates that
there has been an intensification of the fighting. It does
not give my delegation much comfort to be told that
there has been a switch from air to army targets. After
all, are army targets always isolated from places of
civilian habitation ; and, after all, are not army persons
only human beings in uniform? Is not human, life concerned in this case also? We do not see that this contradiction brushes asicle the main fact, which is that the
situation is worse than it was two days ago, that there
is an intensification of the evils which confronted us
when we met here two days ago.
92. Furthermore, we are now faced definitely with just
those events which we were told were the reason why
certain Western Powers had embarked on their expe$tion in Egypt. The very situations have arisen which
the Western Powers sought to avert by going into this
operation in Egypt. I refer to the closing of the Canal
and to the cutting of oil pipelines. This was just the
sort of thing that we were told the Western Powers
wished to avert, and here! as a result of their operation%
just those things are takmg place.
93. Though all this is happening, an? though,the .I-+ture is growing darker, at the same tune I thmk It 1s
also our duty to bring to the notice of this Assembly
that efforts are being made behind the scenes to try to
arrive at some settlement, at some arrangement which
would bring to an end what is being perpetrated in
‘Egypt, It is too early to say that those efforts Will sueteed, We hope they will succeed. We hope that the

54

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

good sense that was voiced here almost unanimously
two nights ago will prevail and that practical arrangements can be devised in the very near future to put
an end to the hostilities in Egypt.
94. We notice that the representative of the United
States has brought two ,&aft resolutions before this
Assembly today [A/3272, 32731. We realize on reading
these ,documents that the United States is concerned
with the causes which have led to the present situation
in Egypt. This is a commendable concern and it certainly must engage our attention. However, these draft
resolutions raise important questions which will have to
be studied very carefully. Therefore it seems to my
delegation that all we can do at the moment is to promise the most expeditious study of these draft resolutions and then meet again as soon as we are in a position to express the views of our Government on them.
9.5. But what of the immediate situation? What of the
filghting that is going on? In the opinion of the delegatlon of India and in the opinion of the delegations of
almost all the Asian and African countries represented
here, something must be done immediately
to try to
arrest the situation that exists in Egypt today. In view
of this extremely urgent fact! in view of the need to
stop the hostilities in Egypt, nmeteen delegations in this
chamber have drawn up a draft resolution, which has
been handed to the Secretariat and which will be circulated in the next few minutes. With your permission,
I shall now read this brief draft resolution so that the
delegations here assembled might see how acceptable
it is and thus find themselves in a position speedily
to support it, and thus intensify the efforts which this
Assembly initiated two nights ago to stop the fighting
in Egypt. This resolution reads as follows :s
“The General Asmnbly,
“Noting with regret that not all the parties concerned have yet agreed to comply with the provisions
of its resolution of 2 November 1956,
“Not&zg the special priority given in the resolution
to an immediate cease-fire and as part thereof to the
halting of the movement of military forces and arms
into the area,
“Noting
fztrtlzer that the resolution urged the
parties to the armistice agreements promptly to withdraw all forces behind the armistice lines, to desist
from raids across the armistice lines into neighbouring
territory, and to observe scrupulously the provisions
of the armistice agreements,
“1. Rcafirms its resolution of 2 November 1956
and once again calls upon the parties immediately
to comply with the provisions of the said resolution;
“2. Azl~!zoriz~s the Secretary-General immediately
to arrange with the parties concerned for the implementation
of the cease-fire and the halting of the
movement of military forces and arms into the area
and requests him to report compliance forthwith and,
in any case, not later than twelve hours from the time
of adoption of this resolution;
“3. Reque;sts the Secretary-General,
with the assistance of the Chief of Staff and the members of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, to
obtain compliance of the withdrawal of all forces
behind the armistice lines ;
“4. Decides to meet again on receipt of the
SecretaryaGeneraI’s
report referred to in operative
paragraph 2 of this resolution.”
3 Subsequently reproduced as document A/3275.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

96. As all delegations here will immediately recognize,
this is an interim measure. This is an attempt to make
an appeal to the parties which are engaged in hostilities
immediately to cease those hostilities. This authorizes
the Secretary-General to let us have an urgent report
on his efforts, in conjunction with the parties concerned,
to put an end to hostilities and to obtain withdrawal of
troops from Egypt.
97. This, surely, is the least we can do tonight. Surely,
this Assembly, which passed a resolution almost unanimously, not forty-eight hours ago, wishes to adhere
to the terms of that resolution, wishes to call again on
the parties to comply with that resolution and wishes
to draw their attention, through our words here and
through those of other speakers, to the worsening of the
situation in Egypt, to its repercussions on the rest of
the Arab world, to its reverberations in areas outside
the Mi’ddle East.
98. If the situation is allowed to continue, it will soon
not be one which can be met by resolutions afiecting
just those parties that are now on two sides of the
Suez Canal. If we allow the situation to continue, we
will soon be faced with a situation which wil,l require
resolutions dealing not with a few hundred square miles
of territory but with many tens of thousands of square
miles of territory. It is therefore imperative that we stop
this situation, arrest it at once, We therefore call again
upon the parties concerned to comply with the resolution
which we adopted by so large a majority, on the initiative of the United States of America, not two days ago.
It cannot be the intention of the sixty-four countries
which voted for that resolution to allow the situation
to remain in mid-air, because there is no mid-air in a
situation like this: there is a terrible fall-out from a
situation of this kind, and the area of contamination
and war will spread rapidly.
99. It is for these reasons that we are asking for the
interim measures included in this draft resolution.
100. We give the Secretary-General only twelve hours
to report to us. That is a short period of time. But, first,
the situation is extremely grave; secondly, certain
Powers took it upon themselves to give Egypt a twelvehour ultimatum, aud certainly, if twelve hours were
given in those circumstances, twelve hours are enough
to stop the situation created by the end of that
ultimatum.
101. We would therefore earnestly request this Assembly, including the parties concerned, to adopt immediately the draft resolution which I have just read,
and which stands in the names of Afghanistan, Burma,
Ceylon, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand and Yemen.
102.
: The immediate purpose
bring about as soon
as possible a cease-fire and a withdrawal of forces, in
the area which we are considering, from contact and
from conflict with each other. Our longer-range purpose, which has already been referred to tonight and
which may ultimately, in its implications, be even more
important, is to find solutions for the problems which,
because we have left them unsolved over the years, have
finally exploded into this fighting and conflict.
103. In regard to this longer-range purpose, important
draft resolutions have been submitted this evening by
the United States delegation. We value this initiative,
and our delegation will give those draft resolutions the
examination which their importance desemes, and will,

563rd

meeting-3

I hope, make its own detailed comments concerning
them later.
104. So far as the first and immediate purpose is concerned, a short time ago the Assembly passed, by a
very large majority, a resolution which is now a recommendation of the United Nations General Assembly.
And so we must ask ourselves how the United Nations
can assistin securing compliance with the terms of that
resolution from those who are most immediately concerned and whose compliance is essential if that resolution is to be carried out. How can we get from them the
support and co-operation which is required; and how
can we do this quickly?
105. The representative of India has just read to US,
on behalf of a’ number of delegations, a very important
draft resolution which deals with this matter. In operative paragraphs 2 and 3 of that text, certain specific
proposals are made with a view to setting up machinery
to facilitate compliance with the resolution already
adopted by the Assembly. I ask myself the question
whether that machinery is adequate for the complicated
and difficult task which is before us. I am not in any
way opposing the draft resolution we have just heard
read. I appreciate its importance and the spirit in which
it has been put forward. But I do suggest that the
Secretary-General be given another and supplementary
-not conflicting, but supplementary-responsibility : to
work out at once a plan for an international force to
bring about and supervise the cease-fire visualized in
the Assembly resolution which has already been passed.
106. For that purpose my delegation would like to submit to the Assembly a very short draft resolution which
I venture to read at this time. It is as follows :4
“The General Assembly,
“‘Bearing in ~&cl the urgent necessity of facilitating conlpliance
with the resolution of 2 November
1956,
‘LRequests,as a matter of priority, the SecretaryGeneral to submit to it within forty-eight hours, a
plan for the setting up, with the consent of the nations concerned, of an emergency international United
Nations force to secure and supervise the cessationof
hostilities in accordance with the terms of the aforelnentioned resolution.”
107. I would assume that during this short period the
Secretary-General would get into touch with the parties
immediately concerned, and endeavour to secure their
co-operation in the carrying out of the earlier resolution
-their co-operation, I venture to repeat, is essential-as
well as endeavour to secure help and co-operation from
any others whom he thinks might assist him in his
vitally important task.
108. The draft resolution which I have just read out
and which will be circulated shortly has an added
purpose of facilitating and making effective compliance
with the resolution which we have already passed on
the part of those whose compliance is absolutely essential. It has also the purpose of providing for international supervision of that compliance through the United
Nations, and, finally, it has as its purpose the bringing
to an end of the fighting and bloodshed at once, even
while the Secretary-General is examining this question
and reporting back in forty-eight hours.
109. If this draft resolution commended itself to the
General Assembly-and
I suggest that it is not in
conflict with the draft resolution which has just been
4 Subsequently
reproctucedas documentA/3276.

November

1956

55

read to us by the representative of India-and if it were
accepted and accepted quickly, the Secretary-General
could at once begin the important task which it gives
him. I apologize for adding to his burdens in this way,
because they have already been added to in the immediately preceding draft resolution, but we know that
he can carry burdens of this kind both unselfishly and
efficiently.
110. Meanwhile, during this period of forty-eight
hours we can get on with our consideration of and decision on the United States draft resolutions and other
draft resolutions before the General Assembly which
deal with the grave and dangerous situation confronting
us, both in relation to its immediate as well as its wider
and perhaps even more far-reaching aspects.
111. The PRESIDENT
(franslated from Sjanish) :
With the permission of the representative of Uruguay,
who is next on my list of speakers, I call on the representative of the United States.
erica)
112.
m”p->.: Let
me th
yleldmg to
me for just a moment.
113. I want to say that the United States likes the
Canadian draft resolution very much. We are looking
for something that will meet the immediate crisis which
is in front of us, as well as something that will go to the
causesand into the more long-range subjects.
114. We have presented two draft resolutions dealing
with the long-range questions; they obviously will require study and we are not pressing them to a vote
tonight. We do think that the draft resolution submitted
by the Canadian Secretary of State for External Affairs
is one that should be acted on promptly, and we
should like to see it given priority. We should like to
seeit acted on quickly this evening, becauseit contains
a real hope of meeting the very grave emergency that
confronts the world.
115. /__
i%wJ
(tralz&ed jronc S$anish) : A few moments ago, from
this rostrum, the representative of Canada told this
General Assembly that compliance with the resolution
it adopted two nights ago was absolutely essential. My
delegation considers that regardless of either the acceptance or the regrettable rejection of that resolution,
the very fact that this Assembly is meeting indicates
that the principles of the United Nations Charter remain in effect. Nothing can diminish the force of those
principles, which have come to represent the deepest
expression of the human conscience.
116. When tile free democratic peoples of the world
met at San Francisco to draw up the Charter of the
United Nations and begin the work of this international Organization, they laid down in the Charter the
foundations of justice and freedom and decided that
armed forces should be used only in defence of States
and in the common interest, On those monumental
foundations the Charter ‘became, in response to the
universal appeal, what it is( today, the new law of
the earth.
117. Tonight we have met to consider the documents
which the President has circulated to the Assembly,
and to deal first ancl foremost with the draft resolutions
submitted by the representative of the United States
[n/3272, 32731.
118. I must say at the outset that, just as events are
occurring so .dramatically and with bewildering speed
far from here, so they are occurring swiftly for us.
The result is that it is somewhat difficult to take a

56

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

definite stand, not merely on the two draft resolutions
submitted today by the representative of the United
States but, and even more so, on the draft resolutions
presented from this rostrum a few moments ago by the
representatives of India and of Canada respectively.
119. Therefore, while noting that the specific points
embodied in the resolution of two ‘days ago are still
in effect, and still constitute an appeal to all the parties
in this question, while affirming and hoping that the
first, the fundamental, the essential and inevitable measure will #be a cease-fire, the cessation of hostilities and
the withdrawal of the conflicting forces, we note, I
repeat, as I said at the previous meeting, that of all
these problems there is one which has its own peculiar
form and characteristics, that is, the problem of the
state of war between Israel and the neighbouring Arab
countries, which has now reached a tragic climax.
120. We welcome the United States draft resolutions,
and, in particular, the draft resolution whose purpose
is to establish peace between Israel and Egypt. In our
opinion it represents an immense and powerful contribution and a step forward in the attempts of the United
Nations to achieve, not truces to be broken and armistices to be ignored, but a state of permanent peace
between the admirable peoples and communities of that
wonderful region of the world-of
Israel and the Arab
countries.
121. At our previous meeting I maintained that the
struggle between Israel and Egypt should ,be considered
and decided upon ‘by the Assembly in the light of its
peculiarities and of the realities of the situation. T%is
struggle has been going on, and this situation has
existed, ever since Israel’s light for independence following the adoption of United Nations resolution 181
(II), which approved the so-called partition; and it
can and should be regarded in the light of this fact.
In itself, it has nothing to do with other present-day
conflicts, with the ultimatum sent to Egypt or with the
consequent outbreak of violence which essentially gave
rise to the General Assembly resolution already referred
to, adopted on 2 November [997 (ES-I)].
122. As I asserted at the previous meeting, after the
armistice lines were fixed between Egypt and Israel
and between the Arab countries and Israel, establishing a truce between those countries and peoples, there
followed, sometimes in quick succession, violations of
the bases and provisions of those armistice agreements.
It is an undoubted fact that during the .last few years
the frontier between Israel and its neighbours has been
the scene of a continual struggle, a struggle which has
claimed victims in the ,communities on both sides of
the frontier. There is no point now in apportioning the
blame for that struggle or in indulging in recriminations; the only appropriate course of action for the
United Nations General Assembly is to face the issue
and, in the name of the unanimous desire of all the
peoples of the world, to lay the groundwork for a
peaceful solution.
123. When from this rostrum the United States Secretary of State, introducing the draft resolution which the
General Assembly adopted on 2 November, issued a
warning that to continue on the path of violence would
mean the destruction of the Charter and of this ,Organization, and when President Eisenhower spoke of peace
a few days ago aud we all realized that his, words were
a cIear call for peace and a message of hope, I am sure
that at that moment the silent but heartfelt gratitude
of all the mothers of the world went out to him. For
since the Second World War, with the establishment

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

of the foundations of justice in the Charter of the
United Nations and the various systems and methods
for resolving differences, between nations, the desire !
of the common man in every part of the world has been
for peace, not hatred, in the name of his children, in
other words, in the name of hope for the future.
124. The draft resolution submitted for this purpose
by the United States delegation [n/3272] makes reference, in the first place, to the Palestine Conciliation
Commission set up by this Assembly under General
Assembly resolution 194 (III)
of 11 December 1948,
It then notes the efforts made by the Secretary-General
of the United Nations under the Securit
resolutions of 4 April 1956 and 4 June 1956y[.$!!??!
36051. All our fervent hopes went with the SecretaryGeneral on that occasion, when as always he placed
his great abilities at the service of this labour of peace
and harmony on behalf of the Organization
which
appointed him.
12.5. The United States draft resolution then provides
for the appointment of a new committee which will
replace the Palestine Conciliation
Commission. And
here, on this point, I should like, with the President’s
permission, to address myself more specifically to the
United States representative, so that we may reach a
clear understanding of the terms of this draft resolution,
with which my delegation is greatly in sympathy. The
draft substitutes for the old Conciliation Commissionwhich Mr. Lodge very properly praised from this
rostrum-a
new committee, and assigns that committee
the task of preparing recommendations, after consultation with the parties to the General Armistice Agreements, with a view to submitting its recommendations
to the parties concerned and to the ,General Assembly
or the Security Council.
126. I feel that it would perhaps be useful and net:%
essary now to make this procedure more flexible. When we say that what are needed between Israel and the
Arab States are not new formulae for an armistice or
a truce but a formula for peace, what are we trying
to say? What do we mean? To what specific principle
are we referring? To what necessity and what appeal
are we responding?
127. Peace negotiations, in our opinion-and
this is
the point of view I shall submit for consideration when
we take ‘up the draft resolution in detail-should
not
be pursued through intermediary procedures which may
prolong the negotiations and delay solutions while the
opinions of the contending parties are solicited, We
must instead bring the parties together, into contact
with each other. We must put the ,representatives of
Israel, Egypt and the other Arab States together at
the same council table. After all, on the one occasion
when they did come together, the result of the meeting
was the armistice. ,On the island of Rhodes in 1949,
the representatives of Israel and the Arab countries
met at the same table. They engaged upon a geuuine
discussion; they voiced their complaints, their claims,
their hope and their faith. Out of that meeting the
armistice agreements were born. We believe that on
the present occasion we should seek a procedure which
will bring the great tragic actors in this conflict into
contact, so that out of their discu’ssion may come the
word of peace which both communities ‘deserve and
which the whole world is calling for.
128. My delegation would support any proposal, at
any time, tending to that end, and offers its co-operation
to the United States delegation, which is the sponsor
of this draft ,resolution. We welcome this resolution

563rd

meeting-3

and we submit these views for consideration by the
United States delegation in particular, as well as the
lvllole Assembly.
18. We believe that the Arab peoples and the people
of Israel must in the future constitute a social entity
wl$cb will entible future generations to enjoy peace
and progress, We know them ; we have been in contact
with them. We have visited the homeland of Israel,
the borne which Israel is, fashioning day and night with
its strength, and its faith, in the name of the ancient
martyrs. We all know the glorious tradition of the Arab
peoples; in the American continent it comes down to
us from past ,centuries when, under the flags of Islam,
Arabs and Jews in the Spanish peninsula created new
ideals, new forms of culture and faith; and all this
cameto America in clue course in Spanish ships, and
wasbequeathed to the peoples of America by the discoverersand those who foresaw America’s present-day
progress.
130, With all this in mind, I was anxious not only to
support the general lines of the draft resolutions sub&ted by the United States delegation, but to outline
our proposal concerning the draft resolution relating
to the peace which must reign at long last bejween
Israel and the Arab countries. This would be a great
contribution to the progress of the world, since it would
finally demonstrate
that when the United Nations
Charter, in the name of the martyrs of the great war
of liberation against nazism, laid down the principles
of solidarity and justice, it was speaking for our children, and in the sacred name of the future of the
human race.
131. My delegation will examine any draft resolutions
which are circulated, and reserves the right to speak
later on the item under discussion.
: We meet again,
e-h.at the British and
:n
I*
adopted by an
le
the
French
have
defied
the
resolution
Y
overwhelming majority of this Assembly, a resolution
‘lwhich, in another sense, represents the sentiments of
tg
) more than 90 per cent of mankind. Two Members of
le
al
members of the Security
I this Assembly, permanent
Council, instead of responding to the manifest desires
I of all the peoples of the world that they put an end
is
to their aggression, actually have intensified their savage
:n
attack upon Egypt, upon its scl~ools, moscjues, hospitals,
0t
ilmocent civilians and non-military
institutions.
LY
133, It is now abundantly clear to everyone that the
so-called police action by the United Kingdo?
and
Fee
France was directed against all Egypt, with a view to
.ct
destroying the Egyptians and everything that Egypt
of
has built in the last few years, Nothing could be more
at
threatening to colonial Powers than a genuine sense
m
of dignity and national pride among small peoples.
1%
Egypt, under President Nasser, the first truly Egyptian
19,
leader, who not only represents in sentiment the aspira.es
tions of the entire population of Egypt but who has
ne
become a symbol of Arab awakening and unity, has
been the target of the British, French and Israel peoit-2
ples. A blow against Egypt and agamst Nasser 1s a
on
blow against the entire Arab world.
Ch
1t0
134, In recent years, Egypt, under the leadership of
he
President Nasser, has been guilty of defending the
ad
legitimate and God-given rights which are embodied
in our ‘Charter, rights which are not merely for the
Egyptians, but also for all those who are still exat
periencing a bitter struggle against France and the
On
United Kingdom, Egypt has supported the right of selfmr
&termination
of the people of Algeria and of the
.0n

*- I

November

1956

I

57

People of Cyprus, and has raised its voice and ,++en
hope to all the people of Asia and Africa. Egypt is
guilty of being a supporter of the freedom and equality
of all nations. Therefore, Egypt must be crushed and
severely punished for that support, The United Kingdom and France, still, and with little sense of shame,
claiming to be the champions of freedom, having become certain that a major world war is now impossible
because of the existence of the hydrogen bomb, saw
the opportunity to resort to nineteenth-century enpowder diplomacy and tactics. The Kingdom of Yemen
warns the peoples of Asia and Africa of this trend in
European diplomacy.
1%. Mr. Dulles, to whom we wish a speedy recovery,
warned us at the meeting of the Assembly on 1 November of the danger of a Power taking the law into
its own hands. He said:
‘(If * . . we were to agree . . , that whenever a
nation feels that it has been subjected to injustice it
should have the right to resort to force in an attempt
to correct that injustice! then I fear that we should
be tearing this Charter Into shreds.,, [561st meet&g,
pa. 140.-J
The United Kingdom and France remained heedless to
this and many similar warnings from all quarters of
the globe, even from their own public servants and
citizens. Some of them, such as Mr. Nutting, Minister
of State of the United Kingdom, have resigned in moral
indignation.
136. We, the small nations, possess very little in the
form of military security. Our security against the
strong lies in strict adherence to the principles of the
United Nations. When the so-called big Powers-for
bigness seems to refer only to military strength and to
world-wide prestige-take
this Organization so lightly,
then our basic sense of security has been destroyed. No
Member among the small nations doubts that unless we
all immediately take appropriate measures to guarantee
the continued effectiveness of the various organs of the
United Nations the security and safety of his own country will become endangered. The issue is much more
than aggression against Egypt; it is an attack against
the security of the weak, and a return to colonialism.
137. This Assembly should not merely punish the aggressors, but should also make certain that what has
taken place in Egypt will not be repeated. Words of
condemnation are not a sufficient remedy. Member
States should immediately take effective steps against
the United Kingdom, France and Israel if they do not
cease their aggressive acts. The lesson should be unmistakably clear. Otherwise the fate of this source of sectrity and international co-operation-I
mean the United
Nations-would
be that of the League of Nations.
138. Everyone has now realized that aggression
against Egypt was planned and synchronized by Israel,
the United Kingdom and France. The representative
of Israel has tried to impress upon you that the Arabs
were responsible for tension in the Middle East. He
even claimed that the belligerency came from the Arabs
alone, The records of the Security Council and the
Mixed Armistice Commissions attest to the contrary.
Israel alone was condemned many times by the Security
Council. It has never surprised the Arabs that Israel
has been continuously belligerent to them. All of ,~s
know that the cardinal doctrine of Zionism to which
Israel owes its existence is to expand the present bqrders of Israel to what the Zionists consider the historical Israel. Unmindful
of the rights of the indigenous people of Palestine, otherwise known as the Arabs

58

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

of Palestine, which rights have been consistently recognized by the United Nations, Israel has now deemed it
opportune to plot with the United Kingdom and France,
its allies, this expansionisE policy.
139. Peace in the Middle East has to be established
on the basis of justice. The Zionists have been successful in the last forty years or so in enlisting the assistance of the big Western Powers against the people of
Palestine. Now the United Kingdom and France have
even conspired with Israel in attaining the goals of
Zionism, In turn, Israel furnished them with the pretext for destroying Egypt.
140. We have always said that peace in the Middle
East cannot be attained without justice. But now, under
the circumstances,
we should add that peace in the
Middle East cannot be attained until some big Powers
refrain from making themselves the instrument of Zionist a&s. Certainly peace cannot be attained at the point
of a gun. The Arabs have always proved responsive to
just solutions. Unless the settlement is just, there can
be no peace.
For the third time in
Nations has been defied
by three Member States bent on aggression, expansion
and the pursuit of selfish interests.
In less than one
week, the civilized world has been thrice challenged,
its efforts to restore peace in the Middle East thrice
blocked by three power-hungry
States-by
Israel, a socalled State born in aggression, reared in aggression
and thriving on aggression; and by two great Powers:
by France, in order perhaps to find a consolation for
the failure of its frustrated
militarists
and colonialists
in their war against the brave people of Algeria, whose
sole crime was that of having asserted their inalienable
right to freedom and dignity, nay, to existence itself;
and by the United Kingdom, which was impatient perhaps to implement its long-cherished
dream of hegemony and clomination over the entire Middle East, which
was constantly harassed by reactionary elements in its
Parliament who still dream of empire and glory and
who have never forgiven their Government for having
abandoned its military base in the Suez Canal, and
which was determined to extinguish the flame of nationalism that is burning hot in the Arab world-that
Arab
world which seeks sincere co-operation with all nations,
big and small, and which refuses to be the obedient
slave of colonial Powers.
142. The United Nations and the civilized world were
challenged by Israel when, in fragrant violation of the
armistice agreements, the resolutions
of the Security
Council, the provisions
of the Charter and the most
elementary principles of decency and propriety in international conduct, it launched its unprovoked
war of
aggression and conquest against Egypt. The United
Nations was defied when lsrael contemptuously
rejected the cease-fire order given to it by the Chief of
Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organization.
143. The United Nations and the civilized world were
challenged and defiecl for the second time when the
United Kingdom and France betrayed the confidence
placed in them at San Francisco and abused their privileged position as permanent members of the Security
Council to thwart the efforts of the international community in its quest for peace, nay, to be assured of a
free hand in their war of conquest and domination.
144. The United Nations and the civilized world were
challenged and defied for the third time in one week
when the three accomplices-the
Unitecl Kingdom,
France and their stooge, Israel-cynically
refused to

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

comply with the request which the SGeneral Assembly,
meeting in its first emergency special session, addressed
to them to cease fire immediately, to halt the movement i
of military forces and arms into the area, to withdraw
promptly all forces behind the armistice lines and to
observe scrupulously
the provisions
of the armistice ’
agreements.
145. It has been argued in this Assembly and outside !,
that this is not the time for propaganda speeches and /
that propaganda is not the way to friendship. I entirely i
subscribe to this view. It has also been suggested that
long tirades against the aggressors-France,
the United 1
Kingdom and Israel-are
not welcome at a time when
minutes count in our search for means to put an end I
to bloodshed and destruction. With that view I have 1
no quarrel. However, brevity must not be at the ex- ’
pense of truth; the facts, the true facts and not the
distorted version thereof which we have heard from i
the representatives of France, the United Kingdom and i
Israel, the true facts must be brought out before we can 1
start on the right road leading to peace. The true facts
must be revealed if our efforts here are to prove fruitful
/
!
and effective.
146. One fact is that Israel has committed a hideous j
crime of aggression against Egypt in defiance of the 1
Security Council, the Charter and the will of humanity,
1
It has committed this aggression in the best traditions
of Israel treachery and deceit at a time when its leaders I
were deafening our ears with protestations of peaceful
intentions, at a time when Mr. Eban, its ambassador in
Washington, was calling on Secretary of State Dulles 1
to assure him that Israel sought peace with the Arabs. /
It has committed this heinous crime unprovoked,
the
lamentations and wailings of Mr. Eban notwithstanding. The pretext given by Israel for its invasion of
Egypt, namely, that it was a measure of retaliation for
so-called fedayesn activity inside Israel, is too flimsy
to deserve any comment. It has been categorically rejected by the Security Council, the Truce Supervision
I
Organization, the Secretary-General
himself and public
opinion in the civilized world.
147. Another fact is that the United Kingdom and
France, two great Powers, have also committed aggression against Egypt. The excuses which these two ~
Powers give for their brutal invasion of Egypt are so
grotesque that one could chuckle heartily over them
but for the tragecly of the hour, and the fact that
thousands of innocent lives and homes are being destroyed in Egypt by the ruthless onslaught
of the
invaders.
148. At the 749th meeting of the Security Council, the
representative
of the United Kingdom said that the
objectives which his Government pursued in invading
Egypt were twofold. I quote the verbatim record:
“The first consideration is that the fighting between Israel and Egypt must stop. The second consideration is that, unless hostilities can quickIy
be
stopped, free passage through the Suez Canal will
be jeopardized-that
free passage on which the economic life of so many nations depends.” [S/PTf,7#9,

pwa. 6.1

These objectives are noble, and I am sure that no one
will quarrel with them. But how did the United Kingdom and French Governments go about attailling these
praiseworthy
objectives ? This is how they did it.
149.. ,$s regarcls the first objective, namely, stopping
hostlhtles, this xs the action taken by the United Kingdom and France. They plotted with Israel, incited it to
attack and gave it their blessing for its massive inva-

563rd

meeting-3

sion of the Sinai desert in Egypt. If there is still any
doubt in the minds of any one about the veracity of
this
fact, a quick glance at the British and American
Press of the last five days would, I am sure, be sufficient to dispel such doubts, Just read the reports of
James
Reston and Marguerite
Higgins
or listen to
radio broadcasts from London, and all doubt will disappear. If indeed, as France and the United Kingdom
indignantly
maintain, there was no collusion between
them and Israel, then one has the right to ask the
folIowing
questions. First, why did the United Kingdom and France, as responsible permanent members
of the Security Council, not join their ally, the United
States,
in taking speedy action within the Council to
stop hostilities? Secondly, why did they take advantage
of the fact that one of them was President of the Council to delay, by dilatory tactics, a vote on the draft resolution proposed by the United States delegation, whose
object
was precisely to put an end to the fighting by
legal and internationally
accepted methods-methods
which
the United Kingdom and France had solemnly
pledged themselves at San Francisco to follow in the
face of a serious breach of the peace? Thirdly, why did
they resort to the veto to block the praiseworthy
efforts
of their United States ally to have adopted a resolution
aiming at an immediate cease-fire? Fourthly, why did
we hear from the mouths of the French and United
Kingdom
representatives
only a mild and friendly rebuke of Israel., the aggressor, while the Security Council and the General Assembly
echoed to their loud
bIasts against Egypt, the Arabs and the entire Moslem
world?
Why, we repeat, why? Because, as we said
before, the British and the French were not interested
in peace in the Middle East. They welcomed the opportunity
provided by the Israel attack on Egypt to stab
that country in the back; the facts, the irrefutable facts,
prove
that they indeed plotted with Israel to invade
Egypt.
150. The British argument that Security Council procedure was too slow and that there exists no military
arm for the Security Council does not hold water. It is
given the lie by the dilatory procedures followed by
the United Kingdom and French delegations to prevent,
or at least retard, action by the Council. If the Security
Council had not been betrayed by two of its permanent
members, it would have been in a position to cope with
the Israel aggression and it could have called on Member States which had the means to intervene swiftly
and effectively to stop the fighting, First and foremost
among those Member States would, of course, have
been the United Kingdom and France.
15 1. Furthermore,
if the United Kingdom and France
were genuinely interested in stopping the fighting and
if they preferred
to act swiftly
and not to wait for
Security
Council action, as they pretend, one would
have expected that they would intervene against the
aggressor,
and not against the victim, Egypt. It is
indeed a curious and novel conception of maintaining
the peace by helping to knock out the victim rather
than attempting to arrest and punish the aggressor. It
was indeed a sad occasion to listen to the representative
of the United Kingdom, a permanent member of the
Security Council, which has a special responsibility
in
maintaining
the peace, It was indeed sad, to say the
least, to hear him argue before the Council, at its 751st
meeting, and again before the emergency special session
of the 4General Assem#bly [56lst ~~zeetirtg], that what
does and what does not constitute an act of aggression
is a matter for debate.

November

1956

59

152. That Israel has thrust its armed might into
Egyptian territory,
that the air forces and navies of
France, the United Kingdom and Israel are pounding
Egyptian cities, massacring innocent people, devastating Egyptian homes- that this tragedy should occur
and that a Government should argue that it is debatable
whether these acts constitute aggression, can only prove
the aggressive designs of that Government.
153. As for the argument that the British-French
armed inpasion of Egypt is, to protect the Suez Canal
and ensure freedom of passage, the answer there too
has been given in what I have said before, As a further
refutation of this flimsy argument, one could ask this
question:
does anyone believe that the Suez Canal
is going to remain open to shipping in the face of the
brutal massacre of Egyptians? Does anyone believe that
the thousands of tons of high explosives being dropped
on Egyptian cities and positions bordering the Canal
and on shipping in the Canal will keep the Canal open
and contribute to the freedom of passage through that
vital artery of international intercourse ?
154. The sad truth of the matter is that freedom of
passage through the Suez Canal and an immediate
cessation of hostilities were far from the minds of
United Kingdom and French leaders when they decided
to join their accomplice, Israel, in its onslaught against
Egypt. The tragedy of the matter is that the United
Kingdom and France determined to crush a country
in which they have found an obstacle to their imperialist aims in the Middle East, in Asia and in Africa,
a country which has bravely and gloriously refused to
yield to the ignominious demands of colonial Powers.
The United Kingdom, along with its French ally, has
stabbed the victim of aggression. The responsibihty of
the United Kingdom and France in this ugly affair is
all the greater in view of the special responsibilities
placed upon them as members of the Security Council,
the organ charged with the maintenance of peace and
security in the world. Their responsibility is rendered
even heavier by virtue of the fact that the Charter has
made of them permanent members of that Council,
men-fbers endowed with special powers and privileges
to enable them to discharge their duties more effectively.
155. It is true that the United Kingdom and France
continue to call their war of conquest a police action.
It is indeed a curious police action where the so-called
policeman has joined in stabbing the victim in the back
crather than remaining in the police force, the Security
Council, and joining in the pursuit and punishment of
the criminal; it is indeed a curious police action by a
policeman turned outlaw who has turned his back on
the police force and joined in aggression.
156. The smaller nations of the world are alarmed.
They have every reason to be alarmed. Their alarm is
justified when they witness two powerful States-States
in which they had put their trust-blast
the foundations
of the system. which was so laboriously built at San
Francisco
“to save succeed,ing generations from the
scourge of war which twice in our lifetime has brought
untold sorrow
to mankind”.
They are alarmed because two of the permanent melnbers which have a
special responsibility in maintaining peace and security
have gone astray and have embarked upon a war of
aggression.
157. The world will never forget the noble stand
which the President, the delegation and the people of
the United States have taken in the face of aggression.
President Eisenhower,
in proclaiming that the United
States will hasten to aid the victim of aggression who-

60

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

ever he may be, was putting into practice his high
principles about human conduct, For did we not hear
him tell the graduating class at Baylor University
on
25 May 1956 that the test of lofty sentiment is “the
readiness of individuals to cleave to principle even at
the cost of narrower,
more immediate gains” ?
158. The human race stands in admiration Ibefore the
gallant fight which the forces of freedom have waged
both in the Security Council and at this emergency
special session of the General Assembly
against the
forces of aggression and conquest. These forces-and
they come from Asia, Europe, Africa, Latin America
and North America-have
earned the gratitude of the
human race for the promptness
and vigour with which
they have acted to put an end to death and destruction.
The fact that their efforts in the Security Council were
blocked by an abuse of a right and a privileged position
on the part of the United Kingdom and France, the
fact that these two States along with their Israel prot&g& have defiantly refused to comply with the provisions of the resolution adopted by the emergency special
session of the General Assembmly, does not mean that
Israel-British-French
lawlessness
is on the rampage,
that nothing can be done to stop the carnage, the destruction and all the horrors of war which the aggressors have brought upon the brave people of Egypt.
159. There is still a lot that the United Nations and
the civilized world can and must do. British-French
colonialists may have paralysed the Security Council ;
they have not yet completely ,destroyed the. ;United
Nations.
They have certainly not changed the principles of the Charter, which stand defiantly as a beacon
to guide our actions in the days to come. The Charter,
to which we have all acceded, has mapped out the course
which we are obliged to follow. It has provided ways
and means of attaining our goal. It is our earnest hope
that Members
will avail themselves of these means
to rush to the aid of the victim of aggres,sion, to drive
but the aggressors,
to save the rule of law and the
world order we took such pains to elaborate at San
Francisco. Fellow members, it is our sincere hope that
you will stand up and be counted among those who still
jbelieve in human dignity.
160. Although
we fully appreciate the spirit which
has prompted the United States delegation in attempting to find a permanent solution to the problems which
have plagued the Middle East for a long time, we
consider that this emergency special session is not the
occasion at which permanent solutions of the Palestine
problem and the Suez Canal can and should be discussed. The two United States draft resolutions, presented this eveniug would more appropriately find their
place at one of the regular sessions of the General
Assembly.
In any case, no: delegation and no Governmelit is prepared to hold a view one way or the other
with regard to these draft resolutions
before undertaking a long and detailed study, as they involve farreaching political consequences. That is why I shall not
pronounce
myself this evening on those two draft
resolutions.
(tyalzslated
161.
by France
frtinz
against Egypt is a fait acand the United Kingdom
co?@%, which, since yesterday,
has been aggravated
‘by the frigid, haughty indieerence
with which the
aggressors
have received the General Assembly’s
recommendation to cease fire and withdraw
from the terriof women and
tory they have invaded. Hundreds
children have been the victims
of the relentless air

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Ibombings launched by two
Christian,
democratic
Powers. The world emerged from the Second World
(
War in the belief that it had eliminated for all time \
the possibility of any repetition of the premeditated
1
acts of aggression which had led to the Polish and 1
!
Ethiopian incidents ; and now it finds itself confronted
once again with an act of violence on the part of two I
Governments
which have alienated themselves cornpletely from public opinion in their countries precisely
as a result of their senseless behaviour,
162. The time has come to shun the euphemisms which
1
many speakers have used on this rostrum in referring
to the aggression perpetrated by two Members of the
United Nations with responsibility
for the preservation
of world peace. There is only one fitting description of
this stupendous grand guiglzol performance of colonial
diplomacy : ,deceit and retrogression.
Why deceit? Because an attempt was made to convince us that Paris
and London had no knowledge whatsoever of Israel’s
invasion o.f Egyptian territory, and this in spite of the
fact that the land, sea and air expedition with which
France and the United Kingdom expect to seize the
Suez Canal again {had been prepared weeks ago. Why
retrogression?
Simply because such acts take mankind
back to the dark days of colonialist expansion by the
European Powers. Nothing could be more distressing
and painful than to find that the Niirnberg trials have
not taught us a lesson. Today as yesterday, as on that
yesterday of blood and desolation, a rain of fire is
descending upon defenceless towns and villages in an
attempt to restore the military and colonial order which,
it was hoped, the sacrifice of millions of persons had
banished from the face of the earth.
163. Let us then speak the truth bluntly. Let us face
the painful facts squarely and not half-heartedly.
In
these darkening days there is only one way to save
the peace. The civilized world must raise its voice in
unison to inform the aggressors that the destruction
of
the United Nations is a price that mankind is not prepared to pay in order to keep Algeria for France and
the Suez Canal for the United Kingdom.
164. Much has .been said here concerning the causes
01 the aggression but not always as clearly as might
have been expected. In fact, the views upheld by the
aggressors camzot ,be reconciled with those expressed
by the United Nations in the historic resolution
it
adopted on 2 November. For the rulers of the United
Pingdom and France the blow struck against Egypt
1s a means of solving many problems which threaten
the very stability of the political rCgimes now in power
in those countries. At the same time, it is a desperate
attempt to salvage what is left of the French and British
colonial empires. Now that Morocco and Tunisia have
been lost, they want to maintain the rule of one million
Frenchmen over nine million Algerians, or natives,
as
they are contemptuously called. They want to maintain
their hold on Africa south of the Sahara, where cracks
have already been observed which may lead to further
eruptions in the cause of freedom.
165. How many thousands or millions of soldiers
ofle
might ask, will be needed to destroy Egypt’s sovereignty
when an army of 400,000 to 500,000 men, fully armed
and equipped, has not been able to drown in blood the
yearning for freedom of little! unarmed, Algeria.
Let
us be frank-is
there any 10s~ in the decision by the
United Kingdom to invade Egypt when they
had
already been compelled, under the pressure of Egyptian
guerrillas, to evacuate the ,Canal after over sixty years
of temporary occupation, and when they had to tralxs-

563rd

meetina-3

November

1956

61

the Gulf of Elath and the Suez Canal to Israel shipform the little island of Cyprus into a prison and a
ping. Egypt maintains a complete economic boycott
graveyard in order to keep it?
against Israel, and by threat arid intimidation
presses
X6.
Many a proposal may be made from this rostrum
commercial
interests
throughout
the
world
to
abstain
in an attempt to end the conflict, but none can possibly
from legitimate trade with Israel.
have any effect so long as the Governments of the
172. Moreover, in preparation for an all-out atten@
aggressor States persist in the delusion that the problems of Algeria, French West Africa, Cyprus? the Suez
to eliminate Israel by force, Egypt has concluded rmhtary alliances with Israel’s neighbours. Egypt has conCanal, etc., can be solved by the destructlon of an
travened her solemn obligation
under the United
ancient and sovereign nation. As long as these counNations Charter, under the Constantinople Convention
tries are still governed by the men who forced them
of 1888, and under the Security Council’s resolutions
into this bloodthirsty adventure, the United Nations
has no choice but to mobilize world public opinion,
of 1 September 1951 [S/2322] and 13 ‘October 1956
[S/3675] with reference to the Suez Canal. By this and
particularly
public opinion in France and the United
other hostile acts, Egypt has undermined the peace and
Kingdom, in order to besiege and conquer the crumbling
fortress of a spent colonialism.
deprived the armistice agreement of all its functions.
The
armistice agreement has, under this policy: become
167. Many enlightened men both in France and in the
a fiction to which Egypt still pays lip-service m so far
United Kingdom stand with us. Evidence of this is roas it thinks this may serve a destructive design. Thus,
B
vided ‘by the following quotation from Mr, Gatscell,
a
return to the armistice agreement would be a return
the head of the Labour Party in the United Kingdom.
to a system which has served as a cover for the victimiAs I remember, it went something like this: “We
zation, the boycott and the blockade of Israel and for
wanted to free the Canal but have only succeeded in
a
policy aimed at Israel’s ultimate annihilation. Moreblocking it. We wanted to protect British lives and so
over,
Egypt interprets that agreement in terms of
far have not succeeded in saving a single one. We
belligerency.
wanted to thwart an aggression and have perpetrated a
173. Egypt having thus destroyed the armistice agreefar more serious aggression.”
ment,
the Government of Israel suggests that paragraph
168. In order to help achieve our objective of stopping
2
of
the
General Assembly resolution adopted on 2
the
delegation
of
Bolivia-a
small,
SOaggression,
November [997 (ES-I)]
does not serve the basic purcalled under-developed country, better described perpose
of
the
United
Nations
as expressed in its Charter,
haps as a country in the early stages of industrial
to maintain international peace and security, to develop
development-will
vote in favour of any d&t resofriendly relations amongst nations and to achieve interlution which expresses the views and purposes w,hich
national co-operation in solving international problems.
are essential in this critical moment of history.
Moreover, Egypt interprets the armistice as a state of
169. We must firmly maintain the position taken by
war, and it cannot be the function of the General
the General Assembly when, on 2 November, it adopted
Assembly to promote or to foster a system of war,
by an overwhelming majority the admirable draft reso174. Accordingly, the Government of Israel feels that
lution submitted by the United States [A/3256]
on
the
otdy
answer to this situation is the establishment of
the initiative of that great guardian of the peace, Presipeace between IsraeI and Egypt by direct negotiations
dent Eisenhower. This General Assembly cannot rebetween the two countries, and it notifies the General
treat a single step; if it were to do so it would betray
Assembly that it would welcome the immediate openthe faith placed in the United Nations by the peoples
ing of negotiations to that end, for which it is prepared
of the world, and we s,hould have to resign ourselves
forthwith to send representatives for discussions with
to the sad fate of the League of Nations, buried by the
Egypt. Israel would also welcome similar negotiations
grave-diggers of peace, law and justice.
with the Governments of other Arab, States.
In the resolution adopted
175. The crucial question with which, in the interests
neral Assembly urped. as
of all the world’s peoples,, the Egyptian Government
a matter of priority, that all parties now invo%G In
must be confronted is : does it want peace or war?
hostilities in the area agree to an immediate cease-fire.
Israel appeals to the United Nations to lend its entire
My Government has given priority consideration to
authority to the establishment of a freely negotiated
this recommendation
and it now empowers me to anpeace between the Governments and peoples of the
nounce that Israel agrees to an immediate cease-fire
Middle
East.
provided a similar answer is forthcoming from Egypt.
My Government has also requested me
to
make
a
ly_
_e
.
general observation on other aspects
ot the situation
night with a feeling
which now confronts the Generai Assembly.
of deep emotion and great perplexity. As represent;
tive of the peace-loving people and Government of
171. Egypt, by its repeated assertions over the years
Afghanistan I have difficulty in understanding the
that a state of war exists between it and Israel, has
bloody and unjustifiable events now taking place in the
distorted the motive and purpose of the General ArmiMiddle. East. We know what horrors an invasion instice Agreement, which, as stated in the agreement
volves. We know that the modern Genghis Khans armed
itself five times, is the restoration of permanent peace.
with the infernal engines of war and massacre can inflict
Egypt has used this agreement, conceived as a transiirreparable damage on peaceful and baud-working peotion to permanent peace, as a cover for murderous
ples whose only desire is to have an honourable place
attacks against the population of Israel and for a relentin the world.
less siege of the country by land, sea and air. Week
after week and month after month, specially trained
177. The other evening we met in these sacred;
units of. the Egyptian army known as fedayeen have
premises to discuss the unjustifiable armed attack onI
entered Israel territory for murder and sabotage. Egypt
Egypt by Israel, the United Kingdom and France. That:
has organized and directed similar gangs in other Arab
this was an invasion is now so clear to the whole world:
countries for action against Israel. Egypt has closed
that no one can doubt it any longer. Besides, the vote

62

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

of sixty-four members of this Assembly was irrefutable
proof of the indignation and horror felt .by the entire
world.
178. The resolution we adopted [997 (ES-I)]
called
for the withdrawal of the invaders from, Egyptian soil
and for an immediate cease-fire. The victim-Egyptpromptly accepted it. The others refused, and are still
refusing, to let go. The law of the jungle-1
choose the
term advisedly-and
of colonialism has ushered in a
new reign of terror. The civilized world must not, and
indeed cannot, accept the rule of brute force. In a world
in which international law is not respected and the principles of ethics and decency lose their practical value,
surely no one can feel secure.
179. The countries which are devoted to peace, international law and the principles of the Charter are
watching the events in the Middle East with anguish
and dread. For who can fail to feel shaken when the
world becomes a jungle? One thing is sure: no one
can be made to do anything by force for any length of
time. That is why, as representative of a peace-loving
country which has always opposed injustice and invasions, I can onIy appeal to the conscience and ethics
of this Assembly and urge it to do its utmost to put
an end to the unprovoked massacres in Egypt and
the Middle East. Today, Egypt is the victim. Who will
be the victim tomorrow? The answer to that question
will depend on the decisive action oi this Assembly.
HO. My delegation, with eighteen other delegations,
has proposed a draft resolution [A/3275]
the purpose
of which is to fill a gap in the recommendation adopted
two days ago. This new draft resolution gives the
Secretary-General the power to arrange a cease-fire.
That is why my delegation will vote for it, and we urge
the Assemblly to adopt it unanimously. Thousands of
innocent lives can be saved by our action. Let us act
quickly.
181. As ‘regards the draft resoh~tions proposed by the
United States delegation [A/3272,3273],
we are unable
to take a position until we have consulted our Government. At this soIemn moment, I wish to express the
deep sympathy and the fraternal feelings of the Afghans
for the Egyptians.
182.
public
ing, the General Assembly adopted by an overwhelming majority a resolution designed to restore peace and
tranquillity in the Near East, Since that time, however,
the situation has not improved ; on the contrary, it has
deteriorated further. The Governments of France and
the United Kingdom rejected the recommendations of
the ‘General Assembly, which offered the possibility of
a settlement in the Near and Middle East. They declared that they would continue their military operations against the Egyptian people and State. The bombing of Egyptian territory continues. United Kingdom
and French forces are preparing for a landing on Egyption soil with a view to its occupation.
183. In carrying out this intervention,
the United
Kingdom and French Governments have not. only refused to respect the will of our Organization but have
openly defied it. In defying the General Assembly resolution, which has met with the complete approval of all
the peoples of the world, including those of the United
Kingdom and France, those Governments are hurling
a challenge at the United Nations, at the fundamental
principles of international law and at the conscience and
honour of peoples. By wilfully ignoring the General
Assembly resolution the *Governments of the United

Speeial

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Kingdom and France are dealing a fatal blow at the
prestige of the United Nations, and have confronted our
Organization with a serious crisis. Their actions since
the adoption of the General Assemby resolution have
torn away the last shreds of the mask under which they
were attempting to conceal their aggression against the
Egyptian people.
184. It must now be clear to all that in their aggressive
action against Egypt, France and the United Kingdom
were not guided, as their representatives have cantended here, by a desire to defend free navigation
through the Suez Canal and to put an end to hostilities
in the Near East and restore peace and tranquillity
in the area. Before aggressive operations were begun
by the United Kingdom, France and Israel against
Egypt, complete freedom of navigation through the
Suez Canal had been guaranteed, thanks to the efforts
of the Egyptian Government. Despite all efforts at
sabotage on the part of BritishaFrench elements, the
Canal was working without interruption.
Now, as a
result of the barbarous bombing raids carried out by
the United Kingdom and French air forces, the Suez
Canal has been put out of action for a considerable
time.
185. The people of Europe and Asia, whose economies
depend to an appreciable extent on the normal functioning of the Canal, will have to pay a heavy price for this
sort of protection of freedom of navigation. Indeed, the
effects of the interruption in the regular operation of the
Canal are already being felt by the people of the United
Kingdom, where it is reported that gasoline rationing
is being introduced and other restrictions are being
prepared.
186. As for the statements that have been made that
the action undertaken by the United Kingdom
and
French Governments is designed to restore peace and
tranquillity
in the Near and Middle East, they are
Ii sheer hypocrisy, as the events now taking place in that
area clearly reveal. The United Kingdom and Fret&
air forces are carrying out constant raids on Egyptian
communications, ,ports, town and villages, destroying
the fruits of the toil and sweat of the Egyptian people
and sowing death among the peaceful inhabitants,
among women and children,
187. The flames of war kindled by the aggression
carried out against Egypt by France, the United Kingdom and Israel are threatening to engulf the entire Near
East and are jeopardizing international peace and security. In the aggressive action undertaken against Egypt
by the United Kingdom, France and Israel the other
peoples of the Near and Middle East rightly see a
threat to their own independence and existence as free
nations. Syria, acting in accordance with its treaty of
mutual ,defence against aggression concluded with
Egypt, has placed its forces under united #SyrianEgyptian command. A state of emergency has been
declared in Lebanon. A general mobilization has been
proclaimed and martial law introduced in Iraq.
188. The accomplice of the United Kingdom
and
France in their aggression against Egypt-the
Israel
‘Government-is
plotting acts of provocation against the
neighbouring Arab States, as the American Press nla.kes
\!abundantly clear. A real danger has arisen that other
countries of the Near and Middle East will be ,dram
into the conflict. The entire responsibility for this dangerous situation lies with the United Kingdom
and
French IGovernments, which have refused to accept the
measures designed to bring about a settlement of the

563rd

situation that were recommended

e
n
In

1
Y
II
it
e
:s
1t
.e
y”
!Z
!e
!S
lis
le
le
d
t

m
f.
;
lIt
3r
a
:e
If
:h

l!tl
:n

id
el
1e

:S
:r
a
lId
le
le

meeting-3

by resolution of this
tijergency special session of the General Assembly.
189. The Governments
of the United Kingdom and
France are attempting, by their aggression against the
EgyptIan people, ta crush the Egyptian Republic, to
seize part of its territory, and to reimpose the colonial
yoke upon Egypt and the other peoples of the Near
and Middle East. They are attempting by force of arms
to restore4their colonial domination in this part of the
world. Thrs policy of colonialist banditry is designed to
crush the determination
of the peoples of the East to
achieve freedom and national independence.
190, The majority of the Members of the United Nations-sixty-four
Members-have
condemned the aggressive action undertaken
by the United Kingdom,
France and Israel against llgypt and have called for an
immediate cease-fire and for a halt to the movement of
military forces and arms into the area. The refusal of
the United Kingdom
and France to comply with this
request of the General Assembly shows that they have
irot abandoned their plans for the ,destruction of the
+rndependent Egyptian State.
“191. The General Assembly cannot permit the use of
armed force against the Egyptian people, The Egyptian Government, though the victim of aggression, has
accepted the General Assembly’s recommendations and
declared its willingness to carry them out. The fact that
military operations in the area have not been halted is
due solely to the refusal of the United Kingdom and
France to heed the views of the sixty-four countries
which voted in favour of the General Assembly, resolution. In their replies [A/3268, 32693 to the General
Assembly’s decision for an immediate cease-fire, the
[United Kingdom
and France have laid down a new
the terms of which go even further than
original ultimatum
to Egypt of 30 Octhe United Kingdom and France
Nations itself to become an accomplice in their aggression against the Egyptian people. That, the saying goes, is the limit.
192. When the General Assembly adopted its resolution, many delegations commented on its inadequacy
and weakness. In view of the necessity for immediate
action to extinguish the flames of war, however, sixtyfour delegations, including the delegation of the USSR,
voted for the draft resolution. The General Assembly
adopted this inadequate resolution, one which failed
to give any true assessment of the aggressive action
undertaken by the United Kingdom and France, and
spared the prestige of the Governments of those countries in the expectation that they would comply with
the demand of the peoples of the world to end their
hostilities against Egypt. That adds still further to the
weight of responsibility
the Governments of the United
Kingdom and France have taken upon themselves by
rejecting the recommendation
of the General Assembly
and continuing to flout the principles of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.
193. The United States representative has presented
two draft resolutions at this meeting [A/3272, 32731.
While I do not wish to go into the substance of these
resolutions at the present stage of the debate, I should
like to point out that an attempt is being made to
smother the main issue, the cluestion of halting aggression, in futile debate on the general Palestine question
and the problem of navigation in the Suez Canal. We are
convened today to consider the fact that three StatesFrance and Israel-having
the United
Kingdom,
launched an aggressive attack against Egypt, have re-

November

1956

63

fused to comply with the General Assembly resolution
Of 2 ~~~e~~ber designed to end the aggression, This is
the question which calls for discussion and for an im,
mediate decision. The general Palestine question can be
considered in the course of the coming eleventh session,
In this respect we agree with the points put forward
by the Philippine representative,
194. At a time when a challenge has been hurled at the
United Nations by the Governments of the United
Kmgdom and France, the General Assembly cannot
rest content with the decision it has adopted, which the
aggressors have failed to respect, and it has no right
to sit idly by and watch the United Kingdom, France,
and Israel deal with their victim. No one with any concern for the future of the United Nations can permit
such a course, which would be incompatible with the
conscience of the peoples and with the prestige and
honour of our Organization. The peoples of the entire
world are looking with hope to the United Nations,
and counting on it to take firm measures to check the
aggressors. We cannot disregard this desire of the peoples of the world.
195. The Soviet Union delegation calls upon the General Assembly, firstly, to condemn the armed attack
carried out upon Egypt by the United Kingdom, France
and Israel as an act of aggression incompatible with
the purposes and principles of the United Nations;
and secondly, to call upon the United Kingdom, France
and Israel again to cease hostilities immediately and
withdraw their armed forces from Egyptian territory
and Egyptian territorial waters. The General Assembly
should also consider other ways and means of helping
to halt this aggression and prevent the crushing of
Qvpt.
196. As a result of the aggressive action undertaken
by the United Kingdom and France the United Nations
is undergoing a serious crisis. The Soviet delegation
expresses its confidence that the United Nations will
find the strength within itself to overcome this crisis
and to restore peace and tranquillity in the Near and
Middle East.
197. The PRESIDENT
(iransnslated f~o+~ Spatztih) :
Before calling on the next speaker I take the liberty
of making an appeal to those representatives who have
asked to take part in the discussion. I am convinced that
I express the general feeling of the Assembly when
I emphasize the responsibility which devolves upon all
of US at the present grave moment, and when I point out
the urgency
of transforming the deliberations of this
Assembly into positive and rapid action. For these reasons I should like to ask the representatives to be as
brief as possible in their statements. I do not *wish to
suggest any time limit; that I leave to the discretion
of the speakers.
198. I apologize to the representative of Costa Rica,
who is the next speaker, for having been obliged to
maIce a statement at this time ; I would not have been
able to do SO once the list of speakers had been
exhausted.
1.9s_._a
Ricaj, (translated from
Sjanish) : At the memorable meeting which this Assembly held two nights ago [562rtd meethg] my country voted in favour of the resolution that was adopted,
Idespite the fact that we felt there was an important
omission, in that there was no reference whatsoever
to a circumstance which ought to have been borne in
mind at that time and which my delegation did have
in mind, although we did not wish to raise the issue
here ; we voted for the resolution in spite of its failure

64

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

to mention that the country attacked had for many
years represented a threat to the territorial
integrity
of Israel. We did not express our opinion with regard
to the omission at the time because we felt, as did all
other representatives assembled here, that on that night
events were moving so fast that our speeches could not
keep pace with them. Nevertheless, my delegation feels
it ought to state that fact for the record. In undertaking the military operations which are our principal
concern and the cause for our meeting, Israel violated
the terms of an armistice, but it did not commit aggression. The initial aggression occurred eight years ago,
and peace has still not been established.
200. It is quite possible that the United Nations bears
some responsibility for the fact that peace has not yet
been achieved. The State of Israel is a creature of this
Organization,
but for eight years the United Nations
has been powerless to guarantee its right to live in
peace. Despite all this, it was the duty of the United
Nations to go to Egypt’s aid when blood began to flow
on Egyptian territory. The United Nations did go to
Egypt’s aid; the delegation of Costa Rica voted in
favour of the decision to do so and it stands by that
vote,
201. The resolution adopted on 2 November called
for a cease-fire, and the Assembly now has before it
draft resolutions which reaffirm the provisions of that
resolution. A cease-fire, however, is not sufficient. We
must strive for something more permanent, something
higher, Our duty does not consist only in securing
compliance with an armistice, At our 561st meeting the
representative of China said that what was needed was
peace, not merely an armistice. The situation calls for
neither a cease-fire nor an armistice, but for peace,
In fact, the situation that has existed in the Middle
East during the past eight years is one that, more than
any other and more rightfully so, may be called a cold
war, a state of war, not actually characterized by daily
battles and constant clashes, but nevertheless in law a
state of war. We must put an end to that state of war.
202. We therefore view the first draft resolution proposed by the United States delegation [A/3272] with
great sympathy because it is a proposal aimed at securing peace aud going beyond a cease-fire and an armistice. It calls for peace. My delegation offers, as did the
Idelegation of Uruguay a few minutes ago, its assistance
in whatever move may be considered desirable to attain
that objective of peace.
203. The Assembly should also, however, deal with
the immediate problem of a cease-fire. For this purpose
it is appropriate, desirable, and even necessary, that we
should adopt the Canadian draft resoIution [A/3276].
#That draft and the first United States draft resolution
complement
each other and form an organic whole.
They lay the foundations upon which the United Nations may build the structure of peace in the Middle
East, so necessary to the Middle East and to the
world.
204. We also have before us a second draft resolution
proposed by the United States [A/3273]. My delegation sympathizes with the points of view expressed
in it but wonders whether this is the proper time for
such a draft resolution, The present session of the Gen,eral Assembly was not convened for the purpose of dealing wit11 the Suez question. The representatives of the
United
Kingdom
and France have stated from this
rostrum that the immediate cause of the action of their
countries was Israel’s action, and not the Suez situation. This Assembly was convened for the purpose of

Speeial

Session-PIenary

Meetings

dealing with the specific question considered by the
Security Council at its 749th and 750th meetings, and
not any other questions which, although relating to the
same region, lie somewhat outside the terms of reference
of this emergency special session.
205. I believe that, owing to the speed with which
events are moving in the Middle East, we ought to give
priority to draft resolutions dealing with the present
emergency. The nineteen-Power draft resolution [A/
327.51 and the Canadian draft resolution are concerned
with that emergency, I repeat, however, that the emergencv should not cause us to forget the overriding inTeresis of peace. It is of the higheit importance that the
United Nations should urgently guarantee-for
the
situation demands urgency-the
territorial
integrity,
tranquillity and labour of the State which is the child
of the United Nations, so that it may progress and work
in peace. Israel needs peace, and we must give Israel
peace. Because we have not been able to give it peace,
Israel, as we have seen, resorted to acts of desperation. While condemning those acts, we should yet show
that we understand them. We are therefore faced with
a twofold situation. We must d&l with the present
emergency for which this meeting was called, but we
also have the higher duty, the fulfilment of which WC
have delayed for eight years, to guarantee peace in the
Middle East.
206. Mr. GUNEWARDENE
(Geylon) : According
to the resolution adopted by the General Assembly in
the early hours of 2 November, the Assembly should
remain in emergency session pending compliance with
that resolution, Today, therefore, we are met to diScUSS
that subject-that
is, whether or not there has been
compliance with the resolution and, if not, how we can
secure that compliance. It is not for us today to pass a
verdict on the actions of the United Kingdom, France
or Israel. That verdict has already been passed. The
question before us is how we can get the United
Kingdom, France and Israel to comply with the resolution that has already been adopted.
207. I am grateful that the representative of that great
Government of Israel has come before this Assembly
and stated that Israel is prepared to accept the ceasefire called for in the resolution. He did not, however,
tell us that Israel was prepared to carry out the second
part of the same resolution, which urges the parties to
the armistice agreements : “pro,mptly to withdraw all
forces behind the armistice lines, to desist from raids
across the armistice lines into neighbouring territory,
,and to observe scrupulously the provisions of the armistice agreements”.
208. Therefore, the statement made by the representative of Israel only gives us an assurance of partial
compliance with the resolution, while the representatives of the United Kingdom and France positively
refuse, except on conditions. The position taken up by
them IS that of a person who enters property that does
not belong to him and then refuses to leave until certain
conditions are complied with. I cannot understand
the
legal or the moral basis for that position.
209. It is therefore a matter for regret that collditions
are laid down, in spite of the moral judgement of the
majority of the world, of sixty-four nations. The question before US is not whether it was justifiable invasion
of the territory, whether it was police action or &fensive action for the preservation of their own interests,
because the verdict has been passed on that. The resolution states “armed forces of France and the United
Kingdom of, Great Britain and Northern Ire&Id
are

563rd

meeting-3

conducting military operations against Egyptian territory”. Those words “against Egyptian territory” are
plain enough. That is what this Assembly accepted. If
the objectives of the United Kingdom and France are
against Egyptian territory, then the question of justification does not arise.
210. The only question, therefore, now before us, in
view of the rejection, or, at least, in view of the conditions that are imposed on this Assembly for acceptance by the United Kingdom and France, is to decide
what this august body should do in these circumstances.
In other words, the attitude of the United Kingdom in
that matter only forces us to the conclusion that their
objective is the settlement of the Suez Canal problem.
Their scheme was unacceptable to Egypt, and so many
other nations were not prepared to go along with them.
We are forced to the conclusion that this invasion of
Egyptian territory was due to disappointment
and
frustration. I am not prepared to say categorically that
it was meant for that purpose, but whatever the purpose may be, it is an invasion of Egyptian territory
which, by the resolution we adopted, we are certainly
not prepared to condone. France has taken up the same
attitude ; Israel is prepared for a partial compliance,
and the United Kingdom and France are not prepared
for even a partial compliance unless certain conditions
are satisfied.
211. In those circumstances, we must now examine
whether there are some ways and means by which
compliance with this resolution can be secured from the
United Kingdom, France and Israel. I think the draft
resolutions before us give us some help in arriving at
a conclusion about what we should do in these circumstances, We are truly grateful to the representative of
the United States for his laudable objective in trying
to secure an over-all settlement of the problem, but we
do not normally think of the disposition of property
when a patient is dying, is gasping for breath. Egypt
is a patient gasping for breath, and we cannot ask
Egypt to sign its last will before we are satisfied that
Egypt is in a sound condition and able to take a reasonable course of action.
212. In the position in which Egypt is placed today,
I say that our first duty is to see that Egypt is in a
condition to exercise its sovereign rights. When that
position has been created, then it will be time to consider how best the Suez Canal dispute should be decided and how best the Israel-Arab dispute should be
disposed of. I freely grant that a solution may be found.
This cannot go on for long, but at the same time the
present moment certainly is not the occasion for the
consideration of that problem. The problem before us
is simply how we can secure a cease-fire, how we can
secure a cessation of hostilities, and how we can put
Egypt into a status quo ante. That is exactly the position in which we are placed.
213. The draft resolution introduced by the representative of India [A/3275],
which Ceylon and other
countries of the Asian group had the privilege and
honour of co-sponsoring, gives the Secretary-General
at least some time-it
may be twelve hours, it may be
eighteen hours, just as the Secretary-General would
require-to
see if something more can be achieved during that period to bring these nations to reason, at least
reason as it is accepted by the rest of the world. Sometimes when people embark upon a course of action, they
find it difficult to retreat, and obstinacy sometimes becomes a virtue, In the present circumstances, I think
that these three nations should be guided by the weight

November

1956

65

of world public opinion and by the moral judgement
passed by this august body only the other day. The
Secretary-General,
who is well known for his tact,
impartiality,
ability and experience in handling this
kind of intricate problem will perhaps find time, a little
breathing space, to see whether other methods are
possible.
214. I hope that this Assembly will find no difficulty
in accepting the draft resolution sponsored by the nineteen countries. It merely requests the SecretaryGeneral, with the assistance of the Chief of Staff and
members of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization, to obtain compliance with the request for
the withdrawal of all forces behind the armisiice lines,
In other words, this Assembly would decide to give
them a second chance to reconsider the position they
have taken in the light of the discussions that are taking
place this evening.
215. I see no difficulty in accepting at the same time
the draft resolution submitted by the representative of
Canada [A/3276].
One does not conflict with the
other. Far from conflicting, this resolution would help
the first resolution. The carrying out of the objectives
of the draft resolution introduced by the Asian countries would be greatly helped by the draft resolution
introduced by the representative of ,Canada. Therefore,
I see no reason why this august Assembly should not
also accept that draft resolution ; in that case, there
would be the machinery by which the three nations that
have so far not complied with the resolution of 2 November could be compelled to comply with it. In other
words, we would be creating machinery to produce the
result which we are aiming at.
216. There is one remark I should like to make: I
hope that this commission, this police force-I
do not
know how to describe it-will
not include representatives from Israel or the United Kingdom or France.
That goes without saying. Provided this task is undertaken by States which are not parties to the dispute, to
this unfortunate situation, then I think that this august
Assembly should also be able to accept the draft resolution introduced by the representative of Canada.
217. With regard to the draft resolutions introduced
by the representative of the United States, for whom
we have the greatest respect and regard, I think that
they can wait for another day. We should first settle the
point before us. We must bring peace and harmony
and see that Egypt is again in a position to exercise
its sovereign rights before we proceed to the next step.
218. I foresee no difficulty in achieving this objective.
Israel has made an open declaration that it is prepared
to observe a cease-fire. What further reasoli is there for
the United Kingdom and France to intervene? They
intervened because of hostilities on the past of Israel
and Israel’s intention to pounce on Egyptian territory.
Israel now gives an undertaking that it will observe
a cease-fire. What then is the answer of the United
Kingdom and France now? If there are going to be
hostilities, they must come from Israel ; but Israel freely
grants that it is prepared not to engage in hosti,lities. I
ask therefore again : what then is the difficulty which
prevents the United Kingdom and France from saying,
“We shall declare a cease-fire”? Those are matters that
I commend to you.
219. I have no doubt that the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral will bring fruitful results, and the implementation of the draft resolution submitted by the Canadian
representative will make it possible for us to see that the
resolution of 2 November is complied with.

66

220.

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Mr. RIFA’I

Uordan)
: My delegation has seen
ioiZ”Z%iitted
bv the United States
delegation at this meeting. In my’delegation’s
view,
this emergemy meeting was not meant to be held to
discuss the settlement of the two problems contemplated
in these two draft resolutions. Our meeting should deal
only with the state of emergency that was created as a
result of the failure of France, the United Kingdom
and Israel to comply with the General Assembly resolution of 2 November. These two draft resolutions involve a complete change of policy in respect to the
Palestine question and the Suez Canal. The present
emergency meeting of the General Assembly is not the
place for such a new debate. In any event, my delegation must refer these two draft resolutions to my Government for consideration.
221. It was extremely dismaying to see the United
Kingdom, French and Israel Governments
refuse to
comply with the resolution of the General Assembly. A
short while ago, we heard the Israel representative declare on behalf of his Government that Israel agrees to
a cease-fire provided Egypt agrees to it also. This declaration is incomplete because the General Assembly
resolution of 2 November also calls for the withdrawal
of armed forces behind the armistice line. Does his
Government agree to that?
222. In view of this defiance and because of the
universal ruling which demands an immediate ceasefire, the United Nations should not yield to the FrenchIsrael-British
challenge to its verdict. The United Nations was not established to encourage aggression, but
to serve peace. More serious and dangerous for international relations and human doctrines is to subject peace
to the desires of aggression, to suppress right and justice
by the rule of force. If the United Nations is going to
tolerate the principle of the superiority
of aggression,
then humanity should change the standards of life altogether. If the United Kingdom and France are given
the opportunity to succeed in their policy of war, then
peace and right will lose their merit in every case.
223. The im’mediate task of this emergency special session is to find means by which the General Assembly
could honour its decision and by which we could go
immediately to the aid of the victim if the aggressors
continued their military operations against Egypt,
224. Egypt is suffering under the fire of merciless
torture of a three-Power
alliance. No human conscience
would ever admit what is taking place there. What is
equally horrible is the catastrophe which struck the
300,000 Arabs in the Gaza Strip by the march of Israel
troops into the area. Are these people going to be condemned to death and destruction because there will be
no room for them in Israel? Or are they going to be
thrown out of the border areas as destitute refugees?
Where can they go, and how? Is the United Nations
going to add their number to their brethren, the 900,000
refugees who subsist on United Nations relief? And
how and when?
225. After al!, the Gaza Strip was the partial payment
to Israel for Its employment as a tool of aggression.
In this respect, 1 wish to read to you a piece of news
to show that the French forces have taken an active
part in the Israel aggression. It is from today’s issue
of the New York Daily Mirror,
and it reads as follows :
“Mrs.
Lorraine
Suddath, formerly
of 43-22 194th
Street, Flushing,
Queens, debarked from a plane at
Idlewlld and told of seeing battle-garbed French troops
at Lydda Airport
in Israel, on Sunday.”

Special

Session-Plennry

Meetings

226. There is, I am afraid, a second payment which
Israel wishes to demand. I shall read to you what the
IsraeI Prime Minister, Mr. David Ben-Gurion, said to
the Israel Parliament on 15 October of last month about
this particular Israel aim. He said:
“I do not know whence came this doubtful initiative for a so-called peace settlement. Egypt still is
occupying the Gaza Strip, which does not belong
to it. Without any right, the Hashemite Jordan Government
occupied extensive
parts
of Western
Palestine.”
There are now reports that the zero hour is approaching for an Israel attack on Jordan territory.
227. We in Jordan are aware of these Israel aggressive expansionist plans. But our homeland will not be
easily usurped. We are there, and in every spot of the
Arab countries, standing ready and firm. The battile of
Egypt has not ended yet, and the battle of the Arabs
has not yet begun. Egypt, throughout history, has repelled every invasion against its soil, and destroyed
armies and empires and survived victorious. Palestine,
throughout
the foreign conquests and invasions that
came upon it, invariably emerged as an Arab land.
We shall defend our homeland to the last drop in our
veins. This inspiration gives us the power not to yield
to the logic of force, no matter how great the disaster
and no matter how massive and cruel the aggression
of Israel, France and the United Kingdom.
228. The only reason for the calling of this emergency
special session was to take all measures possible under
the “Uniting for peace” resolution to effect a cease-fire,
in view of the failure of the Security Council to do so+
A cease-fire resolution cannot be construed as a “recommendation” like any other resolution of the General
Assembly which might be taken on any other matter
because it is a resolution taken to meet an immediate
need. There is a breach of the peace and an act of
aggression that must stop immediately. It accepts no
bargain. If the General Assembly scores another faihrre
after that of the Security Council in arresting the aggression against Egypt immediately, then the fate of
the United Nations Charter will be sealed.
229. My delegation feels that the draft resolution
sponsored by nineteen Members, among which Jordan
is numbered, and submitted to the consideration of the
General Assembly, is the appropriate draft resolution
for the present situation. We urge the Assembly
to
give it full support.
When at this
go, we adopted
112a dramatic manner and almost unanimously
a resolution calling for an immediate cease-fire and for the
withdrawal
of the attacking forces of the United Kingdom, France and Israel from Egyptian soil, as the first
immediate step for restoring peace in the Middle East,
the world as a whole expected’ immediate compliance
with the provisions of that resolution by the parties
concerned. The resolution clearly stood as a moral conldemnation of the acts of #brutal aggression committed
by three Member States against a fello,w Member State
of our Organization.
It was felt here that it would,
indeed, be intolerable to allow these acts of aggression
to continue unchecked.
231. However, it is sad to note that the Governments
of the United Kingdom, France and Israel have seen
fit only to ignore that resolution, which has been endorsed #by practically all the peoples of the world;
to ignore a resolution based on the principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter, which they have

563rd

meeting-3

chosen to violate, They have continued their military
aggression against Egypt, bringing about more destruction, more death, more hatred, more war-and
all this, cynically in the name of peace. If this is the way
they understand the making of peace---peace by armed
aggression- then their conception of peace is obviously
quite different from that envisaged in the United
Nations ,Charter. This is tragic. What is more, by ignoring the resolution they have challenged the world
moral force, which challenge, believe me, will do them
no good, now or in the future. They can carry out
such a policy because they have the armed might for
it. They can now continue to maim and to kill, they can
now continue to destroy because they possess the
weapons for such acts. But I would remind them that
they thus aIso continue to invite hatred and condemnation against what they dare commit, and this again
will do them no good, now or in the future. They may
be able to kill and to destroy material things, as they
are doing now, but they never can kill and destroy the
moral forces which have accumulated against them by
these very acts of aggression and which led to the
adoption of the resolution by this Assembly two
nights ago. ,
232. They call their action a police action. My country
and people, not long ago, knew only too well what
this kind of “police action” really means. Some people
in London and elsewhere have a strange conception of
police indeed. Ironically, the London policeman himself-1 mean, of course, the real policeman in London
for whom I, who have lived in London, have the
greatest regard, who carries out his duties unarmed
and in the most gracious manner-will,
I believe, ,be
among the first to protest against the London Government’s conception of police action, You cannot claim
to be a policeman-recalling what the representative of
the United Kingdom said the other night [561st nzeetirsg]--with the duty to restore peace and separate the
intruder in a home from the owner of the home by
killing off the owner of that home. If you do, then YOU
are either a bad-and indeed a very bad-policeman or
this self-appointed policeman belongs in reality to the
group of intruders. No, let us talk plain words. The
present military action against Egypt is aggression,
pure and simple. It has nothing to do with motives of
peace. It is the selfish, narrow material interests of
the United Kingdom and France, as was lucidly pointed
out by the repres,entative of Ecuador the other night
[56&d meeting], which they attempt to impose. by
force, by their bombers and tanks, by guns and against
the law, against the Security Council resolution of
13 October 1956 on the Suez Canal [S/3675] and now
against the resolution of this General Assembly-and
indeed against the decent conception of peace.
233. We are willing to recognize interests-the legitimate interests of all the parties. But no one, merely
because he happens to possessthe means for destruction, the means for killing the other party, can be
allowed to take the law into his own hands. This is in
essence,as I seeit, the real issue-you may call it the
moral issue-at this grave moment. T,hat is the reason
why this Assembly should uphold strongly the resolution it ,has overwhelmingly adopted, and why it should
not tolerate it to be challenged and ignored in such a
brutal manner. If we allow naked force employed in
cold blood by two permanent members of the Security
Council, in collaboration with a third Member of our
world Organization, to destroy the resolution, then I
believe that this Assembly, and indeed the United
Nations, stands at a moment of great crisis.

November

1956

67

234. We should take strong measures and empl?y
all possi,blemeans at our d8isposalto give effect to tlvs
resolution. By the very nature of this emergency session, called under the “Uniting for peace” resolution,
the “recommendations”, as our resolution may be called,
are endowed with a special character. This emergency
special sessionhas the competence and the powers comparable to those of the Security Council, which in fact it
replaces under the special circumstances which prevail
on this question ; indeed the question was referred to
us by the Security Council. Therefore, we can take effective measures, apply sanctions-economic sanctions
and other kinds of sanctions if necessary-even go to
the extent of dispatching forces to the troubled area
with a view to securing the implementation of our resolution.
23.5. First of all, we must persist in our endeavours
to check the aggression, to stop war and to restore
peace in Egypt now, in a manner consistent with the
sovereignty, integrity and dignity of the independent
Egyptian State, Egypt has the right to demand this
much from this Assembly, as a Member of our C!rg??lzation. The prestige of the United Nations, the vlablhty
of our Organization has been shakenin its very foundations, We should secure the effective adherence of
Member States to our resolution, and if necessary
forcefully, in order to check aggression and restore
peace and. stability in the Middle East.
236. That is why my delegation, together with eighteen other delegations, has submitted the joint draft
resolution which has been introduced by the representatives of the Philippines, India and others [A/3275].
This nineteen-Power draft resolution should therefore
be adopted if we honestly meant to arrest the aggression when we adopted the resolution on 2 November,
237. My delegation was; rather surprised to see the
two draft resolutions submitted by the United States
delegation [A/3272,3273].
I fully share the view of
the representative of the Philippines that these two
draft resolutions do not meet exactly the immediate
need of the present situation with which we are confronted, namely the non-compliance of the attacking
parties with the resolution adopted two nights ago.
These two United States draft resolutions, while
dealing with two important issueswhich have a bearing on the present aggressive actions of the three
Powers, in fact circumvent the issuefor which we have
gathered in this special meeting again tonight. The fact
that the two United States draft resolutions, regardless
of their own merits, do not even mention non-compliance and do not even express regret at the serious contempt of the IGeneral Assembly resolution is to me
rather extraordinary. My delegation is therefore grateful to the representative of the United States that he
will now not press his two draft resolutions to the vote
at this meeting. My delegation believes that as long as
the aggression is not checked, the war is not ended and
the hostile forces are not withdrawn from the territory
of Egypt, no favourable conditions for solutions of
future problems in that area can be created.
238. As regards the draft resolution submitted by the
representative of Canada [n/3276] I must say that it
is an interesting proposal which may have its practical
merits in conjunction with the nineteen-Power draft
resolution, that is to say, to enforce the implementation
not only of the cease-fire but also of the immediate
withdrawal of the foreign forces. The Canadian draft
iresolution is not quite clear on this point. Pending
further clarification, including the meaning of the

68

General

AssemIily-First

Emergency

phrase “with the consent of the nations concerned” in
setting up the plan as envisaged by the draft resolution,
my delegation reserves the right to take a fmal stand
upon it.
(translated
osed by the
died by my
delegation with the greatest ,care and interest, but I
cannot give a final opinion until I receive instructions
from my Government. Personally, I think that these
drafts embody constructive features which might in
the future contribute to the solution of the complex
problems to which they refer. On the other hand, ‘certain objections which have been raised on grounds of
proceclure seem at first glance to be well founded.
240. I fully agree with those representatives who
think that a cease-fire and a withdrawal from Egyptian
territory of the land, sea and air forces which have invaded it are matters of t,he utmost urgency. I think
that the appeal made by the General Assembly to the
Powers responsible for the actions censured by this
august body will in practice have to be backed up by
the dispatch of an international force under the United
Nations flag, capable of physically separating the combatants in the Near East and composed of troops from
countries acceptable to all the countries involved in
the conflict. For that reason, such a force could not, in
my opinio?, consist of French and British units, as is
suggested m sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph 2 of the
United Kingdom letter [A/3269], at least not in so far
as the Egyptian frontier is concerned.
241. The Canadian draft resolution propos.ed by that
country’s Secretary of State for External Affairs is,
on the other hand, in keeping with the views of my
delegation and with the extreme urgency of the situation in the Near East, We welcome it.
242. With regard to the draft resolution proposed by
the representatives of nineteen Asian and African nations, which really amounts to a reaffirmation of the
recommendations adopted by the General Assembly on
2 November, my delegation will vote for it.
243. The statements made by the Governments of
Egypt and Israel, to which we have listened with deep
feeling tonight, arouse in us a faint hope that we are
perhaps not so far from co+liatory
solution as we at
first feared. In the meantime I take the liberty of repeating wbat I said at at our previous meeting: “It is
the inescapable duty of the United Nations to give
effect to the first of the purposes set forth in the
ce and security.”
(translated from
into existence as
an international authority in consequence of the events
of the Second World War; its fundamental purpose, as
has ;been repeated so often in this forum, is the maintenance of international
peace and security. ‘On two
inlportant occasions the United Nations has been confronted with difficut situations created by the violation
of the principles set forth in the Charter : I refer to
the Korean war and to the situation which constitutes
the reason for this emergency session.
245. We are confronted with a situation created by
three Member States, two of which are, what is more,
permanent members of the Security Council and as
such under a special duty to ensure the maintenance
of international peace and security, since they enjoy
certain privileges not enjoyed by the other Members
of the United Nations.

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

24.6. It grieves us to have to recognize thaf, in addition to Israel, which might admittedly be said to have
certain more or less justifiable or plausible reasons for
making war on the Arab countries, two permanent
members of the Security ICouncil, two great Powers
which have enjoyed the reputation of being representative of Western civilization, France and the United
Kingdom,
have joined in this military
action. We
listened carefully and, at the same time, with surprise,
to what the representatives of the United Kingdom
and France saicl in the Security Council and at this
special session of the Assembly in order to justify*
juridically
rather than politically,
the action which
their countries have taken simultaneously with Israel.
We cannot but state that we were greatly surprised that
those Powers should try to justify, in the way they
have done, their attack on a small country like Egypt,
which is to a certain extent defenceless against aggression committed on such a scale and launched in a
manner that is patently unjustified.
247. Though our legal training, like that of all Latin
American countries, draws inspiration from Roman
law and Roman sources, its fundamental sources are
French, t,he enlightened jurisprudence of France, and
we fail totally to understand how these civilized and
cultured countries can hope to’ convince the world that
what they are doing is something justifiable
internationally under international
law.
248. Two night ago this special session of the
Assembly, in view of the Security Council’s impotence
as a result of the veto, adopted a resolution
[997
(ES-O], calling upon the three aggressor Powers,
namely, Israel, France and the United Kingdom,
to
suspend hostilities, to withdraw their forces and to
end this wrongful contest in Egypt. As we all know,
the General Assembly’s exhortation was not heeded but,
on the contrary, defied. In other words, these three
Member States of the United Nations continue to defy
world public opinion, not only public opinion in the
neutral countries <but also public opinion in the countries actually involved in the situation. Repeated references have been heard here to the tone of the speeches
made, for example, in Parliament in London. We all
know how the United Kingdom action has been received
and we all know the repercussion that its action has
caused in the United States and in the world at large,
Yet the miiitary action, the attack, is continuing,
249. Tonight two draft resolutions have been presented to the Assembly by the United States [A/3272,
32731 ; I do not think it necessary to refer to them,
because the United States delegation itself has stated
that it will not press for consideration of them now. In
fact, from the point of view of my delegation, these
drafts are irrelevant at this juncture. They are interesting and of potential usefulness ; they may be used in
the future for the purpose of solving the Palestine
problem in general and the Suez Canal problem in
particular,, but, I repeat, they are irrelevant
to the
solution of the urgent problem for which this special
session of the Assembly was convened.
2.50. Consequently I wish to refer only to the two
drafts which, in our opinion, are relevant at this
moment, at this time of the night, when the ti-agedy
on the battlefield is continuing and the Assembly must
take some form of action that may succeed. There are
two draft sesolutions which ought to be discussed and,
if possible, adopted immediately : the nineteen-Power
draft [A/3275]
and the Canadian draft [A/3,2766].
These two draft resolutions are of primary importance

563rd

meeting-3

and should receive the immediate and exclusive attention of this meeting.
2.51. Some very brilliant speeches have been made this
evening; but, if my colleagues will allow me, we, would
say that this is not the time for very long speeches,
but for action, for adopting resolutions which can lead
to some result. For this reason, my delegation takes
the liberty of proposing that we should vote on these
two draft resolutions without delay. My delegation
does not consider them to be contradictory ; on the contrary, it finds that they are complementary and that
both can be adopted.
252. One delegation-I
do not know whether I am
mistaken in thinking that it was the United States
delegation-proposed
that the Canadian draft resolution should be voted on first. We ,would agree to
that procedure, but on the condition that the other
proposal should be voted on afterwards. In fact, we
should prefer the nineteen-Power draft resolution to be
voted on first. We find more useful elements which
would contribute towards an immediate settlement of
the problem in the nineteen-Power
draft resolution
than in the Canadian text. Accordingly, we would
propose that the Assembly should vote first on the
nineteen-Power draft and then on the Canadian draft.
253. In the Canadian draft resolution, we find a
phrase which causes us great concern, namely, “with
the consent of the nations governed”. Perhaps it is
due to our own legal training that we fail to understand
how the States w.hich have placed themselves beyond
the pale of international law, which have violated the
United Nations :Charter, which are offending against
the princ‘iples adopted at San Francisco, can be consulted and asked for their consent to an international
police action by the United Nations.
254. We have often .heard, in this Assembly and in
the Security Council, the argument of some delegations
-1 am thinking of the French and United Kingdom
delegations-that
they are carrying out an international
police action. It has already been said here that this
is simply ironical. It is inadmissible that one or two
States should claim the right to carry out an international police action when the only organ which can
do this is precisely the Security Council or, if it fails
to act, the General Assembly itself by virtue of the
“Uniting for peace’, resolution.
255. I therefore think that it is not acceptable in law,
that for the purpose of the establishment of a body or
force which is to carry out a police action, one should
consult the parties against which this action is to be
carried out. The only country which might be consulted, precisely because its territory is the scene of the
warlike acts, is Egypt; but we fail to see how Israel,
which has invaded Egyptian territory, and France and
the United Kingdom which are co-operating in the
attack, can be consulted in this matter.
2561 The PRESIDENT
j tradatsd
from Sfiartish)
:
Tfh;rt.rstrahan
representative has the floor on a point
257. Mr. WALKER
(Australia) : On a point of
order, I desire to inform the Assembly of the action
that I am taking, arising from very important reports
that have just come into my hands. I wish to read
the following bulletin from Reuters, datelined Vienna,
4 November :
“Premier
Imre Nagy of Hungary declared over
Budapest Radio today that the Russian Army was

November

1956

69

attacking the Hungarian capital and the Hungarians
were fighting back.
“Nagy, speaking in English, announced: ‘This is
Imre Nagy speaking. In the early hours of this
morning, Soviet troops started to attack the Hungarian capital with the apparent purpose of overthrowing the democratic Government of the Hungarian People’s! Republic.’
“ ‘Our troops are in battle with Soviet forces,’ he
continued, ‘The Hungarian army is in position. Ths
is my message to the Hungarian people and the
whole world.’ ”
2.58. The Security Council adjourned this afternoon
with the intention of meeting again on Monday morning. Before the adjournment it was made clear from my
questions and the statements of the President of the
Council that the Council could be called at any time.
In view of this news, I am now asking the President
of the Security Council to invite the members of the
Council to meet with him within half an hour in his
office for a consultation regarding the next steps-and
the immediate
steps, I trust-to
be taken by the
Security Council.
259. The PRESIDENT
translated from Sbanish) :
The Chair takes note of t\ le statement made by the
representative of Australia.

Assembly 01; 2 November, because we cknsider it appropriate to the requirements of the present situation.
261. Thailand is a firm supporter of the United
Nations, for it sees in this world Organization the only
hope for peace and the best guarantee for the territorial
integrity and independence of free nations. The United
Nations must not in any way be frustrated in its task of
maintaining
international
peace and security. Hence
the “Uniting
for peace” resolution, which now finds
its appropriate application in the present case. My delegation whole-heartedly supported the convening of this
emergency special session of the General Assembly.
262. Because this is an emergency special session,
however, it cannot be expected to settle the deep-rooted
conflict between Israel and Egypt or to settle the thorny
problem of the Suez Canal ibut it should overcome the
emergency so tragically created by the invasion of
Egypt by Israel and the so-called police action by
France and the United Kingdom against Egypt, acts
unwarranted under the Charter of the United Nations.
Egypt, the victim of such aggressive acts, must be
saved from further armed attack. Conditions of peace
should, therefore, be restored forthwith, so that peaceful solutions may be further pursued.
263. Thus, there are two problems before the ‘General
Assembly: one, the immediate problem of measures to
be taken forthwith for the restoration of international
peace ; the other, the definitive problem of settling the
deep-rooted conflict between Israel and the Arab
Sta;;; and settling the thorny problem of the Suez
264. With regard to the first problem, inasmuch as
only an incomplete response has so far been received
from the parties concerned, my delegation shares the
view of the other co-sponsors of the draft resolution
contained in .dscument A/3275 that the General Assembly should reaf?irm its resolution of 2 November
1956 so that an immediate cease-fire may be brought

70

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

about. In supporting such reaffirmation, my delegation
is desirous of making a pressing appeal to the United
Kingdom, France and Israel in the interests of international peace.
265. When once conditions of peace have been restored, the atmosphere will be favourable for a real
search for definitive
and peaceful solutions.
This,
however,
does not mean that the search should not
be started now, because it is not likely that final solutions will be rapidly forthcoming. Committees of study
entrusted with the task of submitting recommendations
could be set up, T.his, in the opinion oif my delegation,
applies to the draft resolution submitted by the United
States in document A/3272.
266. With regard to the United States draft resolution ‘contained in document A/3273, however, it would
appear that the committee on the Suez Canal problem
would be vested with greater powers than those of
recommlndation,
and my delegation would therefore
need further time to consider it,
267. The delegation
of T,hailand
supports
the
Cauadian draft resohttion [A/3276]
as a constructive
proposal to implement the cease fire.
26s. The PRESIDENT
(trurrsla~sd f~:ronz S@nisb) :
The representative of Denmark has the floor on a point
of order.
269. Mr. ESKELUND.
(Denmark)
: We have had
a very comprehensive
discussion
on the two draft
resolutions
which are most immediate, that is, the
Canadian and the nineteen-Power
drafts. Since time
is going fast, and matters are very urgent, may I
suggest that we take a vote immediately on those two
draft resolutions. I feel sure that my suggestion will
have very wide support. I think there must be some
possibility within the rules of procedure, not to close
the debate, but to adjourn the debate until we have
voted.
270. The PRESIDENT
(translated front Sputiislz) :
The Chair considers that rule 76 of the rules of procedure should be applied on the understanding
that,
after the vote, the debate will continue so that the
representatives
previously on the list of speakers can
make their statements. I shall put the motion of the
representative
of Denmark to the vote without calling
on two speakers in favour and two against.
That motion was adopted by 53 votes to I, with 9
abstentions.
271. I give the Aoor to the representative
of India on
a point of’order.
272. Mr. LALL
(India) : We have before us two
draft resolutions, one submitted by nineteen countries
in document A/3275, and the other the Canadian draft
resolution which appears in document A/3276. These
two draft resolutions are very closely interlinked, and
in my personal view it does not matter which is voted
on first. We have had discussions
about this matter
informally with various delegations, and I understand
that it would assist the acceptance of both these draft
resolutions
if that contained in document A/3275,
which wo~~lcl
normally be voted on first under the
terms of rule 93 of the rules of procedure, were voted
on after the Canadiau draft resolution.
273. We would be willing to agree to a vote on the
Canadian draft resolution before the vote on the nineteen-power
draft resolution,
provided that the vote
on the latter was taken immediately after the vote on
t,he Canadian draft resolution. We agree to this in order
to expedite our proceedings and in order to get the

Special

Session-Plennry

Meetings

maximum vote in favour of both draft resolutions. It
is in that spirit that we agree to this procedure.
274. While I am here, may I, with great respect to
the representative of Canada, say a few things about
his draft resolution, because I do not propose to come
to this rostrum again tonight if I can help it. What
I wish to say about the Canadian draft resolution is
that we will understand the words “with the consent
of the nations concerned” to mean with the consent of
the nations which will contribute to an emergency international United Nations force. It will be the understanding of the delegation of India that countries which
are engaged in hostilities will not be members of the
emergency force.
275. We also understand the words “cessation
of
hostilities”
to be governed by two phrases in this draft
resolution. One is in the preambtle, which speaks of
“compliance with the resolution of 2 November 1956”,
and the second is the last phrase of this draft resolution, “in accordance with the terms of the aforetnentioned resolution”, “In accordance with the terms” must
mean in accordance with all the terms of the aforementioned resolution, and we would be grateful if the representative of Canada would kindly introduce the word
“all” into that phrase between the words “with”
and
(‘the terms”. If that were done, it would be quite clear
that the operative part--that
is the supervision
of the
cessation of hostilities-will
refer to all the contents
of the resolution which we adopted on 2 November.
It is on that understanding that my delegation will be
prepared to vote for the Canadian draft resolution.
276. I would only add that a vote for that draft
resolution at this stage does not commit us to the plan
which the Secretary-General
will submit to US within
forty-eight
hours. I am not suggesting that we will
not accept the plan the Secretary-General
will draw up,
but I would point out that obviously we are not
committed at this stage of the plan. All we are asking
for and voting for is the request that the SecretaryGeneral should submit such a plan within forty-eight
hours.
277. The PRESIDENT
(tramluted from SfmG.~l~) :
There seems to be general agreement that the Canadian
resolution should be put to the vote first. After that we
would vote upon the draft resolutions submitted by the
nineteen Powers.
278. I should like to ask the representative of Canada
his opinion of the interpretation which has been placed
on his draft resolution.
279. Mr. URQUIA
(El Salvador)
(trmslnted
jnmt
Sjnnish) : My delegation completely agrees that we
should vote immediately upon the Canaclian draft resolution #but for the reasons which I set forth at the end
of my brief statement just now I would request a
separate vote on the phrase “with the consent of the
nations concerned.” I make this request because my
delegation does not agree with that phrase, and wishes
to vote against it. We would support the remainder of
the draft resolution.
280. Mr. PEARSON
(Canada) : As the draft resolution standing in the name of my delegation is about
to be voted on, and as some question has been raised
with regard to the interpretation of two phrases, in it,
perhaps I might just say a word as to what we had in
mind in respect of these particular words which have
been mentioned.
281. In the case of the first phrase, which has been
referred
to ,by the representative
of El Salvador,
namely, the phrase “with the consent of the nations

I
1
I
i

563rd

meeting-e’kwentber

concerned,‘, our interpretation
d that is exactly the
same as the interpretation
of the representative of India.
What we had in mind was that the Secretary-General,
in submitting a plan to the United Nations, should not
include in that plan for an international
force the
name of any country without the consent of that
particular country. That may seem an obvious point,
but our own experience in the past has shown that it
is just as well to make it quite clear, because it has
happened that on armistice commissions Governments
have been named at international
meetings not only
before they had agreed but even before they were
consulted on the subject, and these words are intended
to make it doubly sure that will not happen on this
occasion.
282. So far as the last few words of the draft resolution are concerned- “in accordance with the terms of
the aforementioned
resolution”-our
interpretation
again is that of the repres,entative oiE India, namely,
that it should read “in accordance with all the terms of
the aforementioned
resolution”.
283. I hope that with this clarification there will be
no doubt in any representative’s mind as to what he is
voting for.
284. Mr. URQUIA
(El Salvador) (tra&ated
from
Sfianistz) : In view of the interpretation
given :by the
representative of India and the explanation just provided by the representative
of <Canada as sponsor of the draft resolution, my delegation will not
insist on a separate vote, because if we are to understand that the “nations concerned” means those which I
will ,be reauested to Darticioate in the formation ot
this intera&ional
poli& force, or whatever it may be,
that will try to contribute to a settlement of the problem, then there is no need for a separate vote, and
we shall have no objection to supporting the draft
resolution.
285. The PRESIDENT
(tra&ated
from S@r;ish) :
I now put to the vote the draft resolution which has
been submitted by the delegation of Canada and which
is contained in document A/3276. A vote by roll-call
has #been requested.
Canada, Iaaving been drawlz by lot by the President,
called upon to vote first.
1~ fa.vour : Canada, Ceylon, Chile, .China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Cuba, Denmark,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador,
El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Finland,
Greece,
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia,
Libya,
Luxembourg,
Mexico,
Nepal, Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Norway, Pakistan,
Panama,
Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Spain, Sweden, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey, United States of America, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Cambodia.
Abstaining : Czechoslovakia, Egypt, France, Hungary, Israel, Laos, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union
of South Africa, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Albania, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic.
The draft resolution was adopted by 57 votes to
nowe, with
absdentiolzs.
286. The PRESIDENT
(tramlated from Sjmnish) :
The Assembly will now vote on the draft resolution

was

19

1956

which has been submitted by nineteen Powers and
which is contained in document A/3275. A vote by
roll-call has been requested.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Argentilza, having been drawfi by lot by ths President, mas called zcpon to vote @St.

In favour: Argentina, Austria, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Republic, Cambodia,
Canada, Ceylon, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Greece, Guatemala,, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia,
Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy,
Jordan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Mexico, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Spain, Syria,
Thailand, Turkey, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United States
of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Afghanistan, Albania.
Against : Australia,
France, Israel, New Zealand,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Abstailzing : Belgium, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Finland, Iceland, Laos, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Union of South Africa.
The draft resolution was adopted by 59 votes to 5,
with 12 abstentions.
287. The PRESIDENT
(tralzslated front Spanish) :
I call upon the representative of the United States on
a point of order.
I
int of order to sav that
we have just received word fFom our legation in &dapest that Budapest is under heavy bombardment, SO
much so that the staff of our own legation has had to
take refuge in the cellar of the building. Prior to that,
I saw some of the Press dispatches, notably one from
the Associated Press, which said: “Russian gangsters
have betrayed us. They are opening fire on all of
Budapest.”
289. And I sat here and heard the remark of the
representative of the Soviet Union about stopping
bloodshed in Egypt. Heaven knows I want to. $0~
bloodshed in Egypt, but I think there is a cymclstfl
about the Soviet Union representative talking about It
at the very moment when they were shedding blood in
Budapest. This will horrify everybody who knows about
it.
290. When I saw the first Press dispatches, I immediately asked for a meeting of the Security Council,
and I was very glad to learn that it will be called
soon. I simply wish to say in this great ~General Assembly of the United Nations how much our hearts go
out to the people of Hungary and with how much
warmth and feeling we think of them and wish for
them a happy issue out of their trials and a future of
independence.
291..
fell0
communication
in document A/3269 which I made to
the Secretary-General this morning and which contained
the response of my Government to the resolution
adopted in this Assembly forty-eight hours ago. I was
obliged to oppose that resolution at the time for reasons
well know to the Assembly, and my Government’s
response to it sets out briefly but, I think, clearly the
kind of action which it thinks can best meet the critical
emergency of the moment and pave the way for a

72

.General

Assembly--First

Emergency

settlement as soon as possilble hereafter of the two most
harassing and difficult problems of the Middle East.
292. I can add very little at this time to what I said
in my letter this morning, and I can only say this:
we believe that police actlon of the most urgent kind
is called for, and that is why we, with the French,
have stepped in. As I have said many times, we have
done so on a purely temporary basis, and the sooner
the United Nations can take over from us the more
we shall welcome that, particularly since our action has
been so much misunderstood
and criticized, even by
our friends.
293. I repeat that we believed that police action was
absolutely necessary, and at once, and is still necessary,
but we are anxious and eager that the United Nations
should take over this task as soon as it can possibly
be arranged. This idea is reflected in the draft resolution, which has just been adopted and which was advanced by the Secretary of State for External Affairs
of Canada. I found the central idea in that resolution of
great interest, but, as Mr. Pearson knows, my delegation did not see the text of his draft resolution ‘before
he read it out. I have not had the time to give it a
full and complete study, nor have I been able to refer
it to my Government.
Indeed, at first sight it does
seem to me that in some respects the resolution goes
too far, and in others not far enough. It was for that
reason that I was not tible to vote for the resolution,
but, equally, I was able to abstain.
294. With regard to the draft resolution submitted
by the nineteen Powers, which has been just adopted,
I was obliged to vote against it simply because it sets
out in a more emphatic form the resolution adopted
by the ‘General Assembly forty-eight
hours ago and,
in our view, does not go to the root of the problem,
as my Government sees it. In our view, if we followed
the course of that resolution it would only lead us
back to the unhappy and increasingly dangerous state
of affairs that has already prevailed for far too long in
that part of the world and that has caused the recent
tragic outburst of violence <by Israel against Egypt,
295. We have not been asked to vote tonight on the
two draft resolutions s&r&ted
by the representative
of the United States [A/3272,3273].
They address
themselves to what are undoubtedly
the two basic
problems of the area, and I think it is valuable to have
this formulation
of the thoughts of the Government
of the United States upon them. I have merely studied
them this evening, naturally with the greatest interest,
and they will be carefully studied by my Government.
296. Mr. WALKE
-I take this opportunity’
ustralian delegation
on the two -draft resolutions
on which we have just
voted. The best explanation I can give of the position of
my delegation is to read out to you the following statement made by the Prime Minister of Australia,
Mr,
Menzies, on 3 November, Mr, Menzies said:
“As I pointed ,out in my statement to Parliament,
the action taken by the United Kingdom and France
was and is police action, the only quick and practical
means of separating the belligerents and protecting
the Canal. Without
such police action, the IsraelEgypt position might by now have become completely
.out of hand, with spreading consequences. If the
United Nations
Assen*bly
accepts the idea of a
United Nations
police force on and around the
Canal, and the Security Council adopts it and acts
upon it, the object of protection of the Canal will
have been achieved. Meanwhile
it is clear that the

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

United Kingdom
and France cannot withdraw.
Police action, to be effective, must be continuous
~
while the danger exists.
“I fear there is much confusion about the position
of Egypt, That the author of the Suez Canal confiscation and the promoter of anti-British
and antiIsrael activities in the Middle East should now be
represented as the innocent victim of unprovoked
aggression is, of course, both wrong and absurd.”
Mr. Menzies concluded his statement by saying:
“We will await the concrete development of Mr.
Pearson’s helpful proposal for an international police
force with most sympathetic interest.”
297. As Australia voted against the resolution which
was adopted on 2 November we could not this, evening
do other than vote against the resolution proposed by
India and other delegations, which in its operative
paragraph reaffirms that previous resolution.
As rei
gards the Canadian draft resolution, I would like to
say clearly that we support, as a matter of principly,
the proposal that the Secretary-General
should subnut
as soon as possible-within
forty-eight hours if possible
-a plan for the setting up, with the consent of the nations concerned, of an emergency internatiorlal
United
Nations force to secure and supervise the cessation of
hostilities. We are in favour of that proposal. But as
this proposal is emibodied in a resolution which is directed primarily towards facilitating
compliance with
the resolution of two days ago, against which we voted
in accordance with the views of my Government,
it
was not possible for me to support the Canadian
resolution,
and I therefore abstained.
298. Nevertheless,, the Australian
~Government does
support in principle the suggestion that the United
Nations should study the establishment, as soon 9s
possible, of an international emergency force of t.bs
kind, and it is our view that if it is practical to establish
such a force, that will on the one hand remove the
need for the sort of police action which
has been
undertaken on this occasion by the United Kingdom
and France and it may make a very important
contribution
to the solution of the problems
of the
Middle East.
c$-@ranslated
vote of my delega300. During our previous meeting, I explained
at
length, and I believe clearly, the policy of my Government in the matter with which the Assembly
is now
concerned. Some speakers said tonight that the French
and United Kingdom Go,vernments failed to take any
account of the recommendations
in the resolution
adopted by the Assembly on 2 November.
I wish to
say that, on the contrary, my Government
examined
those recommendations with the greatest attention,
as
may be seen from its letter to the Secretary-General,
the text of which is given in document A/3268.
301. The French ‘Governmelit, like the United Kingdom Government,
considers that it is essential
to1
halt the hostilities threatening the Suez Canal as soon
as possible and to interpose between the combatants
a force which will prevent the resumption of hostilities.
The two Governments are of the opinion tllat the time
has come, by taking the measures in question, to create
the necessary conditions for a definitive settlement
of
the Israel-Arab
war, which threatens the legitimslte
interests of so many countries,.
302. The two Governments
urgently
request
the
Governments of Israel and Egypt to agree to the sta-

563rd

meeting-3

tioning between their armies of a United Nations
force whose mission would be to keep the peace. They
ask the United Nations to take the necessary steps
to organize an,d maintain such a force until Israel
and the Arab States have agreed on peace conditions
and until satisfactory arrangements have been made
with regard lo the Suez Canal. When these agreements
have been concluded, they will have to be guaranteed
by the United Nations.
303. Finally, the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom ask that pending the constitution of
the United Nations force the ,Governments of Israel
and Egypt should agree to the immediate stationing
between their respective armed forces of small detachments of British-French
troops, acting, as it were, on
behalf of the United Nations.
304. The British-French
military operations will be
brought to an end as soon as the requests which I
have stated are fulfilled.
305. Which of these requests can be said to be motivated by selfish ambition or national interest? Their
acceptance would cause no prejudice to the sovereignty
of any State. The parties would merely place their fate
in the hands of the international
Organization,
convinced at least that the Organization is determined to
find a definitive solution for the problems which have
occasioned their sufferings, The Governments of France
and the United Kingdom have stated more than once
and repeat today that the intervention of their joint
forces in the beginning and of the United Nations
forces as soon as possible is merely temporary.
306. In conclusion, I wish to say that the French
Government’s objective is a final settlement, and that it
regards its intervention as merely a temporary stage
and hopes that the United Nations will as soon as possible take over the responsibility which, owing to the
urgency of the situation, my Government was obliged
at first to assume, along with the United Kingdom
Government.
307. These remarks should suffice to explain my vote.
I could not vote for the draft resolution proposed by
the nineteen Powers [A/3275]
because it conflicted
utterly with the purposes I have just defined. I abstained in the vote on the draft resolution proposed by
the Canadian delegation [A/3276] chiefly because of its
reference to the resolution adopted by this Assembly
which we did not accept.
308. I would not wish to leave this rostrum without
associating myself with the remarks just made by Mr.
Lodge on the situation in Hungary. A few hours ago,
in the Security Council [753rd meetirtg] , I questioned
the Soviet assurances and I asked whether the massed
forces of the Red Army were not getting ready to stage
another “Prague”
coebp at Budapest. I hope that events
will not prove me right, and that the Hmigarian
patriots, with the support of the United Nations, will
be able to protect their independence.
(translat+
fro++2
he Security Counemergency special
session of the General Assembly to discuss the attack
on Egypt [S/3721] and the resolution adopted by the
General Assembly on 2 November [997 (ES-I)]
are
great steps forward on the road to international peace
and the strengthening of the United Nations Charter
and will tend to reinforce the Organization’s authority.
310. It is unfortunate that the General Assembly’s
decision has been rejected by the United Kingdom and

November

1956

73

France and that those countries have failed to modify
their views and to realize the importance of that decision. The action of the Governments of the United
Kingdom, France and Israel in launching a military
attack against Egypt must be described as a violation
of the United Nations Charter. In the name of its people and its ‘Government, the delegation of the Albanian
People’s Republic expresses the warmest sympathy for
the Egyptian people in its sore trial and at the same
time affirms its admiration for the determination of
this people in its righteous struggle for the liberty and
independence of its country.
311. The British and French Govermnents urged
Israel to attack Egypt and, after a brutal ultimatum,
which is inconsistent with the rules of international
law, ostensibly for the purpose of freedom of navigation
in the Suez Canal, started a military action against a
sovereign State, a Member of the United Nations. Are
the United Kmgdom and France the only countries
concerned with navigation in the Canal? Certainly not.
This attack is nothing but a demonstration of the familiar policy of force. The representatives of the United
Kingdom and France have many times uttered fine
sentiments concerning the sovereignty of peoples. They
have frequently stated that their Governments had no
intention of intervening in the domestic affairs of other
countries. Their speeches have been full of such words
as liberty, equality, human dignity, non-intervention,
and so forth. All these statements, however, are m
flagrant contradiction with the actions of the United
Kingdom atsd France.
31.2. We must put an end to this attack and make sure
that the people of Egypt have the right to live in freedom on their own soil. In our time, those who try to
tamper with the destinies of other peoples merit universal censure. Times have changed. It is madness to
think that a people can be crushed by force. All the
peoples of the world desire lasting peace on earth. It is
not long since the Second World War, which brought
to humanity terrible losses and incalculable ruin. The
miseries and the calamities caused by that war are still
vivid in men’s minds. ‘Can we allow the world to be
dragged into a fresh catastrophe? The reply is clear.
The peoples want no more of blood and disasters. The
peoples of the whole world, and in particular the small
countries, of which Albania is one, have always considered that the great Powers had the decisive role in
safeguarding the peace of the world. The United Kingdom and France, which are among those Powers, have
not fulfilled the hopes of the peoples. They have taken
a dangerous road which may well lead to disastrous
consequences.
313. At this time we are faced with a glaring violation of the United Nations Charter. In view of the
dangerous situation created in the Middle East, it is
the duty of the General Assembly, the supreme organ
of the United Nations, to take effective steps to halt
the attack against Egypt.
314, In the hope that peace would be re-established
in the Middle East, the delegation of the Albanian
People’s Republic voted, on 2 November, for the draft
resolution proposed by the United States representative
[A/3256] and supported by the majority of the members of the General Assembly. I must regretfully say,
however, that it is clear already that the United Kingdom and France have no respect for the authority of
the United Nations. It is time to stop making speeches
and to take practical measures to end the bombing of
the Egyptian people. To save the peace, the General

74

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Assembly should denounce the aggressors and obtain
the withdrawal of their armed forces from Egypt.
315. My delegation voted for the nineteendpower draft
resolution which the Assembly has just adopted, in the
hope that it would lead to a positive solution of the
problem in the interests of the maintenance of peace
in the world.
Ukrainian
delegation welcomes this meeting of the
emergency speaal session of the General Assembly
convened to consider the extremely serious situation
which has arisen in the Near East. The United Kingdom, France and Israel have refused to comply with
the General Assembly resolution adopted at the previous meeting by an overwhelming majority, and have
failed to halt their aggressive action against Egypt,
which has been condemned by the peoples of the entire
world. The letters sent by the permanent representatives of the United Kingdom and France in response
to the General Assembly resolution indicate that both
Governments maintain their stand and that regardless
of consequences they will continue their military action,
which they call “police action”.
317. Thus, armed aggression in the Near East continues. Egyptian towns and villages are being subjected
to brutal bombardment.
Preparations are beirig made
for an invasion by United Kingdom and French armed
forces in the Suez Canal zone, and hour by hour we receive further news of the loss of human lives and the
,destruction of property.
318. The United Nations cannot pass over all these
facts. We must take immediate action to give effect
to the ‘General Assembly resolution, with a view to
achieving an immediate cessation of hostilities and the
withdrawal of foreign armed forces from Egyptian territory. The peace-loving peoples of the world demand
protection for Egypt, a victim of completely unwarranted aggression; they demand a halt to the activities
of the colonialists, which are incompatible with the
honour and conscience of mankind.
319. The Ukrainian delegation adds its voice to those
raised in emphatic protest against the criminal actions
of the aggressors, and takes this opportunity to express
its deep sympathy for the heroic Egyptian people, who
are fighting for the freedom and independence of their
country.
320. In an attempt to justify the acts of aggression
committed by the British-French
armed forces, the
United Kingdom and French representatives have repeatedly stated that their purpose is to bring about a
settlement of the conflict between Egypt and Israel and
to restore peace in the Near East. They also affirm that
they are acting to ensure freedom of navigation through
the Suez Canal. Such assertions will not deceive anyone, for the actual result of the BritishPrench
intervention has been to broaden the theatre of hostilities
and thus to prevent freedom of navigation through the
‘Canal.
321. It is common knowledge that United Kingdom
and French preparations for the attack on Egypt began
long before the conflict: arose between Israel and Egypt.
The concentration of United Kingdom and French
armed forces in the Mediterranean
area, in particular
in Cyprus and Malta, began several months ago. How,
then., can it be asserted today that the aggressive acts
carried out by the United Kingdom and France have
been caused by the armed clash between Israel and

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

Egypt? It is perfectly obvious that Israel% attack on
Egypt was used as a pretext to cover up the military
seizure of the Suez ‘Canal, and that Israel’s aggression
was itself inspired by those who were seeking such a
pretext.
322. If the United Kingdom and France had been
genuinely impelled by a desire to restore peace in the
Near East in accordance with the requirements of the
United Nations Charter, then they would have condemned the aggressor, when the armed conflict broke
out, and would have supported the proposal for a ceasefire and the withdrawal of Israel armed forces behind
the armistice lines, a proposal supported by an overwhelming majority of this Assembly. Instead, however,
the United Kingdom and France struck at the victim
of aggression by launching a flagrant armed attack
against Egypt.
323. The aggressive actions undertaken by the United
Kingdom, France and Israel in the Near East have
given rise to an extremely dangerous situation. Any
extension of the armed conflict could deal a fatal blow
to international peace and undermine the very foundations of the United Nations, which is now facing its
most serious challenge. Accordingly, the duty of the
United Nations is to prevent any further spreading of
the conflict and to restore peace in the Near East.
324. We hope that the nineteendpower draft resolution adopted by the General Assembly at this meeting
by an overwhelming majority will contribute to the
achievement of this goal. For that reason the Ukrainian
delegation voted in favour of the resolution.
and for. that proposed by India and eighteen other
Powers because the situation is so critical as to brook
no delay. Urgent and effective measures must be
adopted.
326. On 2 November, this Assembly adopted by a
significant majority a draft resolution proposed by the
United States in which first priority was given to a
cease-fire and the withdrawal of troops. Despite that
fact the conflict continues and, what is more, is growing more serious minute by minute. That being the case,
the Assembly must try another approach so that a
settlement may be reached in the face of this breach
of the peace which has occurred.
327. ‘My delegation is of the opinion that until peace
has been restored, the action taken must be taken
without delay. My delegation has always believed that
the United Nations should find within itself the solution to all the problems which may arise in connexion
with the maintenance of international peace and security. The creation of the United Nations Force, as
proposed by Canada, will mean, or at least we hope it
will mean, that a final settlement has been found for the
present belligerent actions in the Middle East and that,
by constituting an effective means of implementing
the
resolutions of this august body, the United Nations
will most surely be strengthened and its prestige in the
world enhanced at this truly crucial time when it seems
that an attempt is being made to reimpose the reign
over injustice, freedom and right,
328;
) : We have been called
to this first emergency special session of the United
Nations General Assembly to discuss the extremely
alarming situation in the Middle East created by the
aggressive actions of Israel, the United Kingdom
and
France against Egypt.

:

563rd

meeting-3

329. After a long eleven-hour discussion, we adopted
by a great majority a resolution [997 (ES-I)] by which
the General Assembly appealed for a cease-fire by the
belligerent parties and for the withdrawal of the invading troops on all frontiers, The resolution was not
satisfactory to our delegation, as well as to many other
delegations, but we voted for it so that the military
operations of the three aggressors against Egypt would
be stopped immediately.
But unfortunately
only the
victim of the attack, Egypt, accepted the resolution. The
aggressors refused to pay heed to the appeal of the
General Assembly and continued to conduct military
operations against the Egyptian people. This has once
again exposed the United Kingdom, France and Israel
as aggressors.
330. It is more clear now to all the people of the world
that the Israel aggression has two aims. The first is to
seize, with the aid of the United Kingdom and France,
Egyptian territory. The second aim of Israel aggression
is to help in the fulfilment of the British-French
imperialist plans to seize the Suez Canal. In the pursuit
of these two aims the Israel people have been placed in
the disgraceful position of being cannon fodder of their
own and foreign aggressive circles.
331. On the other hand, in these last three or four
days the attempt of the aggressors to put on a peaceloving and noble mask has been laid bare. The British
and French aggressors, against the will of the United
Nations and without any right to do so whatever, declared themselves to be so-called protectors of peace,
mediators between the two fighting sides, stating that
they wanted, as Sir Pierson Dixon said, through a SOcalled police action to separate Israel from Egypt by
means of a so-called temporary occupation of the Suez
Canal. Is it possible that there are people in the world,
including those who make this allegation, who believe
this clumsy patched-up invention?
332. By their actions the United Kingdom and France
aim to seize again the Suez Canal which they possessed
for nearly ninety years, the Suez ‘Canal was built by
the blood and sweat of tens of thousands of Egyptians.
These are the true aims of the British-French-Israel
military operations, It is precisely in the name of these
rapacious aims that they are today murdering
the
Egyptian people ; they are destroying all cultural monu‘merits ; they are sinking Egyptian ships and stopping
navigation along the Suez Canal, which is an important
international
waterway. They have increased international tension and have created the conditions for expanding and not for curbing war in that part of the
world,
333. The United Kingdom and French #Governments
have alleged that they have invaded Egypt to prevent
the spread of hostilities between Egypt and Israel. Reports, however, show that the hostilities are spreading.
The military action that was being waged by Israel and
Egyptian troops was far from the Suez Canal, whereas
now the British-French
troops have brought them to
the Canal. Instead of ensuring, as they alleged, that
they would free navigation along the Canal, the Canal
has already been closed.
334, Despite the military operations of Israel on the
Egyptian frontier during the first day of the Israel invasion, fifty to sixty ships, according to information
submitted in the Security Council, used the Canal and
were well serviced by the Egyptian administration.
According to reports now coming from Egypt, some ships
were sunk in the Canal itself.

November

1956

335. Therefore, all the masked and hypocritical justification of the British-French
aggressors has been completely laid bare by the events which are now taking
place.
336. The Bulgarian delegation considers that by their
aggressive actions, the United Kingdom, France and
Israel are endangering world peace, are acting contrary
to the provisions of the United Nations Charter, are
hindering the United Nations in the taking of swift
measures for ending the spread of the conflagration in
the Near East, and are undermining the foundation of
the United Nations, Indeed, the British-French actions
and demonstrations
are an expression of a desire to
undermine the prestige and foundations of the United
Nations.
337. But what is taking place here in the United
Nations encourages all of us and is a warning to those
who would use the old methods of intimidation.
It is
very encouraging here that two days ago almost seventy
countries voted against the aggression. The Bulgarian
delegation considers that it is still not too late to take
measures to stop the conflict in the Near East by forcing
the aggressors to withdraw from the territory of Egypt
and to fulfil their obligations under the United Nations
#Charter. The Bulgarian delegation considers that all
the conditions exist for the restoration of world peace.
What is needed is the speedy and effective action of
the United Nations.
338. In conclusion, permit me to read an excerpt from
the declaration of my Government on the armed aggression against the Egyptian Republic :
“The Bulgarian people, together with all peaceloving people, express their full sympathies with the
Egyptian Government and the Egyptian people who
are heroically defending their country and the national independence of their homeland.
“Proceeding from its consistent policy of peace and
the peaceful settlement of international questions, the
Government of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria
resolutely condemns the aggression against Egypt.
The responsibility for all the dangerous complications
and consequences stemming from this aggressive action rests entirely with the Governments which
trampled upon the United Nations Charter and took
the path of aggression and war.
“The Government of the People’s Republic of Bulgaria insists that the United Nations and the Security Council should take all the necessary measures
for the immediate cessation of hostilities and for the
withdrawal of the foreign troops from Egyptian
territory.”
339. In accor,dance with this declaration, the Bulgarian delegation voted for the resolution which the
‘General Assembly adopted on 2 November and for the
resolutions which it adopted today.

ernment, which is that there should be immediate cessation of hostilities in that troubled area. We voted for
this resolution, however, on the assumption that its
logical implications are as follows: first, that the international force envisaged in the resolution will exercise
its functions not only with respect to the British-French
and Egyptian forces but also with respect to the hostilities between the Egyptian and Israel forces, as well
as to other hostilities which may take place either in
Egypt or in related territories when this body begins to

76

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

perform its functions ; secondly, that this international
police force will not include the forces of the combatants; and thirdly, that this police force will perform
its functions of supervision in strict accordance with
the terms of the resolution adopted by this Assembly
on 2 November.
341. I should like to conclude with a word of deep
appreciation for the attitude of the United States delegation, Even though it submitted two draft resolutions
which were designed to take a constructive approach
to the basic difficulties of this situation, it nevertheless
gladly yielded to the Canadian draft resolution as a
matter of priority and urgency. We can assure the
United States delegation that at the appropriate time
the Philippine delegation will give the two draft resolutions its utmost sympathetic consideration.
if-:
t is a time for
facts and for action. I shall therefore be very brief.
343. What is the situation? What must we do? In my
delegation’s opinion, we must, first of all, note that
the resolution adopted by the General Assembly sitting
in emergency special session has evoked two different
reactions, two different attitudes. IOn the one hand,
the Egyptian Government tells us that it will accept the
resolution of the General Assembly if the attacking
armies stop their aggressive operations. On the other
hand, the Governments of the United Kingdom and
France inform us that they maintain ‘their point of
view. They also specify what they consider to be the
essential conditions which have to be fulfilled before
military operations can cease. Now, to stipulate these
conditions means, in fact, to reply non possumzts to the
United Nations resolution.
344. We see before us two ,diametrically opposed attitudes. One party defers to the will of the United Nations ,General Assembly, the other meets it with a
categorical refusal. The General Assembly, convened
in an emergency special session, has called for an immediate-, cease-fire. The Egyptian Government accepts
this, with only one condition, which stems from the
right ,of self-defence-that the attackers shall cease their
military operations. The Governments of France and the
United Kingdom stipulate conditions which have nothing to do with the interests of international peace and
security. And in meantime the war, for this is a war,
continues, with growing severity, in Egyptian territory,
against the Egyptian people, which invokes its rights
and calls to the United Nations for help. The bombardment of cities and of the countryside continues, Human
lives are lost. Railway and other installations are demolished. These are the facts.
345. As regards the question of international law and
the rule of law, sixty-four Governments represented
in the United Nations have declared through their
votes that they are on the side of Egypt.
346. What must we do? First of all, it is proper to
note that the United Nations has ,done itself honour and
has upheld the law by adopting the resolution of 2 November. If the United Nations continues in this attitude and accepts its consequences, the aggressor will
be ,disarmed. The Charter provides for sanctions in cases
in which aggressor States flout the recommendations
of the United Nations. The ‘General Assembly should
authorize the Secretary-General
to communicate immediately with the belligerents and to bid them to cease
fire, to withdraw their troops and to respect the will
of the LUnited Nations. The General Assembly should

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings

without delay take note of the fact that the Governments
of the two Western countries and Israel refuse to
respect the resolution of the United &Nations.
(
347. The Assembly has come to a decision. The time
has come to act, and to act quickly, because human lives
are in danger, because the sovereignty and independence
of a Member State of our Organization have been attacked. Millions of people throughout the world look
to LIS for a solution, and the United Nations and the
principles for which it stands will be discredited if we
fail to act in conformity with law and justice.
348. Since the nineteen-Power draft resolution meets,
in essence, the needs of the moment, I voted for it.
xplaining
no longer
tills for-speeches ; it calls for action, action in accordance
with the two resolutions just adopted by this Assembly,
,action in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the United Nations Charter.
350. We were dismayed earlier this evening to see
two other draft resolutions which, win all the genuine
intentions behind them, if adopted, would have paralysed
the provisions spelled out in the resolution approved by
sixty-four Members of the United Nations in the early
hours of 2 November 1956. Our suspicions about the
attempts to save the face of the aggressor have been dissipated by the (Canadian draft resolution, which we
supported, together with the one which we co-sponsored
with eighteen other Powers.
351. It is heartening that the United States has not
pressed for its complex draft resolutions. It is also
heartening that Mr. Lodge sensed the negative attitude
manifested by the Assembly towards the dilatory tactics which those two ,draft resolutions might have afforded to certain Powers describing themselves as
policemen directing the traffic in the Suez Canal. They
are no longer needed to direct the traffic there in the
guise of policemen, first, because the Canal does not
need such policemen, and also because the Canal is
already blocked. The services of the self-appointed
policemen are no longer required, so they had better
go home. And we had better go home at this early
hour, hoping and praying for peace.
352.
delegation w
egation.
It was with great regret that I was unable fully to SUPport the form in which its draft resolution was put
forward.
353. (My delegation, for reasons which I stated at the
562pd meeting of this Assembly, was obliged to vote
agamst the resolution which was then adopted. Clearly,
we were, as a result, unable to support a text which
referred to the urgent necessity for complying with that
resolution, namely, the resolution which we had already
voted against. Accordingly, also, we were unabIe to
support a text which referred to the cessation of hostilities in accordance with the terms of the aforementioned
resolution-namely
the one which we had previously
voted against.
354. ‘Nevertheless, I am authorized to state that the
New Zealand Government is prepared to support the
establishment of a United Nations force, on acceptable
terms, to assist in the establishment of peace and order
in the Middle East. Not only that; I have been specifically authorized tonight to state that New Zealand is
prepared to contribute to a force of the nature envisaged.
355. New Zealand’s negative vote on the draft resoletion of the nineteen Powers is, I think, self-explanatov

563rd

meeting-3

November

1956

77

Members of the United Nations expressed the common view and fervent wish that the aggressive actions
Denmark has er, committed by Israel, the United Kingdom and France
e Suez Canals& cease immediately. This resolution was received by the
of the ” nublic oDinion of the world whole-heartedly in the hope
ever sir&e they began after the nationalization
ihat it Gould be respected by those to whom the appeal
was made. This hope was strengthened by the declaration of the Government of Egypt announcing the readiness of the Egyptian Government to accept the resolution and to comply with it. The greater was the
indignation of world public opinion-and>, I am con357. After military actions have been initiated, withvinced, of the majority of the delegations at this session
out authorization from the United Nations and in violaof the General Assembly-when
an announcement was
tion of its Charter, and after non-compliance with the
received from the ,Governments of France and the
resolution adopted by sixty-four nations on 2 November
United Kingdom that they were not ready to comply
has been announced, it is more than ever true that the
with the resolution of the General Assembly calling for
Suez Canal question can be solved only through and by
an immediate cease-fire and withdrawal of all the forces
the United Nations.
involved in hostilities in the area to <behind the armi3.58, One more thing is true and should be said. Earlier
stice lines. They insist on continuing what they call
this evening the representative of India struck a warnpolice action and what is actually a large-scale aggresing note, It was not, in my opinion, sufficiently strong.
sion against an independent State. In fact, the condltlons
He said that if we did not stop this now, we should soon
they stipulate are of such a nature that they would
not be able to stop it by resolutions. I am very much
frustrate the elective application of the #General ASafraid that the position is even worse, and that it t.s
sem;bly resolution and thus be equal to the complete
worsening rapidly. We may very soon, within ‘days, If
rejection of the most urgent appeal by the General
not hours, from now-and this I feel I have to say to
Assembly.
all concerned, including every Member State of the
365. This attitude on the part of the Governments’ of
United Nations-reach
a position where this situation
the United Kingdom and France further aggravates the
will be completely out of hand. War is indeed a dansituation in the Midmdle East and calls for further imgerous monster, and it has of late grown more dangermediate steps by the General Assembly that would help
ous and more unmanageable.
Moreover, the commumty
to restore peace in this area.
of nations is indivisible, in that anything happening any366. According to the report of the Secretary-General
where may at any time let loose events elsewhere. That
[A/3267] and other communications, large-scale milimost certainly should always be kept in mind.
tary operations causing irreparable loss of life and
359. May I add just one more consideration:
even
property to the people of Egypt, which has fallen victim
if the fire is apparently stamped out, it may still
to aggression, are continued without interruption. Acsmoulder. Such fires are sometimes the most fierce.
cording to a declaration made by the Commander360. Finally, I shoul’d like to express with all my heart
in-ChiaE of the British and French forces attacking
my sympathy to the victims of aggression, whether in
Egypt : “Aerial bombing will ,continue until Egypt sees
Hungary or in Egypt.
reason, Length of the operation depends on how quickly
Egypt accepts our terms.”
361. - i&..“7A”“-,.-mm
ASHA -CSxria).:
I should like to explain
.I * “I
the vote of my delegation with regard to the Canadian
367. It is obvious from these facts that it is not a
draft resolution. We understand by the words “with
concern of the Governments of the United Kingdom
the consent of the nations concerned” the consent of the
and France to cease hostilities, but on the contrary to
contributing nations, as was explained by the author of
continue war actions until they achieve their main
draft resolution, the Secretary of State for External Afobjective, that is, seizure of the Suez Canal and occupafairs of Canada. We also understand the “cessation of
tion of a large part of Egyptian territory.
hostilities” to include the withdrawal of United King368. It is most regrettable indeed that the Governdor& and French forces in the event that they have
ments of the United Kingdom and France, using Israel
landed before or after the adoption of this draft resoluas their tool, forcibly frustrated the possibility of a
tion. We equally understand that the draft resolution
peaceful solution of the Suez Canal issue, for which
means the withdrawal of Israel armed forces behind the
there were all the prerequisites as agreed in the Searmistice lines.
curity Council on 3 October 1956 and confirmed by
362. We voted in favour of this draft resolution also
the exchange of correspondence between the Secretarybecause of our honest desire to secure an effective and
General and the Foreign Minister of Egypt.
immediate halt to the aggression of France, the United
369. By condemning most emphatically the attitude
Kingdom and Israel.
and the actions of the aggressors, who disregarded the
1.: I should like to say
decision of the General Assembly aimed at the restorar vote on the Canadian
tion of peace and who most seriously violate their obligations under the Charter, the Czechoslovak deledraft resolution. The Portuguese delegation abstained
gation supports steps which could help to put an end
from voting on the Canadian ‘draft resolution because
to an act of aggression against Egypt.
we had no time to refer it to the Portuguese IGovernment. My ‘delegation has, ho,wever, every reason to
370. We voted in favour of the draft resolution prebelieve that the Portuguese Government favours. the
sented by nineteen Asian and African nations, which
principle that is embodied in the resolution.
reaffirms the ,resolution adopted by this Assembly on
2 November 1956 and which contains a new, urgent
d!
: By the appeal
it the second
for a cessation of the aggression and implementation of the cease-fire. We fully support the provision
met&g of the emergency special‘sessi&.-of the General
of paragraph 2 of the operative part, requesting. the
Assembly, an overwhelming
majority
of sixty-four

in terms of its opposition
2 November.

to the resolution

adopted on

78

General

Assembly-First

Emergency

Special

Session-Plenary

Meetings
.

Secretary-General
to report compliance forthwith and
not later than twelve hours from the time of adoption
of the draft resolution. This should be our ultimatum
for peace-the demand of the overwhelming majority
of Members of the United Nations.
371. We abstained from voting on the ‘Canadian draft
resolution because we have serious doubts as to its possible implications and effectiveness.
372. As to the other draft resolutions presented at
this meeting, the Czechoslovak delegation reserves its
right to state its position at a later stage after having
consulted its IGovernment.
373. Mr. SHAHA
(Nepal) : I should like to explain
the reasons why my delegation co-sponsored and supported the draft resolution which has now been adopted
by the Assembly [A/3275].
374. Draft resolutions concerning solutions of the
Suez and Palestine problems were sulbmitted by the
United States, delegation. Those draft resolutions had
their own merits. There is no question but that we
should strive for a lasting and just peace in the Middle
East-but
only after a cease-fire has been effected.
375. I think that it has become abundantly clear during
the course of the ‘debate that a grave .injustice has been
done to Egypt in the present circumstances, Egypt’s

territory has been invaded by the forces of Israel, the
United Kingdom and France. Egypt is suffering death
and devastation on a very wide scale, The invasion of
Egyptian territory by Israel, the United Kingdom and
France, on the pretext of protecting the Suez Canal
and ensuring free passage through it, can be justified
neither on the grounds of expediency nor on the basis
of international law, morality and justice.
376. In my opinion, attempts by nations to confront
the United Nations with f&s ac,complis in order to gaitl
the objectives of diplomacy by the active use or the
threat of force must be discouraged at all costs, The
cause of suffering humanity in Egypt must receive the
primary consideration of this Assembly, Steps must
be taken to arrest the march of aggression and to secure
justice for the people of Egypt. Once that has beat
done, we can think of a lasting solution of the Suez
and Palestine problems.
377. Our heart reaches out to Egypt in sympathy in
this grave hour of its suffering and trial. My delegation
fervent1 hopes that the General Assembly support of
the dra Yt resolution it co-sponsored will bring effective
help and relief to the Egyptian people in this hour of
their trial.
Ths meeting rose on Stinday, 4 November, at 3.5 a,m,

/

printed in U,S.A.

S31331-December

1956--Z,@
-
