_19_8_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _G_e_n_e_ra_l_A_s_se_m_b_ly_-Forty-first Session

Commission on Human Rights in order that he may carry
out his mandate effectively;
6. Requests the Special Rapporteur, in carrying out his
mandate, to respond effectively to information that comes
before him, in particular when a summary or arbitrary
execution is imminent or threatened, or when such an execution has recently occurred;
7. Endorses the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur in his report 135 to the Commission on Human
Rights at its forty-second session on the need to develop
international standards to ensure that proper investigations are conducted by appropriate authorities into all
cases of suspicious death, including provisions for adequate autopsy;
8. Invites the Special Rapporteur to receive information from appropriate United Nations bodies and other international organizations and to examine the elements to
be included in such standards and to report to the Commission on Human Rights at its forty-third session on progress made in this respect;
9. Considers that the Special Rapporteur, in carrying
out his mandate, should continue to seek and receive information from Governments, United Nations bodies,
specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur so
that he may effectively carry out his mandate;
11. Again requests the Secretary-General to continue
to use his best endeavours in cases where the mínimum
standard of legal safeguards provided for in articles 6, 14
and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 22 appear not to be respected;
12. Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
forty-third session, on the basis of the report of the Special
Rapporteur to be prepared in conformity with Economic
and Social Council resolutions 1982/35, 1983/36,
1984/35, 1985/40 and 1986/36, to make recommendations concerning appropriate action to combat and eventually eliminate the abhorrent practice of summary or arbitrary executions.
97th plenary meeting
4 December 1986

41/145.

Question of enforced or involuntary disappearances

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its resolution 33/173 of 20December 1978
concerning disappeared persons, and its resolution 40/ 14 7
of 13 December 1985 on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Deeply concerned about the persistence, in certain cases,
of the practice of enforced or involuntary disappearances,
Expressing its profound emotion at the anguish and sorrow of the families concerned, who are unsure of the fate
of their relatives,
Convinced of the need to continue implementing the
provisions ofits resolution 33/173 and ofthe other United
Nations resolutions on the question of enforced or involuntary disappearances, with a view to finding solutions

135 E/CN .4/ 1986/21.

------------ ---for cases of disappearances and helping to eliminate such
practices,
Bearing in mind Commission on Human Rights resolution 1986/55 of 13 March 1986, 31 in which the Commission decided to extend for two years, on an experimental
basis, the term of the mandate of the Working Group on
Enforced or lnvoluntary Disappearances, and Economic
and Social Council decision 1986/ 139 of 23 May 1986, in
which the Council approved the Commission's decision,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Working Group on
Enforced or lnvoluntary Disappearances for its
humanitarian work and to those Governments that have
co-operated with it;
2. Welcomes the decision of the Commission on Human Rights to extend for two years, on an experimental
basis, the term of the mandate of the Working Group, as
defined in Commission resolution 20 (XXXVI), of29 February 1980, 25 while maintaining the principie of annual reporting by the Group;
3. Also welcomes the provisions made by the Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 1986/55 to enable
the Working Group to fulfil its mandate with even greater
efficiency;
4. Appeals to ali Governments, particularly those
which have not yet replied to the communications addressed to them by the Working Group, to co-operate
fully with the Group so as to enable it, with respect for its
working methods based on discretion, to perform its
strictly humanitarian role;
5. Encourages the Governments concerned to consider
the wish of the Working Group, when such a wish is expressed, to visit their countries, thus enabling the Group
to fulfil its mandate even more effectively;
6. Calls upon the Commission on Human Rights to
continue to study this question as a matter of priority and
to take any step it may deem necessary to the pursuit of
the task of the Working Group when it considers the report to be submitted by the Group to the Commission at
its forty-third session;
7. Renews its request to the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Working Group with all necessary
facilities.
97th plenary meeting
4 December I 986

41/146.

Realization of the right to adequate housing

The General Assembly,
Recallingits resolution 37/221 of20 December 1982, in
which it proclaimed the year 1987 lnternational Year of
Shelter for the Homeless,
Recognizing the objectives of the lnternational Year of
Shelter for the Homeless,
Bearing in mind that the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 2 and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights2 2 provide that ali persons have the right to an adequate standard of living for
themselves and their families, including adequate housing,
and that States should take appropriate steps to ensure the
realization of thi-; right.
Noting that the objectives of the International Year of
Shelter for the Homeless are closely related to the realization of the economic, social and cultural rights set forth in
the Universal Declaration ofHuman Rights and the Inter-
