A/RES/61/32

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 December 2006

Sixty-first session
Agenda item 77

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 4 December 2006
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/61/453)]

61/32. Report of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law on the work of its thirty-ninth session
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it
established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law with a
mandate to further the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of
international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples, in
particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of
international trade,
Reaffirming its belief that the progressive modernization and harmonization of
international trade law, in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would
contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on a
basis of equality, equity and common interest and to the elimination of
discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the well-being of all peoples,
Having considered the report of the Commission on the work of its thirty-ninth
session, 1
Reiterating its concern that activities undertaken by other bodies in the field of
international trade law without adequate coordination with the Commission might
lead to undesirable duplication of efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim
of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and
harmonization of international trade law,
Reaffirming the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the
United Nations system in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal
activities in this field, in particular to avoid duplication of efforts, including among
organizations formulating rules of international trade, and to promote efficiency,
consistency and coherence in the modernization and harmonization of international
trade law, and to continue, through its secretariat, to maintain close cooperation with
other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations,
active in the field of international trade law,
_______________
1

06-49635

Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/61/17).

A/RES/61/32

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work of its thirty-ninth session;1
2.
Commends the Commission for the finalization and adoption of revised
articles 2 of the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the United
Nations Commission on International Trade Law 3 on the form of the arbitration
agreement and interim measures, and of the recommendation regarding the
interpretation of article II, paragraph 2, and article VII, paragraph 1, 4 of the
Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards, done
at New York, 10 June 1958; 5
3.
Also commends the Commission for the approval of the substance of the
recommendations of the draft legislative guide on secured transactions, which has
been designed to facilitate secured financing, thus promoting increased access to
low-cost credit and enhancing national and international trade;
Welcomes the progress made by the Commission in its work on a revision
4.
of its Model Law on Procurement of Goods, Construction and Services, 6 and on a
draft instrument on transport law, and endorses the decision of the Commission to
take up new topics in the areas of arbitration and insolvency law;
Endorses the efforts and initiatives of the Commission, as the core legal
5.
body within the United Nations system in the field of international trade law, aimed
at increasing coordination of and cooperation on legal activities of international and
regional organizations active in the field of international trade law, as well as
promoting the rule of law at the national and international levels in this field, and in
this regard appeals to relevant international and regional organizations to coordinate
their legal activities with those of the Commission, to avoid duplication of efforts
and to promote efficiency, consistency and coherence in the modernization and
harmonization of international trade law;
Reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the
6.
work of the Commission concerned with technical assistance and cooperation in the
field of international trade law reform and development, and in this connection:
(a) Welcomes the initiatives of the Commission towards expanding, through
its secretariat, its technical assistance and cooperation programme;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for carrying out technical
assistance and cooperation activities in Belarus, Benin (for the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development/World Trade Organization International
Trade Centre seminar), Colombia, Egypt, the Republic of Korea, Singapore,
Slovakia and Switzerland (for the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development/World Trade Organization International Trade Centre symposium on
multilateral trade treaties and developing countries) and for providing assistance
with legislative drafting in the field of international trade law to China, Georgia,
Greece, Malaysia, Peru, Rwanda (through the joint project with the International
Law Institute), Serbia, Slovenia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
and to the Commonwealth Telecommunications Organisation;
_______________
2

Ibid., chap. IV, para. 181, and annex I.
Ibid., Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/40/17), annex I.
4
Ibid., Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/61/17), chap. IV, para. 181, and annex II.
5
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.
6
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 17 and corrigendum
(A/49/17 and Corr.1), annex I.
3

2

A/RES/61/32

(c) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions
enabled the technical assistance and cooperation activities to take place, and appeals
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where
appropriate, to the financing of special projects, and otherwise to assist the
secretariat of the Commission in carrying out technical assistance activities, in
particular in developing countries;
(d) Reiterates its appeal to the United Nations Development Programme and
other bodies responsible for development assistance, such as the World Bank and
regional development banks, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid
programmes, to support the technical assistance programme of the Commission and
to cooperate and coordinate their activities with those of the Commission, in the
light of the relevance and importance of the work and programmes of the
Commission to the implementation of the United Nations development agenda,
including the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals;
Takes note with regret that, since the thirty-sixth session of the
7.
Commission, no contributions have been made to the trust fund established to
provide travel assistance to developing countries that are members of the
Commission, at their request and in consultation with the Secretary-General, 7
stresses the need for contributions to the trust fund in order to increase expert
representation from developing countries at sessions of the Commission and its
working groups, necessary to build local expertise and capacities in the field of
international trade law in those countries to facilitate the development of
international trade and the promotion of foreign investment, and reiterates its appeal
to Governments, the relevant bodies of the United Nations system, organizations,
institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the trust fund;
Decides, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the
8.
sessions of the Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent
Main Committee during the sixty-first session of the General Assembly, its
consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed countries that are
members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
Recalls that the responsibility for the work of the Commission lies with
9.
the meetings of the Commission and its intergovernmental working groups, and
stresses in this regard that information should be provided regarding meetings of
experts, which bring an essential contribution to the work of the Commission;
10. Recalls its resolutions on partnerships between the United Nations and
non-State actors, in particular the private sector, 8 and in this regard encourages the
Commission to further explore different approaches to the use of partnerships with
non-State actors in the implementation of its mandate, in particular in the area of
technical assistance, in accordance with the applicable principles and guidelines and
in cooperation and coordination with other relevant offices of the Secretariat,
including the Global Compact Office;

_______________
7
8

Resolution 48/32, para. 5.
Resolutions 55/215, 56/76, 58/129 and 60/215.

3

A/RES/61/32

11. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General, in conformity with the
General Assembly resolutions on documentation-related matters, 9 which, in
particular, emphasize that any reduction in the length of documents should not
adversely affect either the quality of the presentation or the substance of the
documents, to bear in mind the particular characteristics of the mandate and work of
the Commission in implementing page limits with respect to the documentation of
the Commission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to continue providing summary records
of the meetings of the Commission relating to the formulation of normative texts;
13. Recalls its resolution approving the establishment of the Yearbook of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, with the aim of making the
work of the Commission more widely known and readily available, 10 expresses its
concern regarding the timeliness of the publication of the Yearbook, and requests the
Secretary-General to explore options to facilitate the timely publication of the Yearbook;
14. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the conventions emanating
from the work of the Commission for the global unification and harmonization of
international trade law, and to this end urges States that have not yet done so to
consider signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions;
15. Welcomes the preparation of digests of case law relating to the texts of
the Commission, such as a digest of case law relating to the United Nations
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods 11 and a digest of case
law relating to the Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade Law,3 with the aim of assisting
in dissemination of information on those texts and promoting their use, enactment
and uniform interpretation;
16. Welcomes also the decision of the Commission to hold, in the context of
its fortieth session in 2007, a congress on international trade law in Vienna, with a
view to reviewing the results of the past work of the Commission as well as related
work of other organizations active in the field of international trade law, assessing
current work programmes and considering topics and areas for future work, and
acknowledges the importance of holding such a congress for the coordination and
promotion of activities aimed at the modernization and harmonization of
international trade law;
17. Recalls its resolutions affirming the importance of high-quality, userfriendly and cost-effective United Nations websites and the need for their multilingual
development, maintenance and enrichment, 12 commends the restructured website of
the Commission in the six official languages of the United Nations, and welcomes
the continuous efforts of the Commission to maintain and improve its website in
accordance with the applicable guidelines.

64th plenary meeting
4 December 2006
_______________
9

Resolutions 52/214, sect. B, 57/283 B, sect. III, and 58/250, sect. III.
Resolution 2502 (XXIV), para. 7.
11
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1489, No. 25567.
12
Resolutions 52/214, sect. C, para. 3; 55/222, sect. III, para. 12; 56/64 B, sect. X; 57/130 B, sect. X;
58/101 B, sect. V, paras. 61–76; 59/126 B, sect. V, paras. 76–95; and 60/109 B, sect. IV, paras. 66–80.
10

4
