S/2019/1008*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 December 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 31 December 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 7 of its resolution 2488 (2019), the Security Council requested that
I provide an update (no later than 31 December 2019) on progress achieved by the
authorities of the Central African Republic on the key benchmarks established in the
statement by the President of the Security Council of 9 April 2019 (S/PRST/2019/3).
The benchmarks had been established to serve as a basis for the Council to assess the
contribution and relevance of the arms embargo in supporting the relevant aspects of
the security sector reform process, the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation process, and the management of weapons and ammunition. In the
same resolution, the Council affirmed its preparedness to review the appropriateness
of the sanctions measures contained in the resolution in the light of the evolution of
the security situation in the country and of the progress achieved in relation to the
above-mentioned processes and the management of weapons and ammunition,
including in relation to the updates requested in paragraphs 6 and 7 of that resolution.
The information in the present letter covers the period between 30 June and
15 December 2019.
Following the issuance of my letter dated 26 July 2019 (S/2019/609), the
Security Council, by its resolution 2488 (2019), decided to adjust the arms embargo
measures on the Central African authorities. The Council provided that the arms
embargo approval process no longer applied to supplies of weapons to the country ’s
security forces with a calibre of 14.5 mm or less, as well as ammunition and
components specially designed for such weapons. Instead, such deliveries need only
to be notified in advance to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic. The Council also
decided that Member States or international, regional or subregional organizations
supplying arms and related materiel would be primarily responsible for notifying the
Committee. Such notifications must be provided at least 20 days in advance of the
deliveries. The Council also stressed the importance of detailed explanations of how
the proposed equipment would support security sector reform in the country. The
Central African authorities will still be able to obtain weapons and ammunition with
a calibre of more than 14.5 mm, subject to approval by the Committee under the
relevant provisions of the arms embargo. The Council also decided that the provision
of non-lethal military and police equipment intended solely for humanitarian or
protective use, as well as related technical assistance or training, would no longer
require advance approval by the Committee, only advance notification.
The Central African authorities welcomed the adoption of resolution 2488
(2019), while continuing to call for the full lifting of the arms embargo on the
* Reissued for technical reasons on 9 January 2020.

19-21933* (E) 090120

*1921933*

S/2019/1008

Government, including in the context of the seventy-fourth session of the General
Assembly.
Since my letter of 26 July, the 2127 Committee has approved three exemption
requests. Two requests were submitted by the Government. The first related to the
transportation by air of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic from Am
Dafok to Bangui, while the second was on the training of rangers for the Chinko
project/African Parks network. The third exemption request was submitted by a
Member State to transfer 2,800 AK-47-type magazines to the Central African
authorities. The Committee also received six notifications from Member States
supplying non-lethal equipment to various entities, including the Government.
From 1 to 4 October 2019, the Chair of the 2127 Committee led a delegation
comprising members of the Committee to the country. The visit was another
opportunity for the Committee and the Government to continue their ongoing
dialogue on the arms embargo and other measures of the sanctions regime.
The following section provides the Security Council with an update to my letter
of 26 July on progress made against each of the five key benchmarks.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark A
The implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme is continuing in the Central African Republic. Between
30 June and 15 December 2019, a further 1,094 combatants, including 76 women,
from nine armed groups were disarmed and demobilized in the western part of the
country by the mobile teams of the Unité d’exécution du programme national de
désarmement, démobilisation et réinégration. These numbers include 250 combatants
from the Retour, reclamation et réhabilitation armed group; 161 from the Union des
forces républicaines fondamentales; 75 from the Front démocratique du peuple
centrafricain; 280 from the anti-Balaka led by Maxime Mokom; 208 from the
anti-Balaka led by Patrice-Edouard Ngaissona; 23 from the Mouvement patriotique
pour la Centrafrique; 6 from the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique; 69 from Révolution et justice-Belanga Branch and 22 from Révolution
et justice-Sayo Branch.
Since the launch of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme on 17 December 2018, 1,321 combatants, including 81
women, have been disarmed and demobilized and 802 weapons of war, 1,239
unexploded ordnances and 67,281 rounds of ammunition collected. This number
includes the 633 weapons of war, 1,079 unexploded ordnances and 60,448 rounds of
ammunition collected between 30 June and 15 December 2019.
Socioeconomic reinsertion and reintegration activities also continued. In July
2019, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), an implementing partner
of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programme in the Paoua region, completed social reinsertion training activities (on
social cohesion, human rights, civic education and conflict resolution) for 227
ex-combatants, including those waiting to join the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité
in Bouar. Of that number, 176 ex-combatants who chose socioeconomic reintegration
at the time of demobilization are engaged in vocational training, which will be
completed by the end of December 2019. Upon completion of this training, they will
receive socioeconomic reintegration kits and support for launching income generating activities. The remaining 51 ex-combatants joined the Unités spéciales

2/6

19-21933

S/2019/1008

mixtes de sécurité training in Bouar in mid-October. 1 In September, 109 of the 133
ex-combatants demobilized in the region of Bouar-Koui participated in reinsertion
training courses organized by another implementing partner, ACTED (an
international non-governmental organization); the remaining 24 ex-combatants are
expected to participate in reinsertion activities soon. In addition, both IOM and
ACTED continued to implement community support projects in the above-mentioned
areas, where the reintegration of ex-combatants is ongoing, as well as areas where
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation has yet to commence (in
Ndélé by IOM and in Bria and Birao by ACTED).
During the period under review, the guarantors of the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic of 6 February 2019
(S/2019/145), the African Union and the Economic Community of Central African
States, along with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and other international
partners, made considerable efforts to maintain the commitment of signatory armed
groups to the Political Agreement. These political efforts, reinforced by MINUSCA
military and police activities, remain important in order to facilitate the continued
implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme in 2020 and the establishment of the Unités spéciales mixtes
de sécurité. MINUSCA, the United States of America and the World Bank continued
to support the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation
programme. The Consultative Follow-up Committee on Disarmament,
Demobilization, Reintegration and Repatriation held meetings on 9 August,
13 September and 6 December 2019, during which officials from the national
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and repatriation programme present ed a
country-wide disarmament and demobilization calendar to representatives of the
armed groups, in line with the provisions of the Political Agreement.
Notwithstanding these activities, the disarmament and demobilization timelines
are not being met, given that some armed groups have not demonstrated their full
commitment and willingness to disarm. In the western Central African Republic, for
example, continued resistance by Retour, reclamation and réhabilitation to complete
disarmament and demobilization operations for all its fighters has caused delays in
the implementation of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme. In addition, delays in disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation operations in the west have also had an impact on the
commencement of operations in the central and eastern parts of the country. Such
delays affect the productivity and efficiency of the disarmament and demobilization
mobile teams of the national disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation programme and could have budgetary implications. Furthermore, during
the most recent round of disarmament and demobilization operations in the west,
combatants entering the programme did not submit the expected number of weapons
of war (as required under the eligibility criteria of the programme), which could
undermine the credibility of the disarmament process.
Community violence reduction activities continued. In August 2019,
MINUSCA, in partnership with United Nations Office for Project Services, launched
__________________
1

19-21933

The Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité training was officially launched by the President of the
Central African Republic, Fuastin Touadera, on 16 October 2019. A total of 241 former
combatants, 196 elements of the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic, 29 police officers
and 29 gendarmes are participating in training activities in Bouar. Initiatives are under way to
identify deployment sites in the northwest and training sites for the two remaining Unités
spéciales mixtes de sécurité in the northeast and southeast of the country. Challenges regarding
Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité funding are being addressed by the partners to ensure coverage
of the necessary logistics and stipends for the training period and for future deployments.
3/6

S/2019/1008

community violence reduction projects in the localities of Bangui, Bria, Bangassou,
Bossangoa, Kaga Bandoro and Bouar. These projects are being planned for 3,300
beneficiaries. As at 10 December, 1,984 beneficiaries, including 731 women, had
been registered in Bria, Bossangoa, Bangassou, Kaga Bandoro and Bangui. In
addition, 33 weapons of war, 601 traditional arms, 3 unexploded ordnances and
778 rounds of ammunition had been collected during the registration phase . In
Bambari, with the financial support of the Peacebuilding Fund and MINUSCA,
700 beneficiaries are programmed for community violence reduction activities in
2019/20, adding to the 3,300 beneficiaries planned in the other locations, to achieve
the total target of 4,000 beneficiaries in 2019/20.
While no major incidents were reported in the integration process of the 232
vetted ex-combatants into the Armed Forces of the Central African Republic in 2018,
a deeper evaluation of the integration phase of the pilot project is needed and will
take place in 2020. The Government has yet to allocate 10 per cent of positions in the
defence and security forces to armed groups in ongoing and future recruitment
campaigns, in line with the commitments of the Government in the framework of the
peace process. These quotas were not considered in, for example, the recruitment of
the 1,000 internal security forces and the 250 correction officers in 2019. It will be
critical that the quota be respected in the Armed Forces recruitment campaign. Since
October 2019, 95 eligible ex-combatants, considered for integration into the defence
and security forces, have been enrolled in the Unités spéciales mixtes de sécurité in
Bouar and are awaiting integration through upcoming recruitment campaigns. In line
with the Political Agreement, progress is also needed in the establishment of a mixed
committee on rank harmonization to facilitate ex-combatant reintegration and the
reinsertion of former Armed Forces personnel having joined armed groups.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark B
Since my letter of 26 July, MINUSCA, through the Mine Action Service, has
built 3 additional storage facilities and rehabilitated 8 others in various parts of the
country, reaching a total of 20 constructed and 40 rehabilitated storage facilities. In
addition, the Mine Action Service completed the deployment of nine storage kits.
MINUSCA provided weapons and ammunition management training to 242 members
of the defence and security forces.
The progress made by the Government in achieving this benchmark is
constrained by financial, technical and management capacity. For example, the
national authorities face challenges in mobilizing sufficient funds for weapons and
ammunition management. Improvements are possible in the monitoring and
management of ammunition utilization. In other cases, available storage spaces are
not fully used and national defence and security forces personnel who have received
technical training in weapons and ammunition management could be better deployed
to take full advantage of their acquired expertise.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark C
In the continued absence of a national protocol outlining the process for the
delivery and verification of weapons and ammunitions shipments in the country,
Central African authorities continued to use interim protocols to manage recent
deliveries. A specific technical protocol, for example, was developed for the second
delivery of Russian weapons and ammunition that arrived in the country between
14 August and 16 September 2019. Similarly, the Government continued to work
towards a national weapons registry under the control of the national commission to
combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons to register and trace
weapons. In the meantime, the directives, policies and procedures for weapons

4/6

19-21933

S/2019/1008

management and individual accountability (as described in my letter of 26 July)
continued to be used by the Central African authorities.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark D
Following the establishment of the national commission to combat the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons in 2017, the Central African authorities
formulated a road map to achieve its operationalization. MINUSCA, through the Mine
Action Service and together with other United Nations entities, supported the national
authorities in implementing the road map, including a national strategy to combat the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. In July 2019, the implementation of
the road map had been completed for the most part when a national action plan to
implement that national strategy was adopted at the plenary assembly of the national
commission and subsequently endorsed by the President of the Central African
Republic, Faustin Touadera. As of September, the national commission had
established its headquarters and recruited 20 per cent of its support staff, as foreseen
under the national action plan. The Government also disbursed 40 million CFA francs
for the implementation of activities in 2019 (approximately $67,000) to the national
commission, which has an annual budget of $1.7 million to implement the national
action plan. The national commission is awaiting finalization of the budget by the
Government to confirm its 2020 allocation.
Update on progress achieved on benchmark E
Under the leadership of the national commission to combat the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, standard operating procedures for the collection of
weapons and ammunition in the Central African Republic, applicable to national
defence and security forces, are being finalized with the support of MINUSCA,
through the Mine Action Service, and international partners such as the European
Union Training Mission. The standard operating procedures, which apply to all
defence and security forces in the country, are expected to be adopted by relevant
institutions early in 2020.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is working closely with the
national commission to combat the proliferation of small arms and light weapons to
strengthen the legislative framework for efforts to combat the illicit trafficking in
weapons in the Central African Republic, including preventive and security measures,
criminal justice provisions and mechanisms for international cooperation and
information-sharing.
At the regional level, efforts to reactivate the bilateral commissions between the
Central African Republic and its immediate neighbours (Cameroon, Chad, the Congo,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Sudan) continued. On
5 and 6 August 2019, the joint commission of the Central African Republic and the
Congo held its fifth meeting. The fourteenth session of the joint commission of the
Central African Republic and Chad was expected to be held from 20 to 22 December
in Chad. On 15 October, the President of Rwanda, Paul Kagame, visited the Central
African Republic for the first time, in the context of talks on the launch of a joint
bilateral commission. A reported number of agreements were signed, including on
military cooperation. From 30 November to 1 December, the President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Felix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi, visited the
Central African Republic and attended the ceremony to mark the country ’s day of
independence.

19-21933

5/6

S/2019/1008

Conclusion
Since my letter of 26 July, the Government of the Central African Republic, with
the support of its international partners, continued to make some progress on the arms
embargo benchmarks established by the Security Council. Continued support from
the Council and international and regional partners will be required.
The recent decision of the Security Council to adjust the arms embargo on the
Government was well received and has provided national authorities with
encouragement. Careful attention is required to ensure that the arms embargo on the
armed groups, which remains in full effect, has the necessary and desired outcomes
to benefit the security and political situation in the country.
(Signed) António Guterres

6/6

19-21933
