United Nations

A/RES/60/147

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 March 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 71 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 16 December 2005
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/60/509/Add.1)]

60/147. Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy
and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of
International Human Rights Law and Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2 other relevant
human rights instruments and the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, 3
Affirming the importance of addressing the question of remedies and reparation
for victims of gross violations of international human rights law and serious
violations of international humanitarian law in a systematic and thorough way at the
national and international levels,
Recognizing that, in honouring the victims’ right to benefit from remedies and
reparation, the international community keeps faith with the plight of victims,
survivors and future human generations and reaffirms international law in the field,
Recalling the adoption of the Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a
Remedy and Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human
Rights Law and Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law by the
Commission on Human Rights in its resolution 2005/35 of 19 April 2005 4 and by
the Economic and Social Council in its resolution 2005/30 of 25 July 2005, in which
the Council recommended to the General Assembly that it adopt the Basic Principles
and Guidelines,
Adopts the Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and
1.
Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International Human Rights Law and
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law annexed to the present
resolution;
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigendum
(E/2005/23 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
2

05-49642

A/RES/60/147

2.
Recommends that States take the Basic Principles and Guidelines into
account, promote respect thereof and bring them to the attention of members of the
executive bodies of government, in particular law enforcement officials and military
and security forces, legislative bodies, the judiciary, victims and their
representatives, human rights defenders and lawyers, the media and the public in
general;
Requests the Secretary-General to take steps to ensure the widest
3.
possible dissemination of the Basic Principles and Guidelines in all the official
languages of the United Nations, including by transmitting them to Governments
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and by including the
Basic Principles and Guidelines in the United Nations publication entitled Human
Rights: A Compilation of International Instruments.
64th plenary meeting
16 December 2005

Annex
Basic Principles and Guidelines on the Right to a Remedy and
Reparation for Victims of Gross Violations of International
Human Rights Law and Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law
Preamble
The General Assembly,
Recalling the provisions providing a right to a remedy for victims of violations
of international human rights law found in numerous international instruments, in
particular article 8 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,1 article 2 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,2 article 6 of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, 5 article 14 of
the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment, 6 and article 39 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, 7 and of
international humanitarian law as found in article 3 of the Hague Convention
respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land of 18 October 1907
(Convention IV), 8 article 91 of the Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions
of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed
Conflicts (Protocol I) of 8 June 1977, 9 and articles 68 and 75 of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court, 10

_______________
5

Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1465, No. 24841.
7
Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
8
See Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, The Hague Conventions and Declarations of 1899 and
1907 (New York, Oxford University Press, 1915).
9
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
10
Official Records of the United Nations Diplomatic Conference of Plenipotentiaries on the Establishment
of an International Criminal Court, Rome, 15 June–17 July 1998, vol. I: Final documents (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.I.5), sect. A.
6

2

A/RES/60/147

Recalling the provisions providing a right to a remedy for victims of violations
of international human rights found in regional conventions, in particular article 7 of
the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, 11 article 25 of the American
Convention on Human Rights, 12 and article 13 of the Convention for the Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 13
Recalling the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime
and Abuse of Power emanating from the deliberations of the Seventh United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders and General
Assembly resolution 40/34 of 29 November 1985 by which the Assembly adopted
the text recommended by the Congress,
Reaffirming the principles enunciated in the Declaration of Basic Principles of
Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power, including that victims should be
treated with compassion and respect for their dignity, have their right to access to
justice and redress mechanisms fully respected, and that the establishment,
strengthening and expansion of national funds for compensation to victims should
be encouraged, together with the expeditious development of appropriate rights and
remedies for victims,
Noting that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court requires the
establishment of “principles relating to reparations to, or in respect of, victims,
including restitution, compensation and rehabilitation”, requires the Assembly of
States Parties to establish a trust fund for the benefit of victims of crimes within the
jurisdiction of the Court, and of the families of such victims, and mandates the
Court “to protect the safety, physical and psychological well-being, dignity and
privacy of victims” and to permit the participation of victims at all “stages of the
proceedings determined to be appropriate by the Court”,
Affirming that the Basic Principles and Guidelines contained herein are
directed at gross violations of international human rights law and serious violations
of international humanitarian law which, by their very grave nature, constitute an
affront to human dignity,
Emphasizing that the Basic Principles and Guidelines contained herein do not
entail new international or domestic legal obligations but identify mechanisms,
modalities, procedures and methods for the implementation of existing legal
obligations under international human rights law and international humanitarian law
which are complementary though different as to their norms,
Recalling that international law contains the obligation to prosecute
perpetrators of certain international crimes in accordance with international
obligations of States and the requirements of national law or as provided for in the
applicable statutes of international judicial organs, and that the duty to prosecute
reinforces the international legal obligations to be carried out in accordance with
national legal requirements and procedures and supports the concept of
complementarity,

_______________
11

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1520, No. 26363.
Ibid., vol. 1144, No. 17955.
13
Ibid., vol. 213, No. 2889.
12

3

A/RES/60/147

Noting that contemporary forms of victimization, while essentially directed
against persons, may nevertheless also be directed against groups of persons who
are targeted collectively,
Recognizing that, in honouring the victims’ right to benefit from remedies and
reparation, the international community keeps faith with the plight of victims,
survivors and future human generations and reaffirms the international legal
principles of accountability, justice and the rule of law,
Convinced that, in adopting a victim-oriented perspective, the international
community affirms its human solidarity with victims of violations of international
law, including violations of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, as well as with humanity at large, in accordance with the
following Basic Principles and Guidelines,
Adopts the following Basic Principles and Guidelines:
I.

Obligation to respect, ensure respect for and implement international
human rights law and international humanitarian law

1.
The obligation to respect, ensure respect for and implement international
human rights law and international humanitarian law as provided for under the
respective bodies of law emanates from:
(a)

Treaties to which a State is a party;

(b)

Customary international law;

(c)

The domestic law of each State.

2.
If they have not already done so, States shall, as required under international
law, ensure that their domestic law is consistent with their international legal
obligations by:
(a) Incorporating norms of international human rights law and international
humanitarian law into their domestic law, or otherwise implementing them in their
domestic legal system;
(b) Adopting appropriate and effective legislative and administrative
procedures and other appropriate measures that provide fair, effective and prompt
access to justice;
(c) Making available adequate, effective, prompt and appropriate remedies,
including reparation, as defined below;
(d) Ensuring that their domestic law provides at least the same level of
protection for victims as that required by their international obligations.
II.

Scope of the obligation

3.
The obligation to respect, ensure respect for and implement international
human rights law and international humanitarian law as provided for under the
respective bodies of law, includes, inter alia, the duty to:
(a) Take appropriate legislative and administrative and other appropriate
measures to prevent violations;
(b) Investigate violations effectively, promptly, thoroughly and impartially
and, where appropriate, take action against those allegedly responsible in
accordance with domestic and international law;
4

A/RES/60/147

(c) Provide those who claim to be victims of a human rights or humanitarian
law violation with equal and effective access to justice, as described below,
irrespective of who may ultimately be the bearer of responsibility for the violation;
and
(d)
below.

Provide effective remedies to victims, including reparation, as described

III. Gross violations of international human rights law and serious violations
of international humanitarian law that constitute crimes
under international law
4.
In cases of gross violations of international human rights law and serious
violations of international humanitarian law constituting crimes under international
law, States have the duty to investigate and, if there is sufficient evidence, the duty
to submit to prosecution the person allegedly responsible for the violations and, if
found guilty, the duty to punish her or him. Moreover, in these cases, States should,
in accordance with international law, cooperate with one another and assist
international judicial organs competent in the investigation and prosecution of these
violations.
5.
To that end, where so provided in an applicable treaty or under other
international law obligations, States shall incorporate or otherwise implement within
their domestic law appropriate provisions for universal jurisdiction. Moreover,
where it is so provided for in an applicable treaty or other international legal
obligations, States should facilitate extradition or surrender offenders to other States
and to appropriate international judicial bodies and provide judicial assistance and
other forms of cooperation in the pursuit of international justice, including
assistance to, and protection of, victims and witnesses, consistent with international
human rights legal standards and subject to international legal requirements such as
those relating to the prohibition of torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment.
IV. Statutes of limitations
6.
Where so provided for in an applicable treaty or contained in other
international legal obligations, statutes of limitations shall not apply to gross
violations of international human rights law and serious violations of international
humanitarian law which constitute crimes under international law.
7.
Domestic statutes of limitations for other types of violations that do not
constitute crimes under international law, including those time limitations applicable
to civil claims and other procedures, should not be unduly restrictive.
V.

Victims of gross violations of international human rights law
and serious violations of international humanitarian law

8.
For purposes of the present document, victims are persons who individually or
collectively suffered harm, including physical or mental injury, emotional suffering,
economic loss or substantial impairment of their fundamental rights, through acts or
omissions that constitute gross violations of international human rights law, or
serious violations of international humanitarian law. Where appropriate, and in
accordance with domestic law, the term “victim” also includes the immediate family
or dependants of the direct victim and persons who have suffered harm in
intervening to assist victims in distress or to prevent victimization.

5

A/RES/60/147

9.
A person shall be considered a victim regardless of whether the perpetrator of
the violation is identified, apprehended, prosecuted, or convicted and regardless of
the familial relationship between the perpetrator and the victim.
VI. Treatment of victims
10. Victims should be treated with humanity and respect for their dignity and
human rights, and appropriate measures should be taken to ensure their safety,
physical and psychological well-being and privacy, as well as those of their
families. The State should ensure that its domestic laws, to the extent possible,
provide that a victim who has suffered violence or trauma should benefit from
special consideration and care to avoid his or her re-traumatization in the course of
legal and administrative procedures designed to provide justice and reparation.
VII. Victims’ right to remedies
11. Remedies for gross violations of international human rights law and serious
violations of international humanitarian law include the victim’s right to the
following as provided for under international law:
(a)

Equal and effective access to justice;

(b)

Adequate, effective and prompt reparation for harm suffered;

(c) Access to relevant information concerning violations and reparation
mechanisms.
VIII. Access to justice
12. A victim of a gross violation of international human rights law or of a serious
violation of international humanitarian law shall have equal access to an effective
judicial remedy as provided for under international law. Other remedies available to
the victim include access to administrative and other bodies, as well as mechanisms,
modalities and proceedings conducted in accordance with domestic law. Obligations
arising under international law to secure the right to access justice and fair and
impartial proceedings shall be reflected in domestic laws. To that end, States should:
(a) Disseminate, through public and private mechanisms, information about
all available remedies for gross violations of international human rights law and
serious violations of international humanitarian law;
(b) Take measures to minimize the inconvenience to victims and their
representatives, protect against unlawful interference with their privacy as
appropriate and ensure their safety from intimidation and retaliation, as well as that
of their families and witnesses, before, during and after judicial, administrative, or
other proceedings that affect the interests of victims;
(c)

Provide proper assistance to victims seeking access to justice;

(d) Make available all appropriate legal, diplomatic and consular means to
ensure that victims can exercise their rights to remedy for gross violations of
international human rights law or serious violations of international humanitarian
law.
13. In addition to individual access to justice, States should endeavour to develop
procedures to allow groups of victims to present claims for reparation and to receive
reparation, as appropriate.

6

A/RES/60/147

14. An adequate, effective and prompt remedy for gross violations of international
human rights law or serious violations of international humanitarian law should
include all available and appropriate international processes in which a person may
have legal standing and should be without prejudice to any other domestic remedies.
IX. Reparation for harm suffered
15. Adequate, effective and prompt reparation is intended to promote justice by
redressing gross violations of international human rights law or serious violations of
international humanitarian law. Reparation should be proportional to the gravity of
the violations and the harm suffered. In accordance with its domestic laws and
international legal obligations, a State shall provide reparation to victims for acts or
omissions which can be attributed to the State and constitute gross violations of
international human rights law or serious violations of international humanitarian
law. In cases where a person, a legal person, or other entity is found liable for
reparation to a victim, such party should provide reparation to the victim or
compensate the State if the State has already provided reparation to the victim.
16. States should endeavour to establish national programmes for reparation and
other assistance to victims in the event that the parties liable for the harm suffered
are unable or unwilling to meet their obligations.
17. States shall, with respect to claims by victims, enforce domestic judgements
for reparation against individuals or entities liable for the harm suffered and
endeavour to enforce valid foreign legal judgements for reparation in accordance
with domestic law and international legal obligations. To that end, States should
provide under their domestic laws effective mechanisms for the enforcement of
reparation judgements.
18. In accordance with domestic law and international law, and taking account of
individual circumstances, victims of gross violations of international human rights
law and serious violations of international humanitarian law should, as appropriate
and proportional to the gravity of the violation and the circumstances of each case,
be provided with full and effective reparation, as laid out in principles 19 to 23,
which include the following forms: restitution, compensation, rehabilitation,
satisfaction and guarantees of non-repetition.
19. Restitution should, whenever possible, restore the victim to the original
situation before the gross violations of international human rights law or serious
violations of international humanitarian law occurred. Restitution includes, as
appropriate: restoration of liberty, enjoyment of human rights, identity, family life
and citizenship, return to one’s place of residence, restoration of employment and
return of property.
20. Compensation should be provided for any economically assessable damage, as
appropriate and proportional to the gravity of the violation and the circumstances of
each case, resulting from gross violations of international human rights law and
serious violations of international humanitarian law, such as:
(a)

Physical or mental harm;

(b)

Lost opportunities, including employment, education and social benefits;

(c) Material damages and loss of earnings, including loss of earning
potential;
(d)

Moral damage;

7

A/RES/60/147

(e) Costs required for legal or expert assistance, medicine and medical
services, and psychological and social services.
21. Rehabilitation should include medical and psychological care as well as legal
and social services.
22.

Satisfaction should include, where applicable, any or all of the following:
(a)

Effective measures aimed at the cessation of continuing violations;

(b) Verification of the facts and full and public disclosure of the truth to the
extent that such disclosure does not cause further harm or threaten the safety and
interests of the victim, the victim’s relatives, witnesses, or persons who have
intervened to assist the victim or prevent the occurrence of further violations;
(c) The search for the whereabouts of the disappeared, for the identities of
the children abducted, and for the bodies of those killed, and assistance in the
recovery, identification and reburial of the bodies in accordance with the expressed
or presumed wish of the victims, or the cultural practices of the families and
communities;
(d) An official declaration or a judicial decision restoring the dignity, the
reputation and the rights of the victim and of persons closely connected with the
victim;
(e) Public apology, including acknowledgement of the facts and acceptance
of responsibility;
(f) Judicial and administrative sanctions against persons liable for the
violations;
(g)

Commemorations and tributes to the victims;

(h) Inclusion of an accurate account of the violations that occurred in
international human rights law and international humanitarian law training and in
educational material at all levels.
23. Guarantees of non-repetition should include, where applicable, any or all of
the following measures, which will also contribute to prevention:
(a)

Ensuring effective civilian control of military and security forces;

(b) Ensuring that all civilian and military proceedings abide by international
standards of due process, fairness and impartiality;
(c)

Strengthening the independence of the judiciary;

(d) Protecting persons in the legal, medical and health-care professions, the
media and other related professions, and human rights defenders;
(e) Providing, on a priority and continued basis, human rights and
international humanitarian law education to all sectors of society and training for
law enforcement officials as well as military and security forces;
(f) Promoting the observance of codes of conduct and ethical norms, in
particular international standards, by public servants, including law enforcement,
correctional, media, medical, psychological, social service and military personnel,
as well as by economic enterprises;
(g) Promoting mechanisms for preventing and monitoring social conflicts
and their resolution;

8

A/RES/60/147

(h) Reviewing and reforming laws contributing to or allowing gross
violations of international human rights law and serious violations of international
humanitarian law.
X.

Access to relevant information concerning violations and reparation
mechanisms

24. States should develop means of informing the general public and, in particular,
victims of gross violations of international human rights law and serious violations
of international humanitarian law of the rights and remedies addressed by these
Basic Principles and Guidelines and of all available legal, medical, psychological,
social, administrative and all other services to which victims may have a right of
access. Moreover, victims and their representatives should be entitled to seek and
obtain information on the causes leading to their victimization and on the causes and
conditions pertaining to the gross violations of international human rights law and
serious violations of international humanitarian law and to learn the truth in regard
to these violations.
XI. Non-discrimination
25. The application and interpretation of these Basic Principles and Guidelines
must be consistent with international human rights law and international
humanitarian law and be without any discrimination of any kind or on any ground,
without exception.
XII. Non-derogation
26. Nothing in these Basic Principles and Guidelines shall be construed as
restricting or derogating from any rights or obligations arising under domestic and
international law. In particular, it is understood that the present Basic Principles and
Guidelines are without prejudice to the right to a remedy and reparation for victims
of all violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian
law. It is further understood that these Basic Principles and Guidelines are without
prejudice to special rules of international law.
XIII. Rights of others
27. Nothing in this document is to be construed as derogating from internationally
or nationally protected rights of others, in particular the right of an accused person
to benefit from applicable standards of due process.

9
