UNITED

NATIONS

Y
FICIAL

CIL

RECO
DEPT.OFPOLlTlCAL
MD
SECMITY
COUMClL
AFFdlaS

TWENTY-SIXTH

YEAR

thMEETING: 30 SEPTEMBER 197 1
NEW

ARC14iVES
L

RETURN

WITHOUT

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l587/Rev. 1)
Adoption

.. ,. .. . .,.. ........ .....,

1

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . , . , .

The situation in Namibia:
(al Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the President of the Security
Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Chad, Congo (Democratic Republic of), Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Libyan
Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Niger,
Nigeria, People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
Sornalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
(6) Report of the AdHoc Sub-Committee on Namibia (S/10330) , . . . . . . . . .
Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New Members concerning the
application of Oman for membership in the United Nations (S/ 10345) . . . . .

s/PI’.1587

9

DELAY

I

,
.

FIFTEEN HUNDRE,DAND EIGHTY-SEVEN&lEETING

_ *

’ Held in New York on Thureday, 30 September 1971, at 4.30 p.m.
president: Mr. Toru NAKAGAWA (Japan).
presenr: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Belgium, Burundi, China, France, Italy, Japan,
Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Syrian Arab
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Brltaln and Northern Ireland and United
Statesof America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 587/Rev.l)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
President of the Security Council from the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo
(Democratic Republic of), Egypt, Equatorial
Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya,
Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic, Madagascar, Mali,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria,
People’s Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo,
Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania,
Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
lb) Report of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia
(S/10330).
3. Admission of new Members:
Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Oman for
membership in the United Nations (S/10345).

_’ ; : “::;I’.’
.

/

’

’ ”’

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the ~oun&s
previous dd.Gom I shall now, with the consent of the
Council, proceed to invite those p&icipa*,
~II ihe
dbmion to take the places reservedfor them. I also invite
the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia t~
take a place at the Council table,
At the invitation of the RestVent, Mr. b. 0. Ogbu,
President of the United N@tion# Quncil for Namibia, took
a pIace at the Council table; and Mr. T, h&konnen
(EthWalj, Mr. H. M&r (Sorrth Afn’ca), Mr. M. Khalki
(Sudan), I%&R. Grimes (Liberia), Mr. S. S. Ramphal (Guyana), Mr. B. Hassane (Chad), and Mr. 0. Arikpo (N&Y&),
took the p&es resewedfor them in the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT: A letter has just been received from
the representatives of Burundi, Sierra Leone and Somalia.
That text has been circulated to the members of the
Security Council as document S/10346. At this stage,
perhaps the members of the Council would be willing to
agree that at the appropriate time in our debate an
invitation will be extended to Mr. Nujoma under rule 39, of
the provisional rules of procedure asrequested in the letter
from the three members of the Council, in view of the
special relationship between the United Nations and the
Territory of Namibia.
3. As I hear no objection, I take it that the Council agrees.
4. I have just received a letter from the representative of
Mauritius requesting an invitation to participate in the
Council’s discussion without the right to vote. In accordance with the usual practice, and with the consent of the
Council, I propose to invite the representative of Mauritius
to t&e a seatat the side of the Council chamber in order to
take pa in the discussion without the right to Vote, it
being
understood that he will be tivited to take a place at
the Security Council table when it is his turn to speak.

Adoption of the agenda
Thew%da ~12sadopted
Thesituation in Namibia :
(a),Letkr dated 17 September 1971 addressed to the
Resident of the ~ectity COUIIC~Ifrom the representatives of Algeria, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon, Central
Afkau Republic, Chad, Congo (Democratic Republic
of), Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Libyan Arab Republic,
Mah.wcar, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco,
Mger, Nigeria, People’s Republic of the Congo,
R-n&, Senegal, Sierra bone, Somalia, Sudan, Swaziland, Togo, Tunisia, Uganda, United Republic of
Tanzania, Upper Volta and Zambia (S/10326);
lb) Report of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia
(S/l 0330)

At the itivitation of the ,president, Mr. R Ramphul
(Mauritius), ,took the place reservedfor him at the side of
the Gmcil chamber.
5. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will ‘nOW
continue its consideration of the question of Namibia.
1
6. The first speaker inscribed on the list is the Minister of
Communications, Telecommunications and POW of Ethiopia, His Excellency Mr. Makonnen.
7. Mr. MAKoNNEN (Ethiopia): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you, Sir, and through you the members of the
1

SeCUri@ Council, for affording me the opportunity

to
discharge the duties entrusted to my Government by the
~r@nization of African Unity, to present the ca8e of
Namibia before this high organ of the United Nations.
8. MY Intervention in the Council’s deliberations will not
be too kmg, since the viewpoint of Africa has already been
presented, in such an able and dignified a manner, by the
CurWnt Chairman of the Organization of African Unity, His
Excellency President Moktar Ould Daddah of the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania. His admirable presentation has
been followed by statements from my other African
colleagues, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and members
of the delegation of the Organization of African Unity, and
by the African members of the Security Council, all of
whom not only have shown the validity of the African
submission but have exposed the utter emptiness of South
Africa’s contention in its desperate effort to retain control
over the international Territory of Namibia.
9. We have a proverb in my country which says that when
the wolf pretends innocence, it dons the skin of the lamb. I
could not help being reminded of that ancient proverb
when listening to the distractive statement that we heard in
the Council the other day from the Foreign Minister of
South Africa.
10. The Council was made witness to the incredible
spectacle of the arch law-breaker of our time posing as the
ardent advocate of international ruIe of law. It is not the
first time I have watched this game of deception played by
representatives of South Africa, During the six years
between 1960 and 1966, when Ethiopia and Liberia
appeared OR behalf of the Organisation of African Unity
before the International Court of Justice and more particulrtrly during the debates of the twenty-first session of the
General Assembly in 1966, I had occasion, as one of the
spokesmen of the African Group, to debate issues with
South African representatives, and, having gained some
insight into their tactical manoeuvres, I am now in a
position to testify that their capacity to confuse issues by
legal arguments matches that of the devil to mislead the
heavenly company of angels.
Il.

In 1966, when the then President of the International
of Justice used his casting vote to reject the
submission of Ethiopia and Lrberia after six long years of
protracted deliberations, the Court’s decision not to decide
was hailed by the South African Government as a supreme
act of wisdom which did credit to the International Court
of Justice as the true embodiment of international rule of
law. That South African reaction was, of course, understandable, since the Court at that time played the tactical
game of delay and procrastination which was and is the
policy and policy objective of the South African Govern
ment.
Court

justice and its faithfulness to the obligations specified ln the
Charter. This time South Africa finds that the Court has
not played its tune and it therefore turns the full rage of iti
propagan& machine to portraying the Court as the villain
of the piece.
’
13. Mr. Muller’s long statement and his haphazard mkquotations from the British and American press have
already been most ably dealt with by my learned eelleagues, the Foreign Ministers of Sierra Leone and LiberiaThese distinguished representatives of Africa have Clearly
shown that the claims and arguments adduced m that
statement of the Foreign Minister of South Afrka and his
juggling with unverified statistics are only aimed at mir+
leading the Security Council and introducing elements
which de&et the Council’s attention from the real issues
involved.
14. But no amount of diversionary tactic on the part of
the South African Government can succeed in hiding the
fact that the problem of Namibia is nothing other than a
problem of open defiance of international authority on the
part of a State which discredita it.8 membership of the
United Nations by refusing to abide by the principles and
provisions of the Charter.
15. In the case of Namibia, South Africa has, in the words
of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), “, . +failed to
fulfil its obligations in respect of the administration of the
Mandated. Territory and to cnsum the moral and material
well-being and security of the indigenous inhabitants.. -I’,
and by refusing to be accountable to international authorities for the discharge of the duties and responsibilities
entrusted to it by the international community
as a
Mandatory Power, it has in fact disavowed the Mandate.
The Security Council has backed this Assembly action by
the resolutions which it has adopted on the subject since
the termination of the Mandate in 1966, and the present
Advisory Opinion has upheld and confirmed the decisions
of the two supreme organs of the United Nations.
16. This is, stated in simple terms, the whole history of
the Namibian case. It is a clear case of international
responsibility so defined and recognized both by the
League of Nations which created the Mandate system and
by the United Nations which, as the legitimate successor of
the defunct League, replaced the Mandate system by the
system of Trusteeship, established as always with the aim of
“promoting to the utmost the material and moral wellbeing and the social progress of the inhabitants of the
territory”.
17. It may indeed appear strange and paradoxical to us
living in.t.his second half of the twentieth century that such
‘a high mission of international trust should have inadvertently, and in the fhst place, fallen into the hands of a
regime that then, as now, openIy manifests its theories and
practices of racial discrimination and unashamedly proclaims its denial of the very principles enshrined both in the
Covenant of the League as in the Charter of the United
Nations,

12. Today the International Court of Justice has faced
squarely its duties and responsibilities asthe highest judicial
organ of our world body and has given an Advisory
Opinionl which is universally acclaimed for its sense of
1 Legal consequences for States of the continued presence of
South Afrim &I Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion, I.CY.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

18. But alas those were the days when considerations of
freedom and human rights weighed lightly with those that
2

dominated the world scene, with the result that the
destinies of Peoples could often be disposed of as corn.
modjties of little value.

24. The effective action that the Security Council has to
take with regard to Namibia divides itself naturally into two
phases.

19. The Declarations On human rights and on the emanci.
pation of Peoples under the colonial yoke were only ideals
which existed in the minds and hearts of people of goodwill
and had not become, as they have in our time, the
demanding realities of international life.

25. The first concerns the illegal occupation by South
Africa of an international Territory recognized as such by
the United Nations. This defiance of the authority of the
United Nations is a grave breach of intemadonal law which
risks undermining the authority of the Unlt,ed Nations, The
Security Council ad the competent organ of the United
Nations endowed with the responsibility for enforcement
action, of ensurbg respect for the decisions of the world
body, and of protecting the collective interests of the
international community must act, and act effectively, in
order to bring an end to the illegal occupation of South
Africa and to preserve the international status of Namibia.
Once the international status of the Territory of Namibia is
assured, the duty falls on the United Nations to assistthe
Namibian people in the attainment of their freedom and
independence.

20. When in 1966, the United Nations General Assembly
decided /resolution 2145 (XXI,Y the South African Mandate over Namibia, it was prompted to do so by that
pressing demand of international conscience roused at the
time by the unbecbming behaviour of the International
Court of Justice in shying away from its responsibilities.
That decision of the General Assembly wassupported by an
overwhelming majority of the membership of the United
Nations with only South Africa and Portugal as usual voting
against.

26. The second aspect is that touching upon international
peace and security. The United Nations risks falling into a
dangerous habit if it allows itself to see threats to
international peace and security only in those situations
that are in a state of active crisis. As Sir AIec Douglas-Home
reminded us in the General Assembly yesterday? the
United Nations must give equal emphasis to the tasks of
peace-keeping and peace-making. There is nothing in the
Charter which ljmits the role of the United Nations to that
of an International fire-brigade. On the contrary, the
purposes of the Charter demand fhat the United Nations
continually engage in peace-making efforts in order to avert
all possible confrontation and conflict.

21. It may appear surprising to outside observers of the
United Nations scene that an Advisory Opinion should have
been required on a subject so clear and self-evident as that
pertaining to the termination of a proven case of misplaced
trust. South Africa’s defiance of United Nations authority
and its effort to incorporate Namibia into the territories of
the Union of South Africa were then as now too well
known for the Security Council to have required an
Advisory Opinion from the International Court of Justice
before taking the appropriate action specified under the
Charter. Nevertheless, the important point now is that the
advice wassought and the Opinion has been given.
22. To the question “What are the legal consequencesfor
States of the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council resolution
276 (1970)? ” the Court has replied [para 133 of the

27. The potential danger of racial conflagration inherent
in the South Africa situation must be recognized in time,
and the United Nations and more particularly the Security
CounciI must not wait for that crisis to be out of hand
before taking the appropriate measures that the situation
demands. We therefore appeal to the Security Council to
take the appropriate and timely measures called for by the
Charter.

Opinimf :

“(1) that the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to
withdraw its administration from Namibia immediately
and thus put an end to its occupation of the Territow;

28. In urging the Security Council to take timely measures, I cannot of course help addressing a special appeal to
those amongst the permanent members of the Council that
maintain close and extensive relations with South Africa. It
is no good for them to tell us that their relations Canhave
no hearing on the political situation in Namibia and in
southern Africa in general. It is obvious that South Africa
could not be in a position to defy United Nations authority
and world public opinion if it did not count on the massive
economic benefits it derives from its relations with certain
of the major Powers. Is it too much to ask that those
Powers at least put pressure on South Africa to heed the
decisions and the obligations to which they themselves have
subscribed? If they fail to do that and if they continue to
help build and strengthen the economic and military power
of the South Africa regime, can the world be blamed for
regarding them as accomplices in South Africa’s illegal
acts?

“(2) that States Members of the United Nations are
under obligation to recognize the illegality of South
Africa’s presence in Namibia and the invalidity of Its acts
on behalf of or concerning Namibia, and to refrain from
any acts and in particular any dealings with the Government of South Africa implying reCogdtiOn of the legality,
of, or lending support or assistanceto, such presence and
administration;
“(3) that It is incumbent upon States which are. npt
Members of the United Nations to give assistance,WI?
the scope of subparagraph (2) above, in the a&on wluch
has been aen by the United Nations with regard to
Namibia.”
23. That clear and unequivocal Opinion of the International Court of Justice must surely mark the end of a
painful period of protracted debate and must also be the
beginning of effective action on the part of the international community represented by the UnitedNations.

2 Ojfictal Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth SessioK
PIena7y Meetings, 1944th meeting.

3

29. On the question of Namibia, as indeed on all other
issues confronting our continent, the stand of independent
African States and of their continental organization is based
on reason and justice. We have never come to the United
Nations asking for aq&ing which is not ours by right. Our
demand has always been for the redress of past injustice so
that all Afrkan peo@~ may have the opportunity to build
on their own mother continent a prosperous future in
fruitful collaboration and on the basis of equality with the
rest of the world.

30. The past haa been cruel to Africa. It has been one of
humiliation, oppression and subjugation, And yet Africa
has not sought to hold that against the rest of the world.
Africa’s response to that past injustice has not been one of
blind hatred and vengeance, On the contrary, its attitude
has been characterized by the spirit of conciliation and of
willingness to let bygones be bygones, thus showing
readiness to live in peace and harmony even with those who
were the oppressors of yesteryear.
31. I can proudly say that my own country, under the
wise leadership of its Emperor, gave the first lead in this
conciliation back in 1941, when the Emperor returned to
his country from five years of bitter exile. On that historic
occasion, he appealed to his people not to repay evil by
evil, but to show mercy and compassion towards the
thousands of Italian military and civilian personnel trapped
within the confines of Ethiopia’s national boundaries.
32. That noble example of conciliation and compassion
was invariably followed by the other leaders of freedom
movements throughout Africa. Those freedom f&hers, most
of whom had literally moved from the status of prisoner to
that of Prime Minister almost overnight, assumed the
statesmanlike stand of making such endeavours for concihation and multiracial harmony that they have succeeded in
working out new relationships based on mutual respect and
common benefit.

b control. We are told of self-rule or the establishment of
homefands for the indigenous Inhabitants of this or that
terr-hory. But this amounts to nothing more than the
creation of reserved areaa for secondclass &hens m the
true fashion of the racist policy oflrpmihe&!
37. We hear about p]ebiscites, and again thhb sometimes
taken by some people as representing a dramatk change in
south Africa’s policies. But when South Africa talks of a
plebiscite what it really means to do is to stage a
make-believe exercise of selective cona&ation which would
be so controlled and influenced by the South African police
apparatus that the outcome would be a foregone conhion.
Needless to say, such a plebiscite, organized and
conducted by the repressive machinery of the South
African r&hne, would amount to a mockery of the
democratic process of self-determination.
38. It has been quite fashionable in recent months to ta&
of “dialogues” between independent African States and
South Africa. But here again how can the South African
Government hold out any meaningful prospect of dialogue
with independent African States when it refusesmeaningful
dialogue in its accountability to the United Nations? How
can independent Africa have confidence in a n?gime which
refuses dialogue with a majority of the South African
peoples and indiscriminately prosecutes peoples of all races
on the ground that they make the minimum of effort to
engage in mutual dialogue and human contact in order to
work together for their betterment through racial conciliation and harmony? How else are we to explain the
extraordinary trial of such distinguished personalities as the
Very Reverend Dean of Johannesburg, who is being tried
on the ridiculous pretext of violating the so-called Prevention of Communism Act? One of the accusations brought
against this courageous clergyman was that when he wason
a visit to London he allowed some South African exiles to
come and see him at his hotel. Is this not clear and
sufficient evidence of merciless tyranny dictated by blind
fear?

33. I submit that thisgxecord of Africa in respect of
international conciliation and harmony has no parallel-1
repeat, no parallel-in the whole annals of human history. It
is a record of which we Africans can justly be proud.

39. The case of Namibia has rightly been described as a
test case of international accountability-in other words, a
test case for the United Nations. I would venture to submit
that &njbia is equally a test casefor South Africa itself.

34. In contrast to that attitude of conciliation and
harmony stands the inhuman policy and practice of racial
discrimination and apartheid championed by the Government of South Africa. The problem of Namibia is only one
part of the strategy of the Government of South Africa to
make southern Africa a base of racial ‘oppression and of
denial of legitimate rights to the African populations of this
region.

40. If South Africa has the slightest inclination to recogr&e the demands of change in our time and if it is
genuinely interested in engaging in meaningful dialogue
based on mutual acceptance of rules and principles enshrined in the Charter-if, I say, there is a genuine change of
heart on the pm-tof the Government of South Africa With
regard to its past policies and practices, then let Us see the
signs of this change in Namibia. Let the South African
Government show its good intentions by voluntarily putting an end to the ryegal occupation of the TerritoIy which
is the rc,sponsibility of the United Nations. I challenge the
SC&-I
African Government to give proof of its good
intentions by yielding to the intematlonal responsibility of
the United Nations in Namibia. Then and only then can we
say with some justification,that there has indeed been some
change of heart in the South African r&ime.

35. Not content with the injustice that it perpetrates in
territories that are under its direct control, the South
African Government seeks to extend these evil practices to
an international Territory which is under the rcsponsjbibty
of the United Nations.
36. This is, of course, done in clever disguise. From time
to time formulae are sprung on us which are cleverly
devised to give the impression of a political break-through
in South Africa’s treatment of non-white populations under

41. But since South Africa shows no sign of such
intentions with regard to the status of Namibia, the

4

decisions and rulings of thk highest organs of the United
Nations notwithstanding, the Security Council becomes
duty&ound to invoke the enforcement measures envlsagtd
in the appropriate Chapters of the United Nations Charter
to preserve Namibia’s intertratlonal status and to protect
and promote the rights of the Namibian peoples. This is a
clear and inescapable duty which we urge the Council to
undertake without delay.
42. I cannot conclude thls statement, Mr. President, without asking your permission to address a message of
encouragement and goodwill to the brave peoples of
Namibia. Their hope for freedom rises high with every
positive decision emanating from the organs of the United
Nations, and, having derived great satisfaction and comfort
from the Advisory Opinion given by the International
Court of Justice, they now wait most anxiously for
meaningful action from the United Nations and, more
particularly, from the Security Council. Theirs is indeed a
difficult ordeal. The fight for freedom has never been easy.
We say in Ethiopia that patience is sour but it bears sweet
fruit. I have no doubt in my mind that the patience and
suffering of the peoples of Namibia shall one day be
crowned with success.

the United Nations adopts in reference to Namibia, but he
also challenged even the author& of the Security Council,
acfhg in accordance with ffs obligations under the Charter,
to have adopted resolution 276 (l!VO),
47. With such an attitude, I wonder if even the most
permissive members of the Security Council can still be in
any doubt ss to the futiUty of trying to reason with the
apartheid r&me of South Africa in the hope that it will
peacefully withdraw from Namibia. I have never been in
doubt that the racist n@me Mr. Mu&r represents has made
up its mind to defy the United Nations, including the
Securify Council. 1 only hope thaf, after the intervention of
Mr. Muller on 27 September, those who still entertained
any doubt have also come to the conclusion that South
Africa needs to be handled with an iron hand.
48. The decision of the International Court ofJustice has
made it unmistakably clear that the presence of South
Africa in Namiia is illegal. That Advisory Opinion has thus
confirmed the positions taken by the General Assembly and
the Security Council when those organs declared South
Africa’s presence in Namibia to be unlawful and called
upon it to withdraw its administration from the Territory.
49. It was the hope of my Government that since the
question of legality had thus been clarified, all Members of
this Organization would consider it incumbent upon them,
in accordance with Article 25 of the Charter, to take such
positive steps as would rid Namibia of the inhuman
administration of South Africa. What is more, it was the
hope of my Government that the permanent members of
the Security Councii, both by the Charter privilege they
enjoy and by the consequent obligation we expect them to
assume, would have no difficulty in grappling with the
problem of South Africa’s continued defiance of the
decision of this august body.

43. The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the Commissioner for External Affairs of
Nigeria, His Excellency Mr. Okoi Arikpo. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.
44. Mr. ARIKPO (Nigeria): Mr. President, I should like,
first of all, to convey through you to the Security Council
my gratitude for being given the opportunity to participate
in your consideration of the item on Namibia.
45. As a member of the delegation sent by the Organization of African Unity to underscore the importance it
attaches to the question of Namibia, I am in full agreement
with the presentation of Africa’s casemade to this Council
by His ExcelIency Mr. Moktar Ould Daddah, President of
the Islamic Republic of Mauritania. If I have asked to
participate as one of the African Foreign Ministers designated by the Organization of African Unity to support
President Ould Daddah, it is to supplement the presentation
of the leader of the Organization of African Unity
delegation and further to impress upon this Council the
expectation by all African countries that positive action
will be taken to relieve the people of Namibia of the yoke
imposed on them by the illegal occupation of their country
by South Africa.

50. Unfortunately, the report of the Ad Hoc SubCommittee on Namibia, presented by the Chairman of that
Sub-Committee, the Ambassador of Burundi, has not given
my delegation any cause for optimism that the expectatio:ls
of my Government, the expectations of the people of
Namibia, the expectations of all Africa and, indeed, of all
freedom-loving peoples throughout the world, will be met.
Looking through the proposals agreed upon by the Ad Hoc
Sub-Committee as contained in part A of the report, one
finds, as usual, that members of the Security Council, and
in particular the representatives of the privileged four, had
no difficulty in subscribing to pious declarations and
hopeful requests. But as soon as proposals were intro
duced-as eontained in part B-which would have ensured
the realisation of the pious hopes and hopeful requests of
part A, most of the representatives of the privileged four
developed cold feet and would not agree. Are we to infer
from that that the conclusion has been reached in the
chancelleries of the major Western Powers whose representatives opposed those positive proposals that a solution
to the Namibian problem is beyond the Security Council?
Are we to infer that the financial returns from the
investment in Namibia are more important to those
countries-even if those returns are at the expense of the
welfare of the indigenous people of Namibia? Are we to
conclude that as far as Namibia is concerned we have once
again come up against a solid wall?

46. As I sat here on 27 September 11584th meeting?
listening to Mr. Muller, the Foreign Minister of the aparfh&i r&.ime of South Africa, I could not help wondering
how the representative of a regime that purports to be a
Member of the United Nations could come to show such
utter disrespect for the most Important organ of this
Organization-for
that is what Mr. Muller’s *speech
amounted to. Not only did he reject out of hand the
Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice, not
only did he call into question the competence of the
General Assembly to have adopted resolution 2145 (XXI)
terminating the mandate of South Africa over Namibia, not
only did he refuse to adopt the correct terminology which
5

51, Perhaps the urgency of kicking South Africa out of
Namibia is not appreciated in this Chamber, I would hate to
think so. I would hate to believe that the members of the
Security Council are not aware’ of the atrocities being
perpetrated dally on the people of Namibia by the racist
administration of South Africa. I would hate to think that
the Security Council ia bent on ignoring theundeniablefact
that South Africa tS oppressing the peoples of Namibfa,
f&g to promote their welfm and denying them their
right of df-dmrminatim.
Otherwise the Foreign Minister
of the apmrheid @ime could not have appeared before this
Council and could not have expected to be taken seriously
when he tded to persuade members of the benevolence of
the South African administration in Namibia, of its
generous provision of social services and the pouring of
millions of dollars of South African money into the
development of Namibia.
52. Characteristically, the South African Foreign Minister
did not tell the Security Council how many millions of
dollars his country had earned from the diamonds and
uranium it pillaged from Namibia during the period under
review. Mr. Muller’s statements and the endlessstatistics he
gave in order to persuade this. Council of South Africa’s
altruism in Namibia would have been treated with utter
contempt and ridicule had they not been soprovocative in
the shameless distortioh of facts. Mr. Muller spoke of
economic development in Namibia. No doubt roads have
recently been tarred and a railway system has been
established-but all for what purpose, if not to facilitate the
pillage of Namibian wealth by South Africa and the
investors from the Western world whose financial interests
therefore make it difficult for their Governments to do
what is right.
53. Of course, investments in Namibia have increased, and
economic activity has therefore been stepped up, but to
what effect and for whose benefit? The end result has not
been a rise in the standard of living of the indigenous
NamibJans, who in fac&.constitute one of the poorest
peoples on the continent of Africa even though the piofits
derived from investment in Namibia are among the highest
in the world. However, more than one third of the
country’s national product is exported in the form of
profits and dividends, making the country, in the words of
an observer, one of the most exploited countries in history.
How beneficial are Mr. Muller’s roads and railway system to
the indigenous people of Namibia, when they cannot use
them because of the inhuman restrictions imposed oa
them?
54. I am sure no one will take seriously the contention of
the representative of the Pretoria rigime that the people of
Namibia are being brought towards self-governtient, because the introduction bf upurtheid into Namibia and the
creation of Bantustans ti that Territory will only accentuate the reign of terror which is characteristic of the racist
tigime in the Republic of South Africa itself. The enforced
separation of the various tribes in Namibia cannot but
increase the suppression of the people’s aspirations towards
selfgovernment. It is amazing that in South Africa the
Government adopted every feasible measure, including
repre&ion, to integrate its English-speaking citizens with
the Beers, while in Namibia it is using these samerepressive

to disintegrate the African population. 14 It any
won&r that Chief Counsellor Ushona Sl@ni of the
aucalled Ovarnbo Executive Council should make ‘the,
ambivalent statement which Mr.Muller ;gleeAulty qtioted,
aamely, “I do not think the Ur$ted Naironr know9
** i. what
* &
going on her@,
’ b a’ ‘, j
measure

; 55. Does the United Nations know what Paitsbefall Chlof
Ifr>seah Kotako, the late Chief of the l%nsrr# 0fNmmibia
who had the courage to protest on behrlf of hir people
against the oppression of the South Aftican nSglmc? Does
the United Nations know of the pressures that have been
bmmght to bear on his successor, Chief Clemens Kapuo who
haa been denied access to the funds of h& own peOpk,
deposited with the Barclays Bank in Windhoek, simply
becausehe will not acquJesce in the repreaive measures of
the upurfheid r&ime? Does the United Nationa know that
only recently when some Ovambo dvll servants expressed
wrpport for the Advisory Opinion of the Intarnadonal
Court of Justice they were dismissed? The fact Is that
South Africa continues to cling to Namibia,, not because it
has the interest of the pt+ople of that Territory at heart but
merely to have a free hand in plundering its mineral wealth.
If this were not so, if in fact South Africa believes that it is
spending money in Namibia to uplift the People and that
the international community as well as the people of
Namibia
themselves have been unappreciative of this
generosity, one would expect that the South African
Government would have packed up and left the Territory
and saved its money for use in the Republic, leaving
Namibia itself to suffer what Mr. Muller calls “‘utter chaos”.
Or, as an alternative, South Africa could have demanded
that the Security Council shoufd send a fact-finding mission
to the Territory. What has South Africa done instead?
South Africa has refused to allow members of the Council
for Namibia to enter the Territory. Instead it hired The
Tcmes of London, the D&y Express and the Ffuncouver
Sun to give respectability to its repressive policies towards
the owners of Namibian land and its wealth. Of course, we
all know that it is easy for these newspapers, financed by
the shareholders of the mines in Namibia, to justify and
even glorify these policies which destroy the human dignity
of the natural and rightful owners of this mineral wealth.
56.

The South African Government’s spokesman has made

the

General Assembly that it intended to ascertain the

a lot of play-with the idea of a plebiscite. I think this idea
ought to be examined. In 1946 South Africa announced to
views of the population of Namibia and that when that had
been done the decision of the South African Government
would be submitted to the General Assembly for judgement.3 Instead of organizing a proper plebiscite the South
African Government organized a mock election on the
result of which it sought to incorporate the Territory of
Namibia into the Union of South Africa. When the General
Assembly, incensed by this mockery of democracy, refused
to accede to the Jncorpofation of the Territory, South
AfEica announced that it would not proceed with the plan
to incorporate.4 Quite recently, before the International
Court
of Justice, South Africa again canvassedthe idea of a
3 Ibid.,
neeting.

4Jbid.,

fmeting.
6

First part of the First Session, Plurary Meetings, 12th
Second part of the First Session, Plenary Meetings,

64th

plebiscite, this time urging that the plebiscite be conducted
by the Court in co-operation with the South African
authorities. Now, it is elementary knowledge that ,no court
0f law ever conducts a plebiscite, Of course, the Court very
rightly rejected such a preposterous suggestion. Before the
Council, the South African Foreign Minister has once again
raised the proposal for a plebiscite. Assuming that South
Africa is serious about holding a real pIebiscite to determine
the wishes of the people of Namibia, may we ask the
following questions.

57, Will the South African Government allow the United
Nations to conduct the plebiscite?
58, Will the South African authorities undertake to
withdraw their armed forces from the Territory to ensure
that there shall be no intimidation of the people?
59. Will the South African Government permit the return
of all Namibian political exiles to their homes to enable
them to explain the issuesto their peoples?
64. Will the South African authorities release Namibian
political prisoners and permit free discussion of the issues
to be decided by the plebiscite?
61. Will the South African authorities allow representatives of the United Nations free and unimpeded movement
throughout the Territory for the purpose of supervisingthe
plebiscite?
62. If these questions are answeredin the affirmative, then
I strongly suggest that the Government of South Africa
should enter into immediate discussions with the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to arrange for steps to
be taken towards such a pIebiscite.

serious action will be taken against it since it enjoys the
friendship of and will always be jlhielded by those who
should be the firat to ensure the compliance of the
apartheld @me with the decisions of this Organization
regarding Namibia. Perhaps that is why 7%~ Nau York
Times,in reporting the debate in the Security CounciLon
Namibia on 27 September, observed:
‘Yhirtysix countries called for the debate [on Namibia] in a letter of 17 September asking the Omncil ‘to
discusswaysand meansof enforcing the paat decision of
the United Nations’ in the fight of the new Court
decision. There is no way to enforce the Court’s decision
except by the Security Council, which is unlikely to take
str0ng immediate action.”
65. The Security Council must show that it it willingthere is no doubt as to its ability-to take strong immediate
action to get South Africa out of Namibia. That is the crux
of the solution to the Namiiian problem. I trust in the
good judgement of this Council in arriving at the best
meansof achieving this solution.
66, The PRESIDENT: The next name on the list of
speakersis that of the representative of Mauritius. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
67. Mr. RAMPHUL (Mauritius): Mr. President, I wish, first
of all, to thank, through you, the Security Council for
having kindly acceded to my request for participation in
this very important sessionof the Security Council.
68. As the Assembly of African Heads of State and
has indicated, the purpose of this special
session is to discusswaysand means of enforcing the past
decisions of the United Nations, taking into account the
Advisory Opinion delivered on 21 June 1971 by the
International Court of Justice on “the legal consequences
for States of the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia notwithstanding Security Council resolution
276 (1970)“.
Government

63. In the absence of an afirmative answer to all these
questions, I most humbly suggestthat the Security Council
has a clear duty. The task before the Council is clear. The
tyranny of the Government of South Africa over the people
of Namibia must be removed. The Council must show not
merely willingness to adopt a resolution but the determina69. The Advisory Opinion given at the request of this
tion to enforce it. The Council had called upon South
body is unequivocal as far as South Africa is concerned. It
Africa to withdraw its administration from Namibia. The
reads[paragraph133J:
International Court of Justice has declared that the
continued presence of South Africa in the Territory
“The Court is of the opinion . , , that the continued
notwithstanding the Security Council’s resolution is illegal.
presenceof South Africa in Namibia being iilegal, South
What is left is for the Security Council to show that it can
Africa is under obligation to withdraw its administration
take firm action. Otherwise, the whole system of world
from Namibia immediately and thus put an end to its
order envisaged in the creation of this Organisation will be
occupation of the Territory.”
sharply called into question. Otherwise, the hopes and
aspirations of millions of people the world over in the
70. That was the considered view of the highest judicial
effectiveness of this Organization will be dashed to the
ground. South Africa must be removed from Namibia even organ of the United Nations system, an organ which, as the
President of the Court has recalled, is a body which acts
if it becomes necessary to resort to the provisions of
only on the basis of law, independently of all outside
Chapter VII of the Charter.
influences or interventions whatsoever.
64. In fact, I believe that if the permanent members of the
71. The International Court of Justice has recalled that
Security Council show the determination to resolve this
the mandates system established under Article 22 of the
problem, to set aside legal technicalities and deal with the
Covenant of the League of Nations was based upon two
human problems with which we are faced, South Africa will
principles of paramount importance: the principle of
have no alternative but to withdraw its administration. Our
non-annexation
and the principle that the well+eing and
bane, so far, has been that South Africa is certain that no
7

development of the peoples concerned formed a sacred
trust of civilization. It added /pamgraph 531:

actions of the South African Government are not governed
by its obligations under the Mandate.

“Mindful asit is of the primary necessity of interpreting
an instrument in accordance with the intentions of the
parties at the time of its conchuion, the Court ia bound
to take into account the fact that the concepts embodied
in article 22 of the Covenant-‘the strenuous conditions
of the modem world’ and ‘the welkeing and development* of the peoples concerned-were not static, but were
by definition evolutionary, as also, therefore, was the
concept of the ‘sacred trust’. ‘Ihe parties to the Covenant
must consequently be deemed to have accepted them as
such. That is why, viewing the institutions of 1919, the
Court must take into consideration the changes which
have occurred in the supervening halfcentury, and its
interpretation cannot remain unaffected by the subsequent development of law, through the Charter of the
United Nations and by way of customary law, Moreover,
an international instrument has to be interpreted and
applied within the framework of the entire legal system
prevailing at the time of the interpretation, In the domain
to which the present proceedings relate, the last SO years,
as indicated above, have brought important developments. These developments leave little doubt that the
ultimate objective of the sacred trust was the selfdetermination and independence of the peoples concerned .”

76. It is obvious that by its conduct South Africa has
forfeited its rights under the Mandate. Under these circumstances, the United Nations, as successorto the League, has
the right to terminate the South African Mandate. It did so
in 1966, through the General Assembly, when the latter
adopted its resolution 2145 (XXI). To the contention that
that resolution “made pronouncements which the General
Assembly, not being a judicial organ, wasnot competent to
make”, the International Court of Justice replied /‘paragraph 1031 that:

72. I thought that quotation of the World Court’s Opinion
was important as it clearly defines the objectives of the
mandates system, a system which, asthe Court recognized,
had survived the demise of the League of Nations. In this
connexion the Court pointed out that the United Nations,
acting through its competent organ, must be seen above all
as the supervisory institution competent to pronounce on
the conduct of the Mandatory.

“ . . . the United Nations . , . acting through its competent

organs, must be seen above all as the supervisory
institution competent to pronoun* in that capacity on
the conduct of the Mandatory.
1‘. . . and Iparagraph 1051 that it would not be correct to
assume that, because the General Assembly is in principle
vested with recommendatory powers it is debarred from
adopting, in special cases within the framework of its
competence, resolutions which make determinations or
have operative design”.
77. It is my view that in its unequivocal Opinion, the
Court has confirmed the illegality of South Africa’s
continued presencein Namibia.
78. If, as our esteemed Secretary-General has pointed out
in the introduction to his annual report,s the remaining
Territories under colonial rule should be considered as a
direct challenge to the Charter, the case of Namibia
constitutes the most direct challenge to the very authority
of the United Nations, a situation which should be
corrected without delay now that the International Court
of Justice. has made its views known to the Council.

73. In adopting resolution 2145 (XXI) terminating South
Africa’s mandate over Namibia, the General Assembly
agreed that the South African Government had forfeited its
Mandate. In the light of theAdvisory Opinion, the General
Assembly’s decision was in order. For the enforcement of
apartheid policies and other measuresare in contradiction
of the principles set forth in the Covenant of the League of
Nations and underlined by the International Court, particularly the principle that the well-being and development
of the people of Namibia formed a sacred trust of
civilization .

79. The Organisation of African Unity is asking the
Security Council to devise ways and means of enforcing the
past decisions of the United Nations in the light of the legal
obligation imposed on the world community by the
decision of the World Court. We believe that the Council
should first of all take the necessarymeasures to ensure the
effective implementation of its own resolution 283 (1970),
particularly of those provisions calling for action by States,
in view of that part of the Advisory Opinion which states
that Member States are under obligation to recognize the
illegality of South Africa’s presence in Namibia and the
invalidity of its acts on behalf of or concerning Namibia.

74. Some United Nations bodies have already pointed out
that the division of the Territory into socalled separate
homelands under the Development of Self-Government for
Native Nations in South West Africa Act is destroying the
unity and territorial integrity of Namibia. And it has been
recognized that to relocate forcrbly the Africans in Namibia
is to apply to them the basic tenet of the policies of
uparfheid that have been condemned repeatedly as inhuman
and criminal by United Nations bodies.

80. The Council should also take whatever additional
measures are needed for the fulfilment of the responsibilities of the United Nations towards Namibia and the
removal of South Africa from the Territory. In view of
South Africa’s continuous refusal to comply with previous
resolutions and unless some sincere and effective solution is
found immediately, the Security Council may weti soon
fmd itself with no alternative but to resort to all measures
provided for under Chapter VII of the Charter for the sake
of peace, progress and justice in southern Africa.

75. Above all, the ultimate objective of the’ sacred trust
being selfdetermination and independence, the continuing
persecution and repression of leaders of the liberation
movement of the Territory is a clear indication that the

5 Ibid., Twenty-sixth Session, Supplement No. IA.

8

81, The PRESIDENT: There are no other names inscribed
on my list of speakers on the question of Namibia. It is my
understanding that members of the Council may wish to
hold consultations on the matter and that my successor as
President, the representative of Nicaragua, Ambassador
Sevilla Sacasa, will make arrangements for the further
consideration of this question by the Security Council. The
Council will, accordingly, proceed with the next item on its
agenda for this meeting.
I

Admission of new Members

88. On 16 June 1970, a year after the British installed the
puppet Sultan of Oman, an eminent correspondent of Le
Mcmde, Mr. Eric Rouleau, wrote the following:
‘In addition to their”-he means the British-%ilitary
bases,the British control the foreign affairs, the army, the
banking, the oil industry, the investments and the foreign
trade of Oman, which in fact amounts to a virtual
surrendering of sovereignty.”
He added :

Report of the Committee on the Admission of New
Members concerning the application of Oman for membership in the United Nations (S/10345)
82. The PRESIDENT: At its 1574th meeting, on 16
August, the Security Council referred the application of
Oman for membership in the United Nations to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members for examination and report, in accordance with rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
83. The report of the Committee on the Admission of
New Members has been submitted to the Council today in
document S/10345. In its report the Committee recommends that the Council have recourse to the last paragraph
of rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure and that it
adopt a draft resolution recommending to the General
Assembly that Oman be admitted to membership of the
United Nations.
84. In connexion with Oman’s application I have received
a letter /S/10348/ from the Permanent Representative of
the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen in which he
requests an invitation to addressthe Council on the subject.
If I hear no objection I shall take it that the Council agrees
that I should invite the representative of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Yemen to take a seat at the
Council table in order to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote.
85. There being no objection it is so.decided, and I invite
the representative of the People’s Democratic Republic of
Yemen to take a seat at the Council table and to make a
statement.

“At the same time, the Popular Front for the Uberation of the Occupied Arabian Gulf (PFLGAG) demonstrated its ability and dynamism by winning effective
control of two-thirds of the province of Dhofar and
estatdishing a popular and effective administration.”
89. In a British newspaper, in an article entitled “Britain
and the Hidden War”, the following waswritten:
Yast week the British Government confirmed that
RAF reinforcements had been sent to Salala, capital of
Dhofar, the western province of the Sultanate of Muscat
and Oman. A bitter but seldom reported guerrilla war
there is now moving into its sixth year. . . About 90 per
cent of the 250,000 population have been ‘liberated’.
Britain’s relationship with the slave-owning Sultan is
hTighly ambiguous. We have no defence commitment to
Muscat and Oman, yet seconded British officers provide
its high-level military expertise. They are assigned as a
quid pro quo for British use of bases in Salala and Masira,
under an agreement dating back to 1958. As the intention
is to keep Masira as a ‘staging post’ even after Britain’s
general East of Suez withdrawal in 1971, the British
Government will still hold to the Sultan. , . .
“Fighting now centres on the stretch of military road
through the mountains, linking Salala with Muscat.
Dubbed the ‘red line’, the Front claims to have inflicted
210 casualties on government troops along this road in
recent months.”
90. Unlike his father, Qabus Bin Taimur has not been able
to black out the news of the popular revolt and keep his
Sultanate in complete isolation. Instead, the new Puppet
Sultan is trying to screen the achievements and development of the popular revolution and win the allegiance of his
impoverished subjects by announcing fictitious plans for
building schools and hospitals. The Sultan is also assiduously trying to win international recognition by simply
declaring that Oman is an independent State, while only
last year the General Assembly of the United Nations
adopted a resolution i.2702 (XXV)/ calling for the selfdetermination of the people of Oman and explicitly stating
that Oman is a colonial Territory.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. M. Ismail,
(People’s Democmtic Republic of Yemen) took a place at
the Council table.

86. Mr.‘ISMAIL
(People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen): Mr. President, I am most grateful for the opportunity
given to me to speak before you and all the other esteemed
members of this Council.
87. On 24 July 1970, after 37 years of the reign of terror
of Sultan Saeed Bin Tahnur, the British Colonial Patron
installed Sultan Qabus Bin Taimur in what appeared to be
an initial move towards independence. The rule of Qabus
Bin Taimur is completely controlled by the British Government, both in internal and external affairs, and the freedom
of selfdetermination of the people of Oman is nonexistent.

91. This is a fact which must be strongly emphasized. A
revolution exists in the Territory and there is a liberation
movement in about 90 per cent of the country.It is a case
of a rule by force, adopted and strengthened by a foreign
Power, which is totally unacceptable to the people and
surely must not be allowed to prevail,
9

92. During the twentydfth sessionof the General Assembly, the Foreign Minister of the People’s Democratic
Republic of Yemen said the following in connexion with
the colonial situation in Oman:
“British colonialism is still a dominant factor in the
occupied Arabian Gulf, which borders our eastern frontiers. Colonialism retains its aggressivemilitary bases to
protect its petroleum monopolies, to drain the riches
which rightfully belong to the people of the Gulf, and to
bolster the . . I imperialist presencein the Arab homeland.
In doing all this, it hides behind flimsy entities of its own
making and takes refuge In invalid agreementsimposed by
military force.”
My Foreign Affairs Minister continued:
“Despite the fact that the Arabian Gulf area boasts vast
petroleum deposits, the majority ofits people suffer from
low levels of living, because those richesare exploited by
colonialism and imperialism and their agents-rulers. . . .
As a result of this state of affairs and the accompanying
colonialist methods of cruel suppressionand subjugation,
the Arab people [of Oman] have been engaged for the
past five years in an armed struggle for liberation under
the leadership of the People’s Front for the Liberation of
the occupied Arabian Gulf. The Front has been able to
liberate some parts in the western area . , . [of Oman].
“In the face of the rising revolutionarv tide. the British ’
authorities have escalated iheir tactics of suppressionand
brutality-even genocide-against unarmed civilians, burning farms and cattle, and employing their air force, tanks
and the most modern weapons of destruction.

effotQ by colonialism to falsify the will of the people , . ,
It is Our conviction that, in accordancewith the Declara.
tion on the Granting of Independence to Coloniiil
Camtries and Peoples, the United Nations should lend its
full SUPport to the people of [Oman and not to the
SuItan] in their effort to determiae their own destiny,
free from all methods of colonialist coercion and falsiflca.
tion.“7
95. The People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen had
undergone a similar experience under the yoke of British
colonialism. Prior to the withdrawal of the occupying
British forces, Britain was pkMhlg
to hand over the
country to a handful of puppet sheikhs and sultans-the
Same thing as is now going on in the Gulf-in ignorance of
the wishes of the people who want to establish their own
representative government. But all the colonial intrigues
failed because of the heroic struggleof the people under the
leadership of the National Liberation Front. It is therefore
our duty, and that of the respectedrepresentativesin this
Council, to support the national struggle of the people of
Oman and adamantly to oppose all forms. of colonial
trusteeship and internal suppression.
96. The question of Oman wassuccessivelyincluded in the
agenda of the Special Political Committee, and then the
Trusteeship Council, since. 1960. At the sixteenth and
seventeenth sessions,the Special Political Committee approved resolutions whereby the General Assembly, recalling
its resolution 1514 (XV), would recogaize the right of the
people of Oman to self-determination and independence,
call for the withdrawal of foreign forcesfrom Oman, and
invite the parties concerned to settle their differences
peacefully with a view to restoring normal conditions in
Oman.

“When recourse to all these methods failed to suppress 97. At the 1191st plenary meeting of the General Assemthe armed revolution, British colonialism resorted to a bly, at its seventeenth session, the representative of the
flimsy political, theatrical production when it replaced United Kingdom, on behalf of the Sultan of Muscat and
Said Ben Taimur, the reactionary puppet ruler of Muscat Oman, extended an invitation to a representative of the
and Oman, by his son, Qabus Said Ben Taimur, the new Secretary-General of the United Nations to visit the
Sultanate on a personal basis to obtain first-hand informaBritish puppet. By so doing, colonialism sought to
tion on the situation there. Subsequently, the Secretaryimpress the world with t)n illusion that a fundamental
General appointed Mr. Herbert de Ribbing, the Swedish
change had taken place in that land. The fact is that
Ambassador to Spain, as his Special Representative to
Qabus and his father are but two sidesof one coin minted
undertake that task. Mr.de Ribbing visited Oman in June
by British colonialism.“6
1963 and submitted a reports which wasmade available to
the
General Assembly.
93. To prove this, may I state that Qabus Ben Taimur, the
new ruler, has five British advisers, and they are still there.
98. At the eighteenth session,the question of Oman was
One of them is the Defence Minister for his, as they say, again included in the agenda of the General Assembly and
State, and I have their names. They are British. The first
referred to the Fourth Committee for consideration. A
one is Colonel H. Oldman; the second one is Brigadier
draft resolution recommended by the Fourth Committee
Abraham; the third one is Major London; the fourth one is was adopted by the General Assembly on 11 December
Major Deason, and the fifth is Captain Butter. They are part
1963 as resolution 1948 (XVIII). By this resolution, the
of the Administration and advisers of the new ruler.
Assembly took note of the report of the Specid Representative of the Secretary-Generaland decided to establish
94. I continue with the quotation of the statement of mY an Ed HOC Committee to examine the question of Oman
and to report to it at its nineteenth session The Ad Hoc
Foreign Minister:
Committee submitted its report9 to the General Assembly
on 8 January 1965.
“The Arab people of the Gulf are waginga struggle for
freedom and independence and for the integrity of their
7/bid., para. 174.
territory. The [People’s Democratic Republic of YemenJ
8 Ibid,, Eiphteenth Session, A~vzxes, agenda item 78, document
believes in the rightness of the struggle and will oppose all
A/5562.
9 na.,
A/5&16.

6 Ibid., 7Wnty-fifth Session, Plenary Meetings, 1872nd meeting,

paras.170, 171 and 172.

10

Nineteenth Session, Annexes, Annex NCJ.16, docummt

99. The question of Oman was one of the many items
included in the provisional agenda of the General Assembly
which it wasunable to consider at its nineteenth session.At
the twentieth session, the item was referred to the Fourth
Committee for consideration. A draft resolution recommended by the Fourth Committee was adopted by the
General Assembly at its 1399th plenary meeting on 17
December 1965 fresolution 2073 (XX)], By that resolution
the General Assembly took note of the report of the Ad
ffoc CormMtee on Oman and recognized the Inalienable
right of the people of the Territory as a whole to
self-determination and independence, That resolution did
not speak of the Ruler or Sultan, It considered that the
colonial presence of the United Kingdom in its various
forms prevented the people of the Territory from exercising
their right to self-determination and independence. The
General Assembly also called upon the Government of the
United Kingdom to implement a number of measures in the
Territory and invited the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples to examine the situation in the
Territory.
I

100. The Special Committee considered the question of
Oman at meetings ia 1966 and heard a number of
petitioners from Oman. On 17 November 1966, the Special
Committee decided that it would report to the General
Assembly that owing to a lack of time it had not been able
to complete its consideration of the item. The Special
Committee also decided that, subject to any further
directives the General Assembly might wish to give during
its twenty-first session, it would consider the question at
meetings in 1967 with a view to the implementation of
General Assembly resolution 2073 (XX).
101. At its twenty-first session the General Assembly
considered the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee concerning Oman’ 0 and adopted its resolution
2238 (XXI) of 20 December 1966. By that resolution the
General Assembly approved the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee relating to the Territory of Oman and
reaffirmed the inalienable right of the people of the
Territory as a whole to self-determination and independence. It also recognized the legitimacy of the struggle of
the people of the Territory to achieve the rights laid down
in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples. It deplored the refusal of the United Kingdom to
implement General Assembly resolutions 1514 (XV) and
2073 (XX} and the policies of the United Kingdom in
installing and supporting any unrepresentative regime in the
Territory. By the same resolution the General Assembly
recognized that the natural resources of the Territory
belonged to the people of Oman and that the concessions
given to the foreign monopolies without their consent
constituted a violation of the rights of the people of the
Territory. It considered that the maintenance of military
bases, depots and troops in the Territory constituted a
major hindrance to the exerciseby the people of its right to
10 md., ~~e~pfirst
23, chap. XIII.

s&on, dnnexes, addendm to agenda item

self-determination and independence and wasprejudicial to
the peace and security of the region, The General Assembly
also called upon the Government of the United Kingdom to
Implement a number of measures in the Territory and
requested the Special Committee to continue its examination of the situation in the Territory,
102. The Special Committee considered the question of
Oman at its 564th meeting on 27 September 1967 and
decided to report to the General Assembly that, in view of
the limited time available to it, it had not been able to
complete its consideration of the items and that, subject to
any further directives the General Assembly might wish to
give during its twenty-second session,it would consider the
question at meetings in 1968 with a view to the implementation of General Assembly resolution 2238 &Xl).
103. I have in front of me several resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly which clarity the real situation in
that area, but I should not like to take up too much of the
Council’s time and I shall therefore only mention the last
resolution that the General Assembly adopted on the
subject, at its 1928th plenary meeting on 14 December
1070.
[The speaker read out General Assembly resolution
2702 (XXV).J

104. That was the resolution adopted last year. Nevertheless,. the self-imposed Sultan, who considers himself the
legitimate ruler of Oman, frequently defies the resolutions
of the General Assembly of the United Nations by
repudiating the discussion of the question of Oman in the
United Nations on the basis that Oman is a noncolonlzed
sovereign State. Only last year the so-called Prime Minister
of the Sultan dispatched a cable to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations protesting the discussion of the item.
That cable was distributed in document A/AC.109/
PET.1155, dated 17 December 1970, On 31 October 1963
another cable wasdistributed as document A/C.4/619.i *
105. The letter of 24 May 1971 /S/10216J addressedby
the so-called Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Sultanate of Oman to the SecretaryGeneral
of the United Nations and requesting admission to the
United Nations cannot simply bury the question of a
territorial colony which has been dealt with in the United
Nations for ten years. It is only logical that the resolutions
of the United Nations General Assembly must be implemented before Oman can be admitted to the United
Nations as an independent sovereign State. And the
conditions of sovereignty and self-determination of the
people-not the Sultan-repeatedly emphasized by many
United Nations resolutions, cannot be met unless all the
colonial foreign forces withdraw from Oman and unless the
people are free to determine their own destiny without
oppression.
106. Since the admission of Oman to the United Nations
is incompatible with the relevant United Nations resolutions, my Government is totally opposed to the request of
the Sultan of Oman for admission to the United Nations,
and we still maintain that Oman is a colonial Territory.
11 ibid., E&hteentb Session, Annexes, agendaitem ‘la.

11

107. The PRESIDENT: Since no Member of the Council
*es to speak at thi.s stage, I shell now put to the vote the
draft resolution recommended by the Committee on the
Admission of New Members in paragraph 4 of its report,
A vote wastaken by ahow of hands.
The dmft res&tin

Krachovsky of Leningrad University haa written a sue&al
114, llur new era on which we earne&$ hops’ the
Government of Oman will embark will be one that aims at
the development of the eount~, at the, rice&q of its
resources for the benefit of the people,‘thq massesof

Oman,in all fM3s-cconomic,cultunl, aocial,educotbnal
and otherwise-in one word; at the fuller existenceof ths

wasadopted unanimously. 81

108. The PRESIDENT: May I take it that the Council also
wishes to approve the recommendation made by the
Committee on the Admission of New Members in para.
graph 3 of this report, namely, to have recourse to the lest
paragraphof rule 60 of the provisional rules of procedure in
making this recommendation to the General Assembly? As
I hear no objection, it is so decided.
109. A number of representatives wish to speak at this
stage,and I shell now call on them.
110. Mr. TOMEH (Syrian Arab Republic): After the
unanimous vote which has just taken place, the fact that I,
as an Arab spokesman in the Security Council, should
welcome the new State of Oman to membership of the
United Nations following the speech delivered by my
brother and colleague the permanent representative of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen-a speech which
indicated our differences-proves how democratic we are,
despite the accusation that the Arabs are undemocratic.
111, It certainly is a pleasure to welcome to the family of
nations a new Member, a sister Arab State, Oman. We are
not unmindful of the great problems which face the people
of Oman and indeed the whole Arabian peninsula. If there
are foreign military bases and foreign exploitation-and
there are-we hope that by joining the United Nations
Oman will achieve complete independence.
112. Indeed, liberation, independence and people’s rule is
a historical, unending cf@ecticai process which can be
achieved through continuous struggle, and not by mere
declarations. The struggle for self-rule-real, genuine selfrule-is, as I have said, an unending one. Throughout
history the inalienable rights of peoples have always been
taken rather than given.
113. Oman achieving membership in the world Organization has a special meaning. After an isolation from the
world lasting 138 years, Oman has come out of seclusion to
share in the world’s progress and to enter a new period of
renaissance.Let us remember that at one time in its history
Oman was one of the most powerful and most enterprising
countries of the Arabian peninsula. The great Arab historian of the fifteenth century, fin Khaldou-who, in the
view of some historians, with all due respect to my learned
colleague Ambassador Vinci of Italy, preceded Vic0 in
establishing history as a science-referred to Oman as a
great naval and commercial State. He did that aslong ago as
the fifteenth century, when he wrote An Introduction to
Histow, which was translated into many European languages, the first being French. Very recently it was
translated into English, and the great Soviet orientalist
-.
I2 Seeresolution299 (1971).
12

people*

115. We are all the moreencouraged
to look hopefuUy
towards such a bright future because those fafthftrl
Omanesewho had been prevented from living in their own
motherland by the resentment of an unprogressive and
backward rt$hne are now gradually being permitted to
return and to help in rebuilding their country and recapturing their glorious Past.
116. It also augurs welI for the membership of Oman in
the United Nations that it has already been accepted as a
full-fledged member of the Arab Leagueand of some of the
special&d agenciesof the United Nations.
117. We are sure that Oman will have its own positive
contributions to make as a Member of the United Nations,
fully cognizant of its duties and responsibilities towardsthe
Charter, towards world peace and security and towards the
problems of liberation in the Third World.
118. Sir Colin CROWE (United Kingdom): My delegation
has taken great pleasurein voting in favour of the admission
of Oman to the United Nations. When, as we ali hope, the
Security Council decision is approved by the General
Assembly, I look forward to seeing Oman take its place
together with its two sister Arab States in the Arabian
peninsula region which have become Members of the
United Nations at the current session.
119. Once again, as in the case of those sister States, a
certain delegation has tried to raise objections to the
admission of Oman. My delegation on earlier occasionshas
given a detailed refutation of allegations of the kind we
have just heard. Once again the unanimous vote of the
Council is a co’mplete answerto those objections.
120. My country has had close and friendly ties with
Oman for very many years, These traditional ties were given
formal .expressionin a Treaty of Friendship, Navigation and
Commerce concluded between our two countries in 1951.
Thus, in the caseof Oman the occasionfor its admission to
the United Nations has not been the ending of a special
treaty relationship with the United Kingdom, for as my
delegation has consistently made clear in the United
Nations there is not, and never has been, any relationship of
Bdependent character between tia.
121. The occasion is rather a decision of the State of
Chnan,announced by the new Sultan on his accessionjust
wer a year ago, to establish a modern government devoted
t:o the improvement of the welfare of the people of Oman,
.o abandon its former isolation and to reclaim its rightful
aace in the Arab world and in the international community
it large.

122. My Government has observed with interest the steps
the new Government has alicady taken iowards that goal,
especially the economic development to wMch they are
devoting the substantial oil revenues that have accrued in
the last few years.
123. We are ready to assist their efforts in whatever way
we can, both directly and through tho bgendes of the’
United Nations, of one of which Oman became a member
earlier this year.
124. With a population of more than one million inhabi.
tads whose enterprise has for centuries past taken them far
beyond the frontiers of the State both by land and sea,
than is rich in human as well as material resources. MY
deIegation is confident that Oman, subscribing as it does t.,~
the purposes and principles of the Charter, will prove a
worthy new Member of this Organkation.
125. Mr. LONGERSTAEY (Belgium) (interpret&w
from
Reflch): My delegation is very pleased to have contributed,
by its affirmative vote on the recommendation just adopted
unanimously, to the admission of the Sultanate of Oman to
the United Nations.
126. Our attitude flows logically from the votes we cast
previously when the problem of Oman was raised in the
Fourth Committee and in the General Assembly, Furthermore, whevever the question of the admission of Oman
arose in certain specialised agencies Belgium always sup.
ported the candidacy of the Sultanate. As wasstated by the
representative of Belgium in the Committee on the Admission of New Members, my Government not only considers
that the candidate meets all the conditions laid down by
the Charter, thereby proving itself capable and prepared to
meet its obligations under the Charter, but is furthermore
firmly convinced that by its very nature the participation of
Oman in the work of our Organization will be extremely
useful and effective.
127 + A country that is both youthful and ancient, situated
at the extreme south-east of the Arabian peninsula, Oman
may take pride in having contributed to the glorious
heritage of Arab and Moslem civilization. Furthermore, the
revolutionary programme of national renewal in the fields
of public works, health and education will make it possible
for the Organization to benefit from its experiences and
successes.
128. On behalf of the Belgian Government may 1 therefore be permitted to present to His Majesty Sultan Qabw
bin Said, as idso to the population of the Sultanate, our
warmest congratulations. We hope that under the enlightened direction of its august sovereign Oman will know
a peaceful and prosperous future safe from any foreign
_ covetousness. Furthermore, the admission of a new Member
will make it possible to broaden the geographical and
cultural basis of our Organization, whose world-wide
vocation ia inscribed in the Charter.
129. Mr. VINCI (Italy): Members of the Council will recall
that at the 1575th meeting, on 18 August, when the
Council adopted its resolution 1296 (1971)] recommending
the admission of Bahrain to the United Nations, my
13

deleg&ion expressedthe fum hope ihat the Committee on
the Admission of New Members could speedily complete ita
consideration of Oman’s spplication in order to put the
Council in a position to recommend Its admkion to our
Organization in the course of the present session of the
General Assembly.
130, The decision just taken by the Council meets and
fulfils our expectation, and my d4enatl& drawsoartlculat
satisfaction fbm it. 131. Since the outset, my delegation haa whole&ark&y
welcomed Chnan’s application for admission to the United
Nations, for two main reasons.
132. First, because the admission to our Organisation of
one more State represents, in our view, a further 8ignificant
step towards the achievement of universality, which my
country has coniistently fostered for a long time. We
believe that that objective, which is consistent with the r
spirit of the Charter, is of paramount importance because
this forum offers opportunities for better understanding
and improved relations and therefore greater chances for
the maintenance of peace and close peaceful co-operation
among nations. I say this with the conviction that it will
prove true also in the case of the geographic area to which
the State of Oman belongs, since the economic and social
development of the populations of that region, perhaps
more than any other, need a reign of peace.
133. The second reason is that in this instance another
Arab State will be joining our family and coming into the
mainstream of international life and will thus be more
closely associated with the other Arab States in this centre
of the international community, and will, furthermore, be
associated with and contribute to its renaissanceas well as
to the renaissance of the whole Arab world, on which I
rely, convinced as I am that the cyclesof life, of history of
nations so clearly and scientifically elaborated and illustrated by the great Italian philosopher Giambattista Vice,
to whom Ambassador Tomeh has referred, will once again
be clearly confirmed.
134. The State of Oman has in recent times been pursuing
vast programmes for improving conditions for its population in the economic, social and cultural fields. MY country
has very close relations with the countries of the Near East.
Italian diplomats have recently visited the Sultanate of
Oman, and Italian fums have participated and are taking an
active part in the development of that country.
135. I wish to convey to the Government and people of
Oman my Government’s desire to seethe Sultanate progress
steadily in all fields and to seeour relations with it become
closer. The Italian Government is confident that the State
of Oman will positively contribute to the work of the
United Nations.

136. For all those reasons the Italian delegation voted in
favour of the resolution that has just been unanimously
adopted, and we shall be most happy to co-operate with the
Oman delegation in the achievement of the purposes
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

137, Mr. CHANG (China):r3 My delegation welcomes the
accessionof the Sultanate of Oman to membership of the
United Nations.
138. It in a matter of great satisfaction to my delegation
at within the short space of a few weeks the Security
Council has been called upon to consider the applications
of three States from the Gulf area for member&p in the
United Nations-Bahrain, @tar, and now Oman. Indeed,
~man’ir application for membership has been pending for
gome time. For reason8 well known to all, its admission has
been delayed until now.
139. In so far as my delegation is concerned, we have
never had any doubt about Oman’s qualifications for
membership. The Sultanate of Oman has always enjoyed
independent status. It is the possessorof a great culture and
civilization, and it has a prosperous and growing economy,
My delegation wastherefore happy to vote for the adqption
of the report and recommendations of the CommIttee on
the Admission of New Members.
140. The Prime Minister of the Sultanate of Oman in his
letter to the SecretaryGeneral voiced his Government‘s
adherenceto the purposes and principles of the Charter and
made known his acceptance of the obligations incumbent
upon a Member State. My delegation believes that as a
Member of the United Nations Oman will play a constructive and positive role in the work of the Organisation.
141. On behalf of my delegation I take this opportunity
to convey to the people and Government of the Sultanate
of Oman our best wishes for a happy and prosperous
future.
142. Mr. SAVAGE (Sierra Leone): When the question of
Oman was brought before this Council last month /1574r!r
meetingf, the Committee on the Admission of New
Members decided to defer its examination of the application and recommended without objection to the Security
Council to have recourse later to the last paragraph of rule
60 of the provisional 6%~ of procedure. The reason was
that certain problems relating to the timing of the
consideration of the matter remained to be solved at that
time. Those problems have now been resolved and my
delegation is proud and happy to accept the recommendation of the Committee and to forward it formally to the
General Assembly.
143. The delegation of the Republic of Sierra Leone voted
wholeheartedly in favour of the resolution which was
unanimously adopted this evening. It did so because it
recognised the several qualifications of Oman for membership in this world Organisation. The people of Oman have
opted for complete independence under their own initiative
and they have indicated through their leader their Government’s intention to abide by the stipulations of the United
Nations Charter. Whatever original differences may prevail
among the Gulf State Members; this should not be allowed
to obfuscate the question before us which, according to the
understanding of my delegation, deals purely and simply
with the admission of a sovereign State to United Nations
membership.
I3 Seenote B at the beginning of the meeting.
14

144. We have no doubt that this new nation, rich in its
ancient history and cultural heritage, as well as in natural
resources,will benefit from a closer association with the
other nationa of the world and that the United Nations wfU
becomericher through its membership.
145, The Government of Sierra lleone wishes the Govemment and peopfe of the State of Oman prosperity, success
and future happiness.
146, I&. DE LA GORCE (France) (interprebtion jtom
Reenchj: My delegation long ago made its position known
with regard to Oman and we experienced no difficulty in
welcoming the application for membership which wa8
submitted to us. Weare convinced that Oman is capable of
fulfilling the obligations of the Charter and is ready to do
so. Thus we welcome the developments which have made it
possible for our Committee on Admissions and then the
Security Council itself, to recommend unanimously the
admissionof Oman to the United Nations.
147. Thus, for the third time in a brief period, we have
taken a decision on the application of a State from the
Gulf. In conformity with the principle of universality, an
area of the world with past glory and future promise is now
far better representedin our Organisation.
148. Oman, a window of that subcontinent, has the
privilege of facing Asia and Africa at one and the same
time. It gavebirth to a people of intrepid navigators who,
sailing the oceans as far back as Middle Ages set foot on
distant shoresand causeda civilisation to flourish which far
surpassedthat of many other regions of the world at the
time. Traders, chroniclers and god-fetig men, they gathered in small maritime colonies and over a long period of
time gavethe benefits of their culture to East Africa.
149. After returning later to their own territory, the
people of Oman have for several centuries shown themselves to be faithful to their dynasty whose present
represeatative,the Sultan Qabus bin Said, has undertaken
with vigour to develop, in a brief period of time, the
immense riches hidden under the harsh surface of the soil
of Oman. Nor are we indifferent to the efforts made by this
monarch at the same time to have his people progress in
harmony arid to put an end to the most recent disputes
which still divide certain regions of the Territory,
150. Since the eighteenth century, the ties between the
United Kingdom and the Sultan have been renewed over
the years in successivetreaties, and they have not been
strained. We have never thought, for our part, that the
closenen, continuity and diversity of those ties placed the
sovereigntyof Oman in doubt.
151, We are happy today that Oman has joined the great
community of the United Nations. We welcome the
initiatives of its Government in offering all the States of the
world its long&nding and certainly very fruitful collaboration. Now as Oman is about to become the 131st Member
of our Organisation, France extends to that country, at
once so ancient and so young, its most fervent wishes for
peace,prosperity and progress.

,.

J’
,:

152. Mr. ISSRAEI.,YA.N
(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub.
lick) &-urwWed Fom Russian): ‘The Soviet delegation does
not object to the admission
of the Arab State of Oman to
the United Nations. ~JI this connedon we have noted that
the League of Arab States has examined the question of
Oman and has adapted a decision to recognize the State of
‘Oman and to adrrxit it to the Arab XRsgueas a full member.
153 e We Mened carefully
to the statement of our friend,
the distinguIshed rapreslentative’of
the People’s Democratic
Republk of Yemen. The Soviet delegation is convinced that
the paople Of Oman will overcome the legacy of its colonial
Past and Will advance alrong the road of national and social
progress. Wo also hope that, on being admitted to the
United Nations, tin
will strictly observe the Charter of
this Organization and wiU promote the efforts of the
United Nations towards’ the strengthening of international
peace and security, which,
as we d how,
is the main
purpose of the United Nations.
154. The Soviet Union has always consistently given, and
will continue to give every possible assistance to colonial
countries and peoples in their struggle for independence,
for the consolidation
of their sovereignty and for the
development of their economies. This policy of the Soviet
Union serves as a firm basis for the establishment and
development of friendly relations between the Soviet Union
and the young States of Asia and Africa which have
liberated themselves from colonial domination.
155. The Soviet delegation
wishes the people of Oman
good fortune and progress along the path of independent
development and hopes that they will establish ties of
friendship and co-operation
with all the progressive and
freedomloving peoples of the world in the struggle against
colonialism and imp&&am.
156. Mr. LUDWIC2A.K
(Poland): The Polish delegation
wishes sincerely to congratulate
the people of Oman on its
country’s imminent
admission to the United Nations which
the unanimous decision just taken by the Security Council
has made possible.

158. we Wish Oman success on that road. The Polish
delegation looks fonvard to Oman’s participation in the
work of the United Nations. We expressour sincere hope
that the presence of Oman in our Organization ~lll
contribute to furthering the role of the United Nations in
the strengthening of international peaceand security and in
advancingthe full and complete liberation of all the peoples
still under cclonial domination,
159. Mr; BENNETT (United States of America): My
delegation waspleased to concur in the unanimous recommendation to the Council by its Committee on the
Admission of New Members that Oman be admitted to the
United Nations and in the unanimous vote of this Council.
The United States now looks forward to welcoming the
delegation of Oman to the twenty-sixth session of the
General Assembly as a new Member that will respect the
obligations of United Nations membership and will be a
valued and constructive participant in the activities of this
Organisation.
160. The United States has recognized the Sultanate of
Chnau since 1833 when* in the first decades of United
States independence, a treaty was signed with the then
Sultan of Muscat and Oman. A United States consulate was
maintained in Muscat for 45 yearsprior to 1915. In 1958
the United States signed a new treaty with Oman providing
for trade, friendship and the exerciseof consular rights. Our
relations with Oman have always been based on the
recognition of its independence and its behaviour as a
responsible member of the international community. We
have alwaysmaintained this point of view when questions
concerning Oman have been raised in various United
Nations forums.
161. The United States has taken note of and applauds the
determination of the present Government in Muscat to
devote its oil income to progressand prosperity in Oman.
The dramatic expansion of schools and the investment in
new facilities for transportation and public health are
happy auguries of the future. We wish the people and
leadersof Oman successin these noble pursuits.
162. ln conclusion, let me warmly welcome Oman’s
application. It has the full and whole-hearted support of the
United States.

157. The question of Oman has been before the United
Nations for some time. It has undoubtedly been among the
difficult problems of deoolonization
with which the United
Nations has been dealing. The resolutions of the General
Assembly adopted year after year reaffirmed the legitimate
right of the people of Oman to selfdetermination and to
the natural resources of its territory and asked the British
Government in its capacity of administering Power to apply
General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) and other pertinent United Nations decisions relating to Oman, but those
resolutions have remained
unanswered. It is only becauseof
the growing stru&e
against colonial rule and the ever
stronger aspirations
to independent
national existence
manifested by the peoples in the region of the Arabian
peninsula that in these conditions the admission of Oman
to the United Nations
has become possible. We earnestly
hope that t.be membership
of Oman in our Organizaticn
will help the people of that country to consolidate its
independence and to promote its economic development,
thus also serving the cause of progress and peace in that
region of the world.

163. Mr. ORTlZ DE ROZAS (Argentina) (interpretation
from Spanish):I should like to say how happy my
delegation is to see Omanabout to join our Organization.

This event, which allows this new Arab country to enter
this Organization and cooperate with all of us is a very
happy one not only because of the very cIose links of
friendship uniting Argentina with the Arab States, but also
because in this way we reaffirm the purpose already
expressedin this Council to advance towards the universality of the United Nations. For these reasonswe extend
to the Sultanate of Oman our warmest welcome. We know
that their positive contribution will soon be evident in our
deliberations at the United Nations.
164. Mr, FARAH (Somalia): Two days ago the Somall
Secretaryof State for Foreign Affairs, when addressing the
General Assembly,14 offered the congratulations of the
14 See Ofj?cial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Se&m, Plenary Meetings, 1943rd meeting.

15

srrr&
people on the admission of Bahrain and Qatar. He
Went on to say that the Somali Government had followed
with irrtereat the political developments in Oman and that It
was the hope of my Government that it would not be long
befom
Jta people too were represented in the United
Nations. Fortunately and happily, that important day is not
fPf Off. Tomorrow we shall be able formally to welcome
tiara
in our midst.
$65 - There 19 very little that my delegation can add to the
ehuent
ncitals of the great cultural and historical
achievements
of the people of Oman and of the energetic
@ffOrtS that are now being made to utilize the rich nabral
~sarces
of the country for the progress and wellbeing of
iti people. We recognize that the recent political history of
the country has given rise to some anxiety on the part of
mme States interested in the wellbeing of the people of
~a&
It is our hope and our prayer that these anxieties
wiu be allayed, that any diaagmamsnts that may exist wffl
&appear
and that the people of Oman will enjoy good and
friendly relations with all States. We wish them the best of
luck
and hope that the future will bring Peace and
Prosperity
to them.
166.

Mr.

MACENGE (Burundi) (interpretation from
The delegation of Burundi was one of those
delegations
which joyfully welcomed the candidacy of the
Sultanate of Oman for membership of the United Nations.
The philosophy of my Government in the question of
decolonization
is well known and hardly needs to be
expatiated
upon here or recalled. Indeed, in our opinion the
larger the family of the United Nations becomes the greater
the chance will be for the admission of those States which
still remain outside this Organization.
fiend):

167.
The vocation of the United Nations is universal. It is
therefore obvious that this goal can be achieved only when
colonial
Africa, as weII as the other regions in the Third
World
which are still living under the colonial yoke, has
been liberated.
w
168. On the day when Namibia is no longer subject to
annexation;
when Guinea (Bissau), Mozambique and
Angola are no longer considered as small provinces, and
condemned
to domination by Portugal; when those independent African Territories no longer serve as basesfor the
colonialists
to attack independent African nations; when
those Territories are no longer held in a state of siege by the
armies from Lisbon and Pretoria-then will my deIegation
be able to gauge the efforts made towards the universality
of 0 uT Organization .

suspended without finding any aoolution to it, has been
before the United Nations for more than 25 years now.
171. I apologize for this digression, but I felt that I had to
remind members of the unfortunate fact that matters of
capital importance are not always considered with alI the
attention they deserve. Of course, when I say that, it in no
way diminishes my joy at seeing the admission of Oman,
and once again I should like to congratulate this new
Member country of the United Nations.
172. Mr. SEVILLA SACASA (Niwagua) (interpretation
from SpanLrh): It was with personal pleasure that I voted,
on behalf of Nicaragua, for the resolution in which the
Security Council recommends to the General Agaembly that
Oman be admitted to membership of the United Nations.
Oman’s entry into our Organization ia a matter of great
satisfaction to us, becausewe know that that nation has the
very best intentions to contribute to the atrangthaning of
international peace and security.
173. May I extend a cordisl greeting to the sovereign and
to his worthy representatives, and convey the wishes of the
Government and people of Nicaragua for the growing
prosperity of their noble people.
174. The PRBSlDENT: As all members of this Council,
except one, have spoken, 1 should Iike to take this
opportunity to speak, not as President of the Council, but
as representative of JAPAN.
175. On this auspicious occasion, on behalf of my
delegation, I wish to expressour genuine feelings of sincere
congratulations to the Government and people of the
Sultanate of Oman on the unanimous adoption of the
resolution recommending to the General Assembly that
Oman be admitted to membership of the United Nations.
176. My delegation is very happy to see Oman admitted to
the United Nations because we are confident that it is a
peace-loving State, able and willing to carry out the
obligations incumbent upon Member States under the
Charter. We are also confident that Oman, which has
already recorded significant economic and social achievements, will participate fully in the collective efforts of the
United Nations to create a more peaceful and prosperous
world, and &at it will play a constructive role in that noble
endeavour,
177. On 1 June 1971 Japan fonnahy recognized the
Sultanate of Oman. The relations between our two countries are very friendly, and we have had constant contacts
through diplomatic channels, as well as through visits of
trade missions.

169. The longer the independence of regions occupied by
South Africa and Portugal is delayed, the longer will the
chances for co-operation between the regions of Africa
stmggling
for their liberation and the former metropolitan
countries be compromised.

178. Our Ambassador in Kuwait, in his recent report,
vividly describes how warmly he was received early this
year in. SaIalah by His Majesty Sultan Qabus bin Said and
His Excellency the Prime Minister, Tarik bin Taimur.

170. I should not like to conclude my brief statement
without
emphasizing that the preceding item on our
agenda-the
question of Namibia-was before this Organization long before the question of Oman: in fact, long before
many
other items which have already been successfully
settled.
The question of Namibia, which we have just

179. Availing myself of this opportunity, I should like to
pay a tribute to the chairman of the delegation of Oman,
His Excellency Dr. Asim Al Jamali, Minister of Health, who
has been dispatched here by His Majesty Sultan Qabus bin
Said for this felicitous occasion and who is with us today.
16

180. The Governmentand peopleof Japanlook forward
to increasingly cl,oae and friendly relations with the
&wernment and people of the S&anate Of Gn~n, both

withinandwithout the United Nationr.

181, As thereare no furthur apcak~n,aaPRESIDENTof
the security Council I *U immediately requw the
SCCMQGCZW~~
to tmaamit to the Generalbwsembly
the
t~ti of the resolution just adoptud,‘together w&h the

17

vedx+th recordsof the meet- at which the appkxtion
of Omanhasbeendiscussed,
in accordance
with de 60 of
the P~OvisiOndrulesof procedwa. At thecometime, I shall
draw attention to the Council’sde&ion to make thin
recommendationsubsequentto the expiration of the
tinwhit assetforth in thelart psragraphof rule 60,
2% meeting tw at 7.30 p.m.
