S/PRST/2012/20

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 September 2012
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6841st meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 September 2012, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
the Middle East”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reaffirms its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
“The Security Council reiterates that cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in matters relating to the maintenance of peace and
security and consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter, can improve
collective security.
“The Security Council recalls all its previous resolutions and statements
of its President which underscore the importance of developing effective
partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations in
accordance with the Charter and the relevant statutes of regional and
subregional organizations.
“The Security Council expresses its appreciation for the briefings of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, and the SecretaryGeneral of the League of Arab States, Nabil Elaraby.
“The Security Council recognizes and further encourages efforts by the
League of Arab States to contribute to collective endeavours to settle conflicts
in the Middle East peacefully as well as to promoting international responses
to the transformations experienced in the region, while reaffirming its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of
regional countries and to the purposes and principles of the Charter.
“The Security Council welcomes the intensifying cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States in the wake of these
transformations which reflect the legitimate aspirations of all peoples in the
region for freedom, political participation and economic and social well-being
in a pluralistic society.
“The Security Council reiterates its commitment to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East and to seek a comprehensive
resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, and reaffirms the importance of the
Arab Peace Initiative. The Security Council also recalls its previous relevant
resolutions.
12-52314 (E) 270912

*1252314*

S/PRST/2012/20

“The Security Council, recalling its resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012), welcomes the appointment of the Joint Special Representative for
Syria of the United Nations and the League of Arab States as an important step
forward in the cooperation between both organizations and expresses its
support for his efforts in continuing the Secretary-General’s good offices in
this regard.
“The Security Council commends the members of the League of Arab
States for their ongoing commitment to international peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, including through the contribution of troops to United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations.
“The Security Council takes note of the general meeting on cooperation
between the Secretariats of the United Nations and the League of Arab States
and their specialized organizations, held in Vienna from 10-12 July 2012.
“The Security Council acknowledges the intention expressed by
representatives of both organizations to cooperate across a broad agenda of
mutual concern, formulating adequate joint responses, where appropriate, to
humanitarian crises, promoting human rights, freedom of expression, food
security, environment protection, and the fight against terrorism and the illicit
trafficking of drugs and arms, while reiterating the need to ensure that all UN
efforts to restore peace and security also respect and promote the rule of law.
“The Security Council recalls its press statements of 12 and
14 September regarding recent attacks on diplomatic personnel and premises
and reaffirms that such acts are unjustifiable regardless of their motivations,
whenever and by whomsoever committed. The Security Council stresses the
importance of respect and understanding for religious and cultural diversity
throughout the world. The Security Council underlines the common
commitment of both the United Nations and the League of Arab States to
foster a global dialogue for the promotion of tolerance and peace, and calls for
enhanced cooperation in light of recent events to promote better understanding
across countries, cultures and civilizations.
“The Security Council recognizes the importance of strengthening
cooperation on capacity building with the League of Arab States in the
maintenance of international peace and security.
“The Security Council expresses its determination to take effective steps
to further enhance cooperation between the United Nations and the League of
Arab States, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General to report, as
appropriate, on further ways of strengthening institutional relations and
cooperation between the two organizations.”

2

12-52314
