A /77/PV.55

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

55th plenary meeting
Friday, 16 December 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/77/600)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution entitled “Credentials of representatives to
the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly”,
recommended by the Credentials Committee.
I now give the floor to the Chair of the Credentials
Committee, Mrs. Carolyn Rodrigues-Birkett of Guyana.
Mrs. Rodrigues-Birkett (Guyana): On behalf
of the Credentials Committee, I have the honour to
introduce the report of the Credentials Committee
concerning the credentials of the representatives to the
seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly, as
contained in document A/77/600.
The Committee had before it two communications
each concerning the representation of Myanmar, the
representation of Afghanistan and the representation of
Libya to the seventy-seventh session of the Assembly.
The Committee decided to postpone its consideration
of the credentials pertaining to the representatives of
Myanmar, Afghanistan and of Libya to the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly and to revert
to consideration of those credentials at a future time
during the seventy-seventh session.

Having considered the credentials of representatives
of other Member States to the seventy-seventh session
at its meeting on 12 December 2022, the Credentials
Committee adopted without a vote a draft resolution
accepting those credentials. The Committee also
recommended to the General Assembly the adoption of
a draft resolution entitled “credentials of representatives
to the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly”,
which is contained in paragraph 17 of the report.
Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to the
members of the Committee and to the Secretariat for
facilitating our work.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution entitled “Credentials
of representatives to the seventy-seventh session of the
General Assembly”, recommended by the Credentials
Committee in its report.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt the
draft resolution?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 77/239).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation joined the consensus on the adoption
of resolution 77/239, recommended by the Credentials

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-75418 (E)
*2275418*

A/77/PV.55

Committee. We welcome the work of the Committee
and the submission of its report (A/77/600).
However, I would like to express my delegation’s
reservation about the part of the report and of the
resolution that could be construed as a recognition of
the Israeli regime.
The President: We have heard the only speaker in
explanation of position on resolution 77/239.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 3.
Agenda items 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 68 to the
Third Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 68
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 77/505).
Agenda item 68
Promotion and protection of human rights
Draft resolution (A/77/L.37)
The President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Brazil to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.37.
Mr. Cunha Pinto Coelho (Brazil): On behalf of the
members of the core group — Argentina, the Dominican
Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Greece, Guatemala,
Mongolia, the Philippines and Portugal — Brazil has
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.37,
entitled “Promoting and Mainstreaming Easy to
Understand Communication for Accessibility for
Persons with Disabilities”.
This first-of-its-kind United Nations draft
resolution seeks to integrate easy to understand
communication into existing United Nations processes,
while calling for its further development worldwide.
Easy to understand communication is acknowledged
as a form of communication by the Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities and represents an
2/5

16/12/2022

accessibility tool to create versions of documents that
are more understandable by persons with intellectual
disabilities. It is an umbrella term for processes that
include texts written in Plain Language, Easy Read and
similar initiatives.
Τhe draft resolution puts forward the following
concrete actions.
First, it decides to hold a General Assembly meeting
on easy-to-understand communication on the margins
of the Conference of States Parties to the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to be held in
June 2023. We look forward to seizing the opportunity
to share good practices, exchange views and discuss
how better to use easy-to-understand communication
to enable the rights of persons with intellectual
disabilities worldwide.
Secondly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to address easy-to-understand communication
in existing reports and present recommendations to
further advance it in our countries and in the United
Nations system itself.
Thirdly, it requests the Secretariat to produce a
version of the draft resolution we are about to adopt in
easy-to-understand communication, which will be done
in the six official languages of the United Nations.
The first version of this draft resolution was
developed in close coordination with representative
organizations. I would like to acknowledge the
important contributions, throughout the process,
of the International Disability Alliance, Inclusion
International and the Brazilian Network for the
Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities (Rede-In).
Thanks to further collaboration with Rede-In, and
while celebrating our commitment to multilingualism
and inclusion, I have the honour to announce that Brazil
will make available an easy-to-understand version
of this draft resolution in Portuguese as well. We
encourage other Member States to take similar steps
towards making this milestone more broadly accessible
by persons with intellectual disabilities in as many
languages as possible.
We thank all Member States for their constructive
engagement in turning the zero draft into the current
action-oriented text we have before us today — for
instance, through the inclusion of important new language
that integrates easy-to-understand communication into
existing United Nations processes, such as the Steering
22-75418

16/12/2022

Committee on Accessibility of Persons with Disabilities
and the Ad Hoc Working Group on Revitalization of the
Work of the General Assembly.
Allow me to express my particular gratitude to
Argentina, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador,
Greece, Guatemala, Mongolia, the Philippines and
Portugal, which, with Brazil, are part of the core group
engaged in this draft resolution. We also thank all
Member States for their strong support to this topic and
for the many co-sponsorships, which do us great honour.
I would also like to warmly thank the Secretariat
for its valuable support during the negotiation process.
I would like to thank in particular the Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management, the Office of
Programme Planning, Finance and Budget, as well as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
Easy-to-understand
communication
processes
realize the right of accessibility for persons with
intellectual disabilities and promote social inclusion.
Bearing that in mind, we believe this initiative is an
important step towards raising awareness and including
everyone in United Nations processes. In our day-to-day
work at the United Nations, in the pursuit of consensus,
we draw on language and structures that unfortunately
seem to be making our documents, increasingly, the
most complex possible. As a result, we unintentionally
make the important work we do here, in some cases,
unavailable to many.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.37, entitled “Promoting and
mainstreaming easy-to-understand communication for
accessibility for persons with disabilities”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce that,
since the submission of draft resolution A/77/L.37 and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have become sponsors of the draft
resolution: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary,

A/77/PV.55

Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, the
Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, the Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia,
Türkiye, Ukraine, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.37?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/240).

A/77/L.37

was

adopted

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
Agenda items 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that, at its 3rd
plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General
Assembly decided to allocate agenda item 109 to the
Third Committee. To enable the Assembly to take
action expeditiously on the document, may I take it
that the Assembly wishes to consider agenda item 109
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately to
its consideration?
It was so decided (decision 77/505).
Agenda item 109
Crime prevention and criminal justice
Draft resolution (A/77/L.29)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.29.
Mr. Andersen (Norway): On behalf of the main
sponsors, Brazil and my own country, Norway, I have
the honour to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.29,
entitled “International Day of Police Cooperation”.

22-754183/5

A/77/PV.55

The three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, human rights and sustainable development — all
depend on effective and accountable law enforcement
for their realization. As the primary point of contact
between the public and State authority, police and law
enforcement institutions uphold the peace and ensure
rights, and thereby enable development.
To do so successfully in today’s increasingly
globalized
world,
international
cooperation
is imperative. Many of today’s most pressing
threats — organized crime, cybercrime and terrorism,
to mention just a few — are defined in part by their
international nature. To counter them, our response
must be commensurate.
A crucial part of those efforts is awarenessraising. Enhancing knowledge among practitioners,
policymakers and the public at large builds the support
and solidarity required for effective international
action to counter cross-border crime. That is precisely
why we, together with Brazil, have introduced this
draft resolution to establish an International Day of
Police Cooperation.
The draft resolution reaffirms resolution 70/1,
which adopted the Sustainable Development Goals,
while recognizing the contribution of law enforcement
to the broader 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. It further recognizes that different
levels of policing capabilities exist among Member
States, thereby affecting their ability to prevent and
combat criminal activity and, in that regard, calls
for international cooperation on capacity-building
and technical assistance, while also mainstreaming a
gender perspective and respecting human rights. And
it emphasizes the need to strengthen international
cooperation at the global, regional and subregional
levels in various areas related to preventing and
combating transnational crime.
The draft resolution proposes 7 September as
the International Day of Police Cooperation. The
date chosen serves to commemorate the founding
of INTERPOL, the world’s only global organization
for international police cooperation. The draft
resolution invites all Member States, organizations
of the United Nations system, other international and
regional organizations and civil society to observe the
International Day and to continue to give consideration
to enhancing international cooperation in support of
national police and law enforcement agencies.
4/5

16/12/2022

On behalf of the main sponsors, Norway and
Brazil, I would like to take this opportunity to thank
the representatives of all the Member States who
actively took part in the consultation process for their
constructive inputs to the draft resolution. We also
thank the Office of the Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations and the members
of the United Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on
Policing for the excellent technical advice they
provided throughout the negotiations. Those collective
contributions helped forge consensus on the present
draft resolution, ultimately strengthening international
police cooperation efforts worldwide to confront
today’s most pressing challenges.
The President: The Assembly will now take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.29, entitled “International
Day of Police Cooperation”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/77/L.29 and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Botswana, Brunei Darussalam, China,
Colombia, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia,
Maldives, Paraguay, the Philippines, the Russian
Federation and the United Republic of Tanzania.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.29?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/241).

A/77/L.29

was

adopted

The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Criminal Police Organization.
Mr. Humlegård (International Criminal Police
Organization): I address the General Assembly
today in support of the General Assembly resolution
establishing an International Day of Police Cooperation
(resolution 77/241).
This Day is the first of its kind, celebrating the efforts
of law enforcement working together to protect citizens
by preventing and countering transnational organized
crime. United Nations international days are important
advocacy tools to shed light on matters that require our
attention, concern or, in this case, appreciation. Indeed,
22-75418

16/12/2022

A/77/PV.55

this resolution serves as a reminder that the work of law
enforcement remains vital to maintaining international
peace and security.
In the words
Kofi Annan,

of

former

Secretary-General

“we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy development without
security — and we will not enjoy either without
respect for human rights”.

law enforcement in working together to keep up with
the evolving criminal landscape. We must use this
initiative to not only celebrate their achievements and
acknowledge their sacrifices, but also to recognize
that sustained political will and multidisciplinary
approaches are needed to more holistically support
police and law enforcement bodies in addressing
today’s most pressing global issues.

As illustrated through the resolution’s reference to
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the
endeavours of national, regional and international
policing organizations provide the foundation of safety
and stability upon which sustainable development can
be built.

I would therefore like to thank the resolution’s
co-facilitators, Norway and Brazil, for their dedication
to this initiative. Through their hard work and
diligence and with the support of the United Nations
and its Member States, this resolution reinforces the
value of information-sharing, mutual assistance and
cross-border collaboration in facing our collective
security challenges.

The resolution also duly reflects the essential work
undertaken by the United Nations Inter-Agency Task
Force on Policing to mainstream a gender perspective
and respect for human rights throughout their projects
and initiatives, including their valuable efforts to
strengthen the capacities of Member States, deliver
technical assistance and improve coordination.

The partnership between the United Nations and
INTERPOL, recently renewed during the third review
of the General Assembly resolution on cooperation
between our two organizations (resolution 77/20),
adopted last month, ensures that the Assembly’s
investment in us will continue to foster comprehensive,
multilateral approaches to global peace and security.

As criminal groups and terrorist networks
continue to expand their influence and exploit existing
vulnerabilities and new and emerging technologies
for illicit purposes, that cooperation continues to be
of the utmost importance. Against that backdrop, the
International Criminal Police Organization is proud to
work with our United Nations partners and the General
Assembly, our shared membership, in connecting police
for a safer world.

We therefore look forward to assisting our United
Nations partners in facilitating the observance of this
International Day next year and in the many years
to come.

As we approach INTERPOL’s centenary, on
7 September 2023, we recognize that this is an opportune
moment to reflect on the impacts and contributions of

The President: We have heard the only speaker for
this item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 109?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 3.30 p.m.

22-754185/5
