S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6196th meeting
Monday, 5 October 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bui The Giang . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Viet Nam)

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lutterotti
Mr. Koudougou
Ms. He Fen
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Gonnet
Mr. Miyajima
Mr. Elshakshuki
Mr. Puente
Mr. Chernenko
Mr. Erdoğdu
Ms. Kafeero
Mr. Saltonstall
Mr. Donegan

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on Women and peace and security
(S/2009/465)
Letter dated 18 September 2009 from the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2009/490)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

09-54249 (E)

*0954249*

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Colombia, the Federated States of
Micronesia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as
was indicated at the morning session, to limit their
statements to no more than five minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I thank participants for their understanding
and cooperation.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I congratulate Viet Nam on
its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this debate. The concept paper (S/2009/490,
annex) that your delegation has prepared on the needs
of women and girls in post-conflict situations is quite
useful. I also commend the Council for having adopted
resolution 1889 (2009) earlier today.
Before proceeding, let me say how saddened I am
at the news of the terrorist attack in Islamabad today
against the facilities of the World Food Programme,
which claimed the lives of five aid workers. We offer
our deep condolences to the bereaved families.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
on peacebuilding (S/2009/304), and as highlighted in
the concept paper, the period immediately following
conflict is critical. What is done or fails to be done has

2

enormous repercussions for the process of peace
consolidation. That is why we must spare no effort to
ensure that the needs and priorities of women and girls
are properly dealt with from the earliest possible
moment.
My delegation believes that, inasmuch as women
and girls are particularly vulnerable in the context of
armed conflict, post-conflict recovery strategies must
make them a priority. Special attention must be given
to those who were victims of sexual violence during
the armed conflict. Although wars affect all, the
personal humiliation brought about by sexual violence
and, in many cases, the social stigma that follows tend
to be particularly painful. National Governments, the
United Nations system and civil society groups must
redouble their efforts to help victims rehabilitate as
much and as soon as possible.
That is not enough, however. Women are not
merely victims to be protected. They must be
acknowledged and empowered as central actors in the
establishment of lasting peace. They must be involved
in formulating and implementing reconstruction
strategies on all fronts. In my capacity as Chair of the
Peacebuilding
Commission’s
country-specific
configuration on Guinea-Bissau, I have had the
privilege of witnessing the extraordinary determination
and vitality of the women of that country. There, as in
many other countries, women play a central role.
Without them recovery would be a much more difficult
task. We must strive to ensure that the important part
women play in the economy is also reflected in their
political participation.
The Peacebuilding Commission has a relevant
role to play in empowering women in post-conflict
situations. My delegation was pleased to note that
resolution 1888 (2009), adopted by the Council last
week, reaffirms the Commission’s role in that matter.
In the case of Guinea-Bissau, I recall that women’s
groups made an important contribution to the
preparation of the country’s strategic framework for
peacebuilding.
The
Secretary-General’s
report
on
the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) (S/2009/465)
contains disturbing findings in several country-specific
situations. Perpetrators of acts of violence and abuse
must be promptly and effectively brought to justice if
we want to avoid a cycle of continued impunity
stimulating more violence.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

The report, however, also brings good news. In
particular, it is encouraging to see the manner in which
so many organs of the United Nations system have
committed themselves to implementing the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000). The progress made in the
areas of training, capacity-building and awarenessraising is particularly notable. In this context I would
like to mention what the report refers to as challenges
that relate to the breadth of resolution 1325 (2000).
The task that we set for ourselves in that
resolution is large and complex. To carry it out
successfully requires a broad and coordinated approach
among all of the relevant stakeholders within the
United Nations system. In the same way that the
Security Council is uniquely mandated to deal with the
widespread or systematic use of sexual violence in
armed conflicts, other bodies have mandates and
specialized expertise that allow them to better address
other aspects of the issue. We must continue to ensure
coordination among all efforts undertaken in this
regard and avoid duplication or overstepping of
competencies. In this context, we welcome the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/311.
Some of the recommendations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report can also help in meeting the
challenges we all face in further implementing
resolution 1325 (2000). Among the suggestions, we see
particular relevance in better data collection. Without
credible information, we cannot act effectively or
fairly. As my delegation indicated in the open debate
held last August (see S/PV.6180), such data should be
shared with other relevant principal organs and with
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination
against Women and the Commission on the Status of
Women as appropriate, so as to ensure that
international action is not merely punitive, but
transformative as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Matussek (Germany): Germany aligns
herself with the statement made by Sweden on behalf
of the European Union. As a member of the Group of
Friends of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), we
attach great importance to the issue of women and
peace and security. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for holding this open debate.
Women and children need to be protected from
violence. Every day, we bear witness to unspeakable

09-54249

atrocities. This is especially the case in post-conflict
situations in which police protection does not exist and
judicial systems lie in shatters. Institutions need to be
rebuilt, but protection cannot wait until the systems are
fully functional. Protection must take place from the
very first minute of peacebuilding — for the benefit of
the victims but also for the benefit of the whole
community, since rape and sexual violence destroy the
very components of societies. Thus, sustainable peace
cannot be achieved without the protection of the most
vulnerable, namely, women and children.
Women are not only victims of conflicts but
powerful agents for peace and security. Therefore, the
empowerment of women to fulfil this potential is of the
utmost importance. The system of granting
microcredits to women has proved successful within
the context of development cooperation. Empowering
women would also help in security sector reform as
well as disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes. Women need to be included in peace
negotiations and in decision-making processes for
rebuilding countries and societies after they have been
torn apart by war. Only by including the gender
perspective in these efforts can a thorough, sustainable
and all-inclusive peace be achieved.
What can Member States do? I will give the
Council just a few examples. Germany has advocated
the inclusion of gender advisers in all European
Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) missions. The
mission of the European Union-led peacekeeping force
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo had, for the
first time, such an adviser among its personnel. During
Germany’s presidency, gender advisers were part of all
ESDP missions. Also, the deployment of female
soldiers enhanced the success of operations. For
example, the presence of female soldiers to check
women and children at checkpoints proved to
de-escalate the situation on the ground. In Cambodia,
Germany supports a project of the Ministry of
Women’s and Veteran’s Affairs that focuses on
capacity-building and gender mainstreaming. Finally,
all German police and military personnel must undergo
gender training.
What can the United Nations do? Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009) and resolution 1889 (2009),
adopted today, are yet another milestone in the fight
against sexual violence and for the empowerment of
women for the maintenance of peace and security. We
now have a whole range of tools available to prevent

3

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

sexual violence and to respond rapidly to situations in
which violence occurs. The new composite gender
entity that the General Assembly has decided to
establish as part of system-wide coherence will help to
coordinate these and all other instruments that already
exist within the United Nations. I echo the presidency
of the European Union in calling upon the SecretaryGeneral and his Deputy to quickly start working on the
establishment of this entity.
Let me suggest and reiterate three more targets.
The United Nations needs to continue working together
with women’s non-governmental organizations on the
ground in post-conflict areas. It has to strive to include
more women in peacekeeping missions at all levels and
to improve its own performance, but also to set an
example for the countries concerned. And United
Nations entities must expand their activities related to
the delivery of basic services that women in postconflict situations need, especially access to health
care, education and justice systems.
Next year is the tenth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000). Let us try to reach these targets by that
date so we will be able to proclaim some progress that
will benefit and guide all people in the world that need
our help and look to us for support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): Thank you, Sir, for
giving the Philippines this opportunity to address the
Council on the ninth anniversary of the landmark
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation congratulates Viet Nam on its presidency of
the Council and for giving priority to a debate on the
issue of women and peace and security with the theme,
“Responding to the needs of women and girls in postconflict situations for sustainable peace and security”
and for circulating a concept paper in relation thereto
(S/2009/490). This debate will make a valuable
contribution to the forthcoming commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary of the Fourth World Conference on
Women.
The Philippines submits that any debate in the
United Nations concerning women must always be
rooted in the solemn declarations in its Charter that
reaffirm faith in the equal rights of men and women
and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
which recognize that the inherent dignity and the equal
and inalienable rights of all members of the human

4

family is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace
in the world. This is the only strategy that removes us
from mere sound and fury on so crucial an issue as
women.
The role of women in matters of peace and
security is particularly significant to the Philippines. It
was under the leadership of our recently departed
President Corazon Aquino, a woman and a housewife,
that the Philippines emerged from a long dictatorship.
She was a standard bearer for those who suffered under
tyranny, and, having survived, became a symbol of
strength and hope. This experience is enshrined in the
provision of the 1987 Constitution of the Philippines
that reads:
“The State recognizes the role of women in
nation-building, and shall ensure the fundamental
equality before the law of women and men”.
This spirit continues to permeate the public
sphere. The incumbent President is a woman, our
second in approximately 25 years. The Supreme Court,
during my tenure as Chief Justice, undertook
unprecedented moves to ensure that women benefit
equally from and participate directly in the judiciary’s
structures, processes and development programmes and
activities. Just last August, the Congress of the
Philippines passed a Magna Carta for Women, which
mandates the representation and participation of
women in policymaking.
We are currently conducting field consultations
for a National Action Plan on Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) in various
regions of the Philippines. These consultations will
culminate in a national consultation in Manila on
19 October 2009. The Philippine Action Plan on
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) will be the
blueprint that various stakeholders will use to ensure
that women are able to participate meaningfully in all
peace processes and in decision-making on peace and
security issues in both the formal and the informal
realms.
We know that, in this time of asymmetric
warfare, the use of sexual violence against women and
girls as a weapon of war is a source of even more
fundamental and pernicious concern. It is a weapon
that is intended to humiliate and destroy women, both
as individuals and as the heart and soul of social order
and the foundation of family and community life. It
should then follow that, within the peace and

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

reconstruction processes, women’s voices must be
indispensable in all phases. Women are often the
primary figures in the education and upbringing of our
children, and, therefore, the primary carriers of the
effects of conflict through the generations. Without
their voice of stability and sense of community,
children grow up knowing only war as their livelihood.
Our present debate must not just be an occasion
to celebrate the role of women. It must be a celebration
of a shift in the international community’s approach to
post-conflict situations, from narrow humanitarian and
relief activities to more comprehensive efforts towards
sustainable peace. This means a greater focus on the
concerns and roles of women in bridging the gap
between conflict and post-conflict development. For
my delegation, gender sensitivity in a post-conflict
environment would mean paying due attention to
women’s access to employment opportunities and
productive assets, such as land, capital, education and
training and health services. It also means looking at
the role of women in ensuring food security in the
community, and making conditions at refugee
settlements a priority. In short, the rehabilitative
approach to post-conflict situations involves a serious
consideration of the short- to long-term development
needs of the community concerned.
My delegation welcomes the resolution that was
just adopted by the Council. We are encouraged by,
among other things, the efforts to improve the resource
allocations for gender issues within the United Nations
by enhancing the monitoring of spending for genderrelated activities, similar to the system pioneered by
the United Nations Development Programme. We are
happy to note at last that, as evidenced by paragraph 19
of resolution 1889 (2009), a systematic assessment of
the needs and challenges facing women and girls in
post-conflict situations is being undertaken by the
United Nations, whose report will also recommend
possible responses, including in the area of effective
financing.
It took a whole nine years after the passage of the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) for the Council to
request a study on women’s participation and inclusion
in peacebuilding in the aftermath of a conflict. My
delegation believes that such a report is long overdue
and should therefore be given the promptest attention,
if the United Nations is to urgently address the
situation of the millions of women affected by the
ravages of war.

09-54249

I should like to conclude with these lines by a
poet:
“All true trophies of the ages
Are from mother-love impearled;
For the hand that rocks the cradle
Is the hand that rules the world”.
Mr. Clay (New Zealand): I join those who have
congratulated you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of this Council. I note that New Zealand
seeks the protection of women and their equal
participation in peace processes. We thank you for
having arranged this debate and we appreciate the
opportunity to contribute.
This is the third consecutive month the Security
Council has debated the issues of women, peace and
security. We welcome that increased focus, in
particular the attention given to the scourge of sexual
violence. We commend the Council’s readiness to
address those issues more systematically. Only last
week, New Zealand joined in co-sponsoring resolution
1888 (2009) in this Council. Along with resolutions
1325 (2000), 1820 (2008), 1882 (2009), 1888 (2009)
and the resolution that was adopted today, 1889 (2009),
we have come a long way in developing a
comprehensive set of norms to protect and enhance the
participation of women and girls in peace processes.
Today, we lend a strong voice to calls urging
States, regional groups and the United Nations system
to translate those words into action. To do this, we
recognize the need for stronger leadership and
coordination across the United Nations system. We
welcome two recent initiatives that should contribute to
this goal. First is the future appointment of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence in armed conflict. And the second is the
General Assembly’s recent action to reform the United
Nations gender architecture. We now urge the
Secretary-General to appoint strong and dynamic
advocates of the resolution 1325 (2000) agenda to the
role of the new Special Representative and as head of
the new composite gender entity.
As we focus more on sexual violence, we must
also redouble our efforts to implement the other crucial
aspects of resolution 1325 (2000) — increased
participation of women both in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions and in mediation and
negotiation processes. To make a lasting impact on the
lives of women in conflict and post-conflict situations,

5

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

we must adopt an integrated approach to each of the
pillars of resolution 1325 (2000). To this end, the
appointment of a Special Representative should
provide much needed visibility, leadership and
coherence. For this reason we believe the mandate of
the Special Representative should cover all aspects of
the women, peace and security agenda, not just the
issue of sexual violence.
New Zealand acknowledges that States must also
take responsibility for making progress towards the
goals of resolution 1325 (2000), including enabling the
full participation of women and girls in the peace
process. Among other things, women need access to
shelter, health care, a livelihood, education and justice.
They should be part of any decision-making processes.
And, above all, they must be free from violence.
New Zealand is committed to addressing these
needs as part of its own peacekeeping efforts. There are
several concrete examples of how we do this through
our provincial reconstruction team in Bamiyan
Province in Afghanistan. To facilitate the participation
of women in Afghanistan’s national police force, New
Zealand police have helped ensure that on-site
childcare services are available for women students,
that women instructors are available for training, and
that mentoring is provided to instructors and senior
male staff in the Afghan National Police to support the
training of women. Through the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, New Zealand supports the
Women’s Protection Network in Bamiyan. We have
contributed funding to establish a Women’s Referral
Centre in Bamiyan to provide secure accommodation
and paralegal advice for women seeking access to
justice. New Zealand’s provincial reconstruction team
also supports the local Ministry of Women’s Affairs in
developing a gender network to look at ways to
empower local women and build capacity for women’s
affairs in the region. Finally, our networking activities
include disseminating information to women to help
them solve their own problems, holding training
workshops around the province and promoting
discussion groups on issues such as the role of mothers
in the home.
Nine years on from the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), much remains to be done. This Council
has my assurance that New Zealand, through its
development
cooperation
programmes,
its
peacekeeping efforts and its domestic policies, will
continue to seek ways to enhance and ensure the

6

protection and equal participation, of women in peace
processes. Resolution 1325 (2000) has our ongoing,
full and determined support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Olinger (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg fully supports the statement made at this
morning’s meeting by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union and congratulates the
Vietnamese presidency of the Council on having
organized today’s important debate.
We also welcome today’s adoption of resolution
1889 (2009), as well as resolutions 1882 (2009) and
1888 (2009) on women and children in armed conflict.
Today’s open debate marks yet another anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, the first resolution adopted by the
Council that specifically addresses the impact of war
on women and recognizes their role in conflict
management and resolution and their contribution to
the search for lasting peace.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to note that
progress
in
the
implementation
of
the
recommendations therein remains insufficient. 2010
will be an especially important year, for it will afford
us an opportunity — at the commemoration of the
fifteenth anniversary of the Beijing Conference and of
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), as well as at the ministerial session of the
Economic and Social Council on the empowerment of
women — to take stock of the work accomplished and
above all to identify and effectively remedy
shortcomings. We further hope that 2010 will see the
establishment of the composite gender entity under the
Secretariat. We are convinced that the timely creation
of the entity will considerably strengthen the
cohesiveness of measures undertaken for women in the
United Nations system.
Women and girls are often the primary victims of
conflict and have specific needs in post-conflict
situations, especially when they have been displaced,
are refugees, or have been mistreated or maimed by
anti-personnel landmines, as so rightly noted by
Ms. Alberdi this morning. Those specific needs must
be taken into account in assessing countries’
requirements as they emerge permanently from
conflict. In post-conflict situations, women must
become important engines for peace and security in

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

their communities. It is indeed critical that women be
more involved in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts at all levels. The involvement of women in
decision-making processes from the start should
subsequently provide for their better participation in
development efforts.
Generally speaking, Luxembourg fully endorses
the Secretary-General’s recommendations in his report
(S/2009/465) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). My country especially welcomes the
recommendation
that
the
Security
Council
energetically pursue a strategy aimed at increasing the
participation of women in all peace processes,
especially within the framework of peace negotiations
and mediation.
Member States will have to demonstrate the
political will to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000). It is especially incumbent on them to utilize all
existing provisions of international law, international
humanitarian law and international criminal law, as
well as not to tolerate impunity and to refer to national
and international tribunals individuals suspected of
having committed crimes against women. The Security
Council could assist States in their efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) by establishing, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, a clear and
exhaustive standing follow-up mechanism that would
enable us to assess progress achieved.
Luxembourg also stresses the important role that
the Peacebuilding Commission could play in
encouraging all parties, including States on its agenda,
to provide for the participation of women in their
peacebuilding strategies and to ensure that women’s
civil society organizations be effectively consulted and
represented in country-specific configurations. We
could also ensure that the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council launch a dialogue on the
best way to address the negative impacts of conflict on
women and consider how to involve women in full
participation in peacebuilding efforts and post-conflict
reconstruction.
My country strives for the systematic
incorporation of the gender dimension in its
cooperation projects in order to better to respond to the
Millennium Development Goals, and fully backs the
peace initiatives taken by local women’s groups and
the
exhaustive
work
of
non-governmental
organizations to ensure the equal participation of

09-54249

women in post-conflict situations. We welcome the
participation in this debate of the representative of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
The President: I call on the representative of
Canada.
Mr. Normandin (Canada) (spoke in French): At
the outset, on behalf of the Government of Canada, I
wish to thank the Vietnamese presidency for convening
this open debate on resolution 1325 (2000). Addressing
the needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations
is a critical element of the Security Council’s
responsibilities.
As we know, the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations are unique and, sadly, often
overlooked. Today’s adoption of resolution 1889
(2009) is a response to a significant body of research
findings that reinforce what we have always known —
achieving durable peace, recovery and development in
post-conflict countries requires the meaningful
participation of women in all aspects and at all levels
of peace processes. Only a strong and sustained voice
will allow women in post-conflict environments to
transcend the status of victim and become empowered
as agents of positive change. We call on the Security
Council to ensure that their voices are heard loud and
clear.
In particular, Canada would like to draw the
Council’s attention to the participation of women in
peace processes and to a study by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women, which has already been
referred to today, concluding that the participation of
women in negotiating delegations to peace talks has
averaged approximately 7 per cent. Member States, the
Secretariat and international peace mediators
collectively share the responsibility to ensure that this
number increases and that we systematically include
women in all peace processes, formal and informal.
Canada sincerely hopes that the Security Council and
the Secretariat will ensure that this becomes a standard
practice.
Canada co-sponsored both resolutions 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009) on sexual violence in conflict.
Both resolutions elaborate on resolution 1325 (2000)
by outlining a number of concrete steps to be taken to
address sexual violence more systematically. Canada
welcomes the call for the nomination of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to provide
strategic leadership and to strengthen United Nations

7

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

coordination mechanisms in order to address sexual
violence.
Canada
also
warmly
welcomes
the
recommendations set out in the Secretary-General’s
recent report (S/2009/465) on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). In particular, Canada would
like to echo the Secretary-General’s calls for an
effective monitoring and accountability mechanism
with respect to all aspects of resolution 1325 (2000), in
particular the participation of women in peace
processes.
(spoke in English)
The implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) is
indeed a work in progress, both at a national level and
at the United Nations. With the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) approaching next
year, it is time to undertake a serious examination of
the gains that have been made as well as those aspects
of the resolution that remain unrealized.
On the positive side, there have been some
remarkable accomplishments by the many dedicated
actors who pursue the promotion and protection of
women’s and girls’ rights, including the efforts of civil
society organizations. On the other hand, we are still
short on some institutional mechanisms and action. In
this respect, the upcoming establishment of a steering
committee to enhance coordination within the United
Nations system ahead of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the resolution is welcome.
Currently, there are 13 full-time gender advisers
in United Nations peacekeeping operations, including
integrated missions. Every United Nations mission
should have a well-trained, full-time gender adviser
whose work is systematically integrated throughout the
operation and who has stable resources to carry out his
or her functions. By now, this should be standard
practice. We also welcome the call for the appointment
of women protection advisers, issued in resolution
1889 (2009), adopted earlier today.
I should like to say A few words on the
peacebuilding front. The Peacebuilding Commission
holds much promise for involving women and girls in
designing and then operationalizing post-conflict
strategies. In accordance with resolution 1820 (2008),
each of the four countries currently on the agenda have
strategies for engaging women in governance, security
sector reform, human rights institutions and other key

8

areas of post-conflict reconstruction. As chair of the
Commission’s country configuration for Sierra Leone,
Canada has worked with the Government of Sierra
Leone and its international partners to ensure that
gender equality and the empowerment of women are
core components of peacebuilding efforts in that
country.
Finally, we would also like to raise the issue of
bringing violators to justice with respect to sexual
violence. As we all know, this type of violence remains
rampant in conflict-affected areas. Too often, these
crimes go unpunished and therefore perpetuate the
cycle of sexual violence. To this end, Canada reiterates
the call made in resolution 1888 (2009) for a team of
rapidly deployable experts on sexual violence and
suggests that a United Nations justice rapid-response
mechanism be considered as we move towards the
implementation of this commitment.
In conclusion, a peace that lasts is a peace owned
by all, including women. As we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
we can acknowledge the progress made towards its
implementation. We can also recognize that more must
be done. Global indicators to track implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as called for in today’s
resolution, will be helpful in this regard. But let us not
wait further. We need to continue to act now,
particularly in the field, to make the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) a reality.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): Thank you, Mr. President,
for allowing us to speak.
What a difference a year can make! Eight years
after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the
Security Council was still debating whether sexual
violence was an issue of relevance to peace and
security. Then came resolution 1820 (2008), which
made it abundantly clear that where women are not
secure, there is no security. Still, the international
community was for too long somewhat ambivalent and
indecisive with regard to implementation and action on
the ground — until last week.
Today, the Council has adopted an important
resolution, but let me also congratulate it on the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1888 (2009), with its
comprehensive yet concrete recommendations for

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

action. This is truly a piece of work the Council can be
proud of.
What happened was leadership. In the past few
months, we have seen how men — and, even more,
women — in high and powerful positions have taken a
decision to make the fight against sexual violence in
armed conflict their top priority. Two lessons are clear
from this. First, where there is political will, there is a
way, and, secondly, women in power positions can
make a difference for the better.
One year before the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the time has now
come for the Council and the international community
to show the same resolve on other remaining challenges
in the promotion of women and peace and security.
Women must be recognized not only as victims of war
and peace beneficiaries, but most importantly as peace
and security providers. We therefore welcome this open
debate to set the course for the next 12 months, a course
not littered with re-commitments and repeated regrets,
but one that spells out specific results to be achieved
and to be measured by October 2010.
We support the Secretary-General’s call for the
Council to urgently establish a monitoring mechanism
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Such
a mechanism must have clear indicators and
benchmarks, including with regard to women’s
participation at all levels of peacekeeping,
peacebuilding,
post-conflict
negotiations
and
mediation. Measuring financial investments and
gender-sensitive funding provisions is also crucial in
this regard.
However, while such monitoring is needed and
welcome, the fundamental facts are already well
known. Women are underrepresented, women’s needs
are underfunded and gender-sensitive expertise is
lacking, both in the field and in capitals. As the United
Nations Development Fund for Women points out in its
excellent study of post-conflict needs assessments, a
mere 2 per cent of signatories to peace agreements are
women, while less than 8 per cent of post-conflict
budgets specifically mention women’s needs.
This must change, and Norway stands ready to
continue our contribution. This year alone, we have
allocated more than $50 million specifically for
women’s empowerment, of which the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is a key component.
Implementing our own national action plan since early

09-54249

2006, we have identified a number of lessons learned.
Key among these is the recognition of the need to
address traditional impediments, including male
chauvinism, and to take proactive political and
financial measures to involve women directly, both in
formal governance structures and in cooperation with
civil society. We have established a dedicated gender
task force in the Ministry for Foreign Affairs to
mainstream these concerns in all aspects of our foreign
policy, including the follow-up to resolution 1325
(2000).
Such an approach is equally relevant to the
United Nations system. We appreciate the SecretaryGeneral’s dedication to gender equality and women’s
empowerment and would encourage him to confirm his
leadership on this issue, both in ensuring the
establishment of the new composite gender entity
agreed by the General Assembly last month and in his
appointment of special representatives and special
envoys. The appointment of a gender adviser in the
Department of Political Affairs would also be most
welcome.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Ireland.
Ms. Anderson (Ireland): Our warm thanks go to
Viet Nam for organizing this debate.
We associate ourselves with Sweden in its
statement on behalf of the European Union (EU) this
morning.
I might begin with a personal recollection.
Almost 17 years ago, in December 1992, I went to the
former Yugoslavia as a member of the EU mission to
investigate the rape of women during the Balkan
conflict. The experience left a deep imprint on all who
participated. It was the end of any illusion that
barbarity is confined to faraway places. There, in the
heart of Europe on the threshold of the twenty-first
century, rape was once again an instrument of war. In
an article written with a colleague after that mission,
we discussed a number of aspects of what had
happened. We included the following point: “A
distribution of roles whereby men negotiate peace in
Geneva while women devise aid programmes for
victims is fundamentally unacceptable.”
That issue of roles and responsibilities remains
central to our consideration today. It is imperative that
the duality of women’s situation — as both victims and

9

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

actors — be fully recognized. Men have always
inhabited those two spaces simultaneously — as
victims and victors, waging the wars and authoring the
peace. Women have largely been imprisoned in the
victim role, as the collateral damage of war and, if
present at all, a kind of add-on at the peace table.
Resolution 1325 (2000), which has been on the
books for nine years, is trying to overthrow the patterns
of centuries. The story recurs again and again, with the
fundamentals almost always the same. Men who have
been in the front line of conflict feel they have earned
the exclusive right to broker the peace. Women who are
struggling to get hearth and home together after the
fighting have other priorities. Implementing resolution
1325 (2000) therefore means climbing mountains. To
get to first base camp, we need real, transformative and
attitudinal change.
I was struck by a comment made by Secretary of
State Hillary Clinton at a breakfast meeting during the
high-level segment of the General Assembly. Secretary
Clinton said that she is repeatedly questioned by the
United States media about why she is spending so
much time on “secondary, soft” issues such as women
in conflict. She has had to explain, she said, for the
millionth time that those issues are not secondary but
primary and that they are core foreign policy issues.
The Secretary of State’s experience captures a reality:
so many commentators, analysts and opinion-formers
do not truly rate the kind of discussion we are having
today. The nod of political correctness is there, but not
the conviction or prioritization that the issues deserve.
Overall,
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/465) makes for sober reading. There are some
bright spots, in particular on the training front, and all
successes deserve recognition and commendation. But
the statistics — to take just one example, only 2.4 per
cent of signatories to peace agreements since 1992
have been women — tell their own story.
In searching for practical ways forward, the
Secretary-General’s report rightly emphasizes the
importance of national plans. Ireland is currently
developing its own national action plan. As part of that
process, we have embarked on a cross-learning
initiative guided by the experiences of women and men
in countries emerging from conflict. We are currently
working in partnership with Liberia and Timor-Leste in
a tripartite cross-learning exercise. Through that
collaboration, our aim is to ensure the achievement of

10

real and immediate change for women who have
experienced conflict and who can and should be
stakeholders in State-building and peacebuilding. A
first cross-learning meeting was held in June 2009, a
second is to be held in Timor-Leste this December and
a third is proposed for Liberia in early 2010. A report
on the process will be shared with the United Nations
in advance of the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000).
A further effort to stimulate cross-regional
discussion on implementing resolution 1325 (2000)
was the hosting in Dublin earlier this year of the
ministerial meeting of the Human Security Network.
The Permanent Representative of Costa Rica described
that initiative in his statement this morning, and I will
not repeat what he has said.
A final point is the importance of coordination.
Within the United Nations system there should be a
one-stop shop to offer guidance and advice to Member
States in drawing up national plans. We suggest that
the Inter-Agency Task Force on Women, Peace and
Security be asked to identify such a focal point. At the
national level, too, there is a role for focal points to
provide drive and leadership. In Ireland Nuala O’Loan,
a distinguished woman of wide and very relevant
experience, has been appointed to the role of special
envoy on women, peace and security. Perhaps that
model could be of relevance elsewhere.
None of us here is in any doubt about the scale of
the challenge and the urgency of action. Next year’s
tenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000) is an opportunity to be seized — not for another
talkfest but to assess, strategize and commit. In the
collective effort to prepare for and mark that
anniversary, we look to the Security Council to
continue to show leadership and determination.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Cornado (Italy): I would like, first of all, to
commend you, Mr. President, for convening this
important meeting on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). Let me also thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Migiro, Assistant Secretary-General Mayanja,
Executive Director Alberdi and Ms. Amin.
Italy aligns itself with the position expressed by
Sweden on behalf of the European Union.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Tragically, sexual violence continues to be used
with impunity as a weapon of war to destroy the very
fabric of society in many conflicts in the world. That
has to stop. As Secretary of State Clinton said in this
Chamber just a few days ago (see S/PV.6195), the
dehumanizing nature of sexual violence erodes social
and political stability, undermines economic progress
and holds us all back.

children. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
early appointment of a special representative for
women and peace and security to provide much-needed
leadership, coordination and advocacy. We are also
convinced of the importance of finding ways to ensure
better and more detailed reporting to the Council,
primarily with regard to the identity of the parties
responsible for these grave violations.

Italy has committed itself to make this issue one
the top priorities of its international action. In the
framework of the Italian presidency of the Group of
Eight (G-8), on 9 and 10 September my Government
convened an international conference in Rome on the
issue of violence against women. In the presidency’s
conclusions of that meeting, we clearly stated that
violence against women and girls is a war crime and a
crime against humanity. The participants committed
themselves to strive to ensure the fullest possible
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), not least to eliminate the sense of impunity that
is still widespread among the perpetrators of such
crimes.

Women’s security must be guaranteed. Abuses
must be prosecuted. Blanket amnesties must be off the
table. But the protection of women is just one pillar of
resolution 1325 (2000). Women are agents of change
and fundamental players for peace, stabilization,
reconstruction and sustainable development. That was
one of the key messages of resolution 1325 (2000).
What we need now is to move with equal
determination to achieve similar progress in
empowering women and ensuring their effective and
equal participation in every phase of peacemaking,
conflict prevention, peace processes and peacebuilding.

The use of sexual violence as a war tactic is
clearly a global emergency. In the past year and a half,
the Security Council has shown remarkable leadership
in this field. With hindsight, we can say that the
adoption of resolution 1820 (2008) was indeed a
watershed moment. It clearly established that sexual
violence in situations of armed conflict, when used as a
tactic of war, is a matter of peace and security, and
very much the business of the Council. Italy is proud to
have been one of the sponsors of that landmark
resolution and to have actively contributed to its
drafting.

As stated in the conclusions of the presidency at
the G-8 meeting in Rome, to which I have referred,
global peace and security also depend on women’s
actions and on their participation under conditions of
equality in social development and governance
mechanisms at local, national and world levels. The
resolution that the Council has adopted today,
resolution 1889 (2009), is the first important step in
that direction, and we commend Viet Nam for taking
this initiative.

Resolution 1820 (2008) brought about a better
understanding of the implications of sexual violence as
a weapon of war, thus opening the way for the Council
to adopt two other important resolutions: resolution
1882 (2009) and, only last week, resolution 1888
(2009). Both provide the Council with important and
effective new tools to end impunity and to hold
accountable the perpetrators of those heinous crimes. It
is now up to the Council to use those tools and
implement the resolutions in full and without delay.

The role of women is particularly important in
peacebuilding efforts, as recognized by the specific
gender mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission.
After a conflict, women are often victims of heinous
abuses and can be irrationally stigmatized for the
violence they have suffered. At the same time, they are
the pillars of families that need to be put back together
and of societies that need to be rebuilt. They are the
educators of future generations, partners in the
reintegration of ex-combatants, mothers of fatherless
children, the only dynamic economic actors in a
ravaged society. For those reasons, a peace that is built
without considering the needs and hopes of women
cannot be a lasting one.

We encourage the Working Group of the Security
Council on Children and Armed Conflict to use the full
array of means at its disposal to deal with parties
responsible for rape and sexual violence against

As we have said time and time again, this is not
just a question of how many women are included in the
political and decision-making process; it is about
enabling them to champion issues that are vital to their

09-54249

11

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

empowerment. This is possible only through the full
engagement
of
civil
society
and
women’s
organizations, which is why resource, training and
capacity-building needs must always be given full
consideration. The United Nations has an important
contribution to make in ensuring, for instance, that the
participation of women is better reflected in
peacekeeping mission mandates, and that those
missions are provided with much-needed expertise and
resources, including through the inclusion of a gender
component in all of its peacekeeping and political
missions.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Italy’s firm
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and to promoting women’s participation
and empowerment. We have made this a priority both
in our political action and in our development
cooperation. To that end, we have funded a number of
projects of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women (UNIFEM) focused on implementing
resolution 1325 (2000) in West Africa, and we have
started the process of drafting a national action plan.
As one of the main troop contributors to United
Nations peacekeeping, we have an important role to
play in ensuring that resolution 1325 (2000) is
mainstreamed in all United Nations missions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Republic of Tanzania.
Ms. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We wish
to join other delegations in commending the delegation
of Viet Nam, led by the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, for organizing this
important debate. Today’s debate further attests to the
need for the Security Council to continue to be seized
of the challenges of protecting women and girls in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We also thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2009/465). We
welcome the recommendations contained therein and
call for their implementation. We also support his
recommendation for a high-level ministerial event to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000), although we would have preferred the event to
be held at a higher level. Let me also at this juncture
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha Rose
Migiro, for her commitment to advancing women’s
rights, which was affirmed in her statement this
morning.

12

We also appreciate the contributions made by Ms.
Mayanja, Ms. Alberdi and Ms. Amin, as well as various
other actors, in particular the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women, the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the
United Nations Population Fund, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization and
various non-governmental organizations for their
efforts in implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
We are concerned that despite several measures
being undertaken in response to resolution 1325
(2000), progress in implementing it is still limited, and
women and girls continue to suffer the brunt of war,
particularly the devastating effects of sexual and
gender-based violence. It is our expectation that the
appointment of a special representative of the
Secretary-General, as provided for in Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009), will add impetus to the United
Nations work in fighting the horrendous acts of
violence committed against women and girls, as well
as boys. We also expect that the appointment of the
special representative will not shift resources from a
holistic approach to the issue of women and peace and
security, one of participation, protection and
prevention. We deeply deplore the use of sex as a
weapon of war and call for concerted efforts to end
impunity.
We need to ensure the promotion and enjoyment
of human rights for all people, and in particular women
and girls living in situations of conflict. Access to
education, health and other humanitarian assistance is a
basic human right; we thus strongly condemn those
parties to conflict who destroy schools, health facilities
and humanitarian supplies, and those who prevent
girls’ and women’s access to education. The Security
Council must consider taking actions against such
parties, including targeted sanctions, and must insist on
people’s unhindered access to humanitarian personnel
and humanitarian assistance.
Furthermore, as part of the conflict-resolution
and peacebuilding process, the Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission must ensure that
resources are provided to restore the rule of law and
strengthen the judicial and law-enforcement systems.
Mechanisms also have to be in place to take to task all
those who have been involved in violations of human
rights.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Women’s involvement is necessary to ensure the
legitimacy of the decision-making process, to
encourage a broad base of participation, to make
sustainable peace and development possible and to
protect women and girls. The implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as of subsequent
resolutions on women and peace and security, is a
necessary tool for promoting the involvement of
women. We also wish to underscore that we can
produce a positive impact on the lives of women and
children by implementing these resolutions in tandem
with the Beijing Platform for Action and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women.
The United Nations must set an example in its
advocacy of women’s participation by the appointment
of more women to senior leadership positions in the
Organization, including in areas dealing with conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. At the grass-roots level,
we need to address the causes of the lack of women’s
participation in peace processes, and to empower
women’s groups socially, politically and economically.
We further recommend that Security Council members
meet with local women’s groups during all missions
that the Council undertakes.
Let me conclude by reiterating the commitment
of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania
to addressing the challenges faced by women and
children in conflict situations and promoting and
protecting their human rights. We also wish to express
our support for resolution 1889 (2009), which the
Council adopted today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this debate, as well as the seminar on resolution 1325
(2000), which your country held in Hanoi in July, and
which Switzerland had the pleasure of supporting. I
would also like to associate myself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Costa Rica
on behalf of the Human Security Network.
Today’s debate is the eighth on the subject held
since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). The
Security Council has adopted seven presidential
statements concerning its implementation. On one of
the key aspects of this resolution — sexual violence in
armed conflict — we have seen impressive progress. I

09-54249

refer here to resolution 1820 (2008), and, very recently,
resolution 1888 (2009), which were adopted as a result
of the commitment of the United States of America and
which should now be implemented. Generally
speaking, the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) remains unsatisfactory. The facts and figures set
out in various studies, including by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), speak for
themselves.
The question thus remains: how can we ensure
that the agenda effectively moves forward and that
what we have committed ourselves to implementing is
actually implemented?
First, Switzerland recently evaluated its 2007
national action plan and continues to improve that
instrument. Thanks to our pool of experts, we will
increase the number of female personnel seconded to
peacekeeping operations and as mediators. We will
improve gender training in all aspects of our foreign
policy, including in our programmes to promote peace
and development cooperation. Switzerland is pleased
to share its experiences with other countries and
partners.
Secondly, as a member of the Group of Friends of
1325, chaired by Canada, Switzerland will actively
support the preparations for the tenth anniversary.
However, if we want to have a reason to celebrate, a
strategic approach and an intelligent agenda are
required. It is essential to enhance the responsibility of
the Council, to increase the leadership in this area and
to improve overall follow-up on the resolution.
To that end, the NGO Working Group on Women,
Peace and Security, in close cooperation with
Switzerland, has developed a concept for monitoring
the resolution’s implementation. This initiative,
entitled “Accountability and Action for the Tenth
Anniversary of Security Council Resolution 1325”,
will include monthly assessments of all Council actions
and, by means of concrete proposals, will contribute to
the systematic implementation of the resolution.
However, if this project is to be successful, more
partners will be required. We invite all States to join
our efforts by providing political and/or financial
support.
Thirdly, the Council already has excellent
instruments at its disposal. The mainstreaming of
gender aspects in all peacekeeping operations, the
consistent use of the sanctions regime and the

13

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

establishment of a strong, high-level gender unit are
key elements for improving the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000).
We must think about how the Council can use
existing instruments more strategically and even about
establishing new ones. The informal expert group on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict could
address the resolution’s prevention aspects. As far as
protection is concerned, the model mechanism
developed for children under resolutions 1612 (2005)
and 1882 (2009), combined with new instruments
provided for in resolution 1888 (2009), is a promising
example. A pool of experts or a commission for the
promotion of women to high positions could respond to
the resolution’s aspect of strengthening the role of
women.
There is much work ahead of us. Let us begin
today, here and together.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): Allow
me to open my statement by thanking the Vietnamese
presidency of the Security Council for the concept
paper distributed for this open debate (S/2009/490).
My appreciation goes also to the Secretary-General for
his excellent report (S/2009/465), which provides a
comprehensive outlook on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), as well as sound suggestions
for specific actions to take.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 1889
(2009) this morning, which reiterates the commitment
of the Security Council to the full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and other important relevant
resolutions, including resolutions 1820 (2008) and
1888 (2009).
As the Secretary-General’s report states, there has
been progress in some areas of the implementation of
the resolution over the past year. For example, major
strides have been made in developing national action
plans. The cooperation and collaboration among
various partners — including United Nations entities
such as the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the United Nations Population Fund, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Office
of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, the International Research
and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

14

and the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM) — in developing national action plans in
various post-conflict areas is commendable. Some
best-practice examples, such as the Liberian case, can
guide the development of future action plans.
That is certainly a positive element, but the report
also illustrates a number of persisting difficulties in the
implementation of the resolution. Let me focus on
three key points.
The first concerns sexual violence. We are all
aware of how serious the situation is and how difficult
it can be to reverse the extent and impact of sexual
violence. In that regard, my delegation welcomes
resolution 1888 (2009), adopted just five days ago,
which identifies specific steps that the United Nations
and Member States should take to prevent or respond
to sexual violence. We expect that the appointment of a
special representative of the Secretary-General and the
rapid deployment of an expert team will make
significant contributions to our efforts to end sexual
violence.
The second point concerns the persistent lack of
participation by women throughout the peace process,
which is a core element of resolution 1325 (2000). As
the Secretary-General’s report expresses, a persistent
cause of concern is that women continue to be virtually
absent from the peace table and to be severely
underrepresented as third-party mediators in most
conflict-affected countries. It should be duly noted that
since 1992, only 2.4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements were women and that no woman has ever
been appointed as a chief mediator.
The Republic of Korea urges Member States and
the Untied Nations to take more vigorous initiatives to
ensure that women are engaged in all levels of
decision-making. In that regard, we commend
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s response to the call
in resolution 1325 (2000) to increase the number of
women in senior positions within the United Nations,
especially in peacekeeping operations. It is
encouraging to see three women heads of mission, six
women deputies in the field and five female undersecretaries-general and assistant secretaries-general in
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. We
encourage the Secretary-General to further strengthen
this positive trend, and we hope that his efforts are
emulated in peace negotiations and reconstruction

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

processes at the country level by ensuring the full
participation of women.
The third point concerns a deficit in post-conflict
funding for women’s needs. As stated in the concept
paper, UNIFEM’s review of almost 17,000 projects in
consolidated and flash appeals for 23 post-conflict
countries over three years indicates that less than 3 per
cent of projects submitted for funding explicitly target
gender issues. Additionally, only 8 per cent of
proposed budgets for post-conflict situation need
assessments included specific elements addressing
women’s needs. As a way to address that gap, my
delegation urges the United Nations system to further
integrate the gender perspective in designing and
implementing assistance programmes.
One area in which United Nations entities can
immediately do more is the utilization of quick-impact
projects. These are intended to meet urgent community
needs in post-conflict areas but are generally
underimplemented in many mission stationing fields,
not to mention the fact that the gender perspective is
rarely integrated into those projects under
implementation. Since one of the main features of the
quick-impact projects is to encourage a gender- and
age-based approach, United Nations missions and
UNDP have the potential to fully activate quick-impact
projects to meet the urgent needs of women.
My delegation believes that the effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) largely
depends on the overall capacity of the United Nations
system to pursue gender equality and women’s
empowerment. In that regard, strengthening the gender
architecture is a key element. We are very much
looking forward to the early establishment of a
composite entity, which will be a driving force in
creating
an
environment
for
the
effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in support of
the efforts of the Security Council.
In conclusion, the Republic of Korea shares the
expectations for the upcoming tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2010. We
anticipate that the anniversary will provide a new
opportunity for all stakeholders to strengthen efforts to
fully implement resolution 1325 (2000) to achieve real
and lasting changes in the lives of women and girls.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

09-54249

Ms. Rulumeni (South Africa): Allow me to
express our sincere gratitude to you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate on such an important matter.
South Africa welcomes the open debate and believes
that it is also timely, leading the processes in
preparation for the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security in 2010. South Africa aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
African Union (AU) later today.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was adopted nine years
ago. Consistent with the resolution, the theme today is
“Responding to the needs of women and girls in postconflict situations for sustainable peace and security”.
It is designed to examine how Member States and
international and regional organizations could further
improve women’s participation in all stages of peace
processes, particularly in conflict resolution, postconflict planning and peacebuilding, including by
enhancing their engagement in decision-making in the
early stages of recovery processes. While women may
be the first casualties of war, they remain active agents
of change and play a meaningful role in the recovery
and reintegration of their families. Women are also
instrumental in bringing about democracy and
reconciliation in post-conflict societies.
The African Union and subregional organizations
offer several advantages in the pursuit of effective
conflict prevention and resolution. Therefore, the
Assembly of the African Union, in its efforts to
promote the participation of women in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and security, has taken concrete steps
and pledged that the organs of the AU and the regional
economic communities and member States, using the
frameworks of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), will integrate gender policies, programmes and
activities on conflict and peace. That would ensure that
women participate fully in conflict resolution and
management processes.
Subregionally,
gender
equality
and
the
empowerment of women are among the founding
principles of the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and are enshrined in the SADC
Treaty. We have been greatly honoured by the
leadership and important contribution of women in
recent peace processes and negotiations in our region.
On 17 August 2008, the SADC heads of State signed
the SADC Protocol on Gender and Development,
which has been hailed as an important step towards the

15

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

empowerment of women, the elimination of
discrimination and the achievement of gender equality
and equity.
In the context of peace and security, the Protocol
stipulates that the States parties shall endeavour to put
in place measures to ensure that women have equal
representation and participation in key decisionmaking positions in conflict resolution and
peacebuilding processes by 2015, in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000). Furthermore, the Protocol
specifies that States parties shall, during times of
armed conflict, take such steps as are necessary to
prevent and eliminate incidences of human rights
abuses, especially of women and children, and also to
ensure that the perpetrators of such abuses are brought
to justice before courts of competent jurisdiction.
There is an urgent need to advocate more strongly
for the equal participation and full involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance and
promotion of peace and security. We also believe that
all actors to the binding resolution should devote their
attention to ensuring sufficient resources, the capacity
to address the challenges and empowerment through
educational programmes so as to increase the
awareness and understanding of how to find lasting
solutions. We encourage Member States to finalize and
concretize national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) that provide for the
necessary training of women and men alike.
South Africa continues to support the work of the
United Nations and of the African Union in promoting
the equal participation and full involvement of women
in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security, as well as in protecting women and
girls against sexual violence. From our experience in
the SADC region, we have learned that it is important
to build solidarity among all role players, particularly
women, and therefore we remain committed to working
within a consultative and collaborative framework to
find peaceful and lasting solutions to conflicts.
To that end, we believe it important for women in
local communities to be allowed to participate in
finding solutions for the reconstruction and rebuilding
of their countries. The importance of equal
representation and participation of women in formal
peace processes and at negotiating tables cannot be
overemphasized.

16

The primary responsibility for preventing and
protecting women and girls in conflict situations and
their aftermath should not lie with the international
community alone. That would assist in promoting local
ownership in peace processes. South Africa remains
committed to the full and effective implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009).
We in the international community have an obligation
to women to ensure that their rights are protected and
that their place in all aspects of the peace process is
assured.
In conclusion, my delegation will continue to
support the work of the United Nations and of the
African Union in promoting the equal participation and
full involvement of women in all efforts for the
maintenance and promotion of peace and security, as
well as in protecting women and girls in post-conflict
situations and their aftermath.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Viinanen (Finland): The representative of
Sweden has already spoken on behalf of the European
Union presidency, and I associate myself fully with his
statement. I have the honour of making a few
additional remarks.
Nine years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000) for the protection of women,
for their participation and for the promotion of their
rights in conflict and post-conflict situations. Last year,
the Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008),
condemning sexual violence as a tactic of war, and last
week it adopted resolution 1888 (2009) to further
strengthen the United Nations response to sexual
violence in conflict. We welcome recent developments
and the resolution adopted today, resolution 1889
(2009), which draws our attention to the crucial
question of women’s empowerment and participation
in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Mr. President, you have chosen a very pertinent
focus for this open debate on women and peace and
security. Building sustainable peace requires much
more than the mere absence of violence. Restoration of
the rule of law, the local economy and basic services
should be the priority in any post-conflict situation.
This should happen alongside meeting the obvious
need to ensure everyone’s physical safety and security,
which includes freedom from fear of sexual violence or
harassment.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

After a violent conflict, women are often the best
experts in identifying the most crucial needs of their
communities. Their experience, knowledge and
determination are needed for the markets to start
buzzing with life again, for the children to go to school
and for the community to heal. Yet, women are still too
often left out of the peace negotiations and the
following processes where priorities and budgets for
early recovery and peacebuilding are planned and
decided upon. Finland emphasises the right of women
to fully participate in post-conflict peacebuilding.
We do not only need to make sure that we have
women present at the table at all levels of decisionmaking. We should consider working towards agreeing
on international standards regarding participation of
women and men in peace and post-conflict processes.
We also need to make sure that women can fully use
their potential, skills and leadership to foster quick and
sustainable recovery and peacebuilding. To that end,
Finland, together with Liberia, convened the
International Colloquium for Women’s Empowerment,
Leadership, Development and International Peace and
Security in Monrovia last March.
The United Nations plays a unique role in
conflict prevention, mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. However, during the 60 years of United
Nations peacekeeping, no more than seven women
have served as Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in the field. No woman has ever
been nominated as a lead mediator in a peace process
led by the United Nations. This has to change. We, the
United Nations Member States, need to ensure that the
change takes place.
We urge the United Nations to lead by example.
We commend the Secretary-General for his efforts to
increase the number of women in senior leadership
positions, and we encourage him to break even more
ground in the years to come. We welcome the call, in
the resolution just adopted, to the Secretary-General to
develop a strategy to that end. The Secretary General
should ensure that all his envoys and representatives
include women in all formal peace processes they lead.
They should actively seek the views of women also
outside of the formal negotiations. Furthermore, we
encourage the United Nations, together with the World
Bank and relevant regional organisations, to include a
requirement for women’s participation in the standards
of post-conflict needs assessments and to track genderspecific budget allocations.

09-54249

Next year will mark the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). There has been progress in its
implementation, but a lot of work remains to be done
before our commitments are fulfilled.
The unanimous decision by the General
Assembly, in its resolution 63/311, to create a new
gender entity was long awaited worldwide. Now we
must set up the ambitious goal of having the new entity
up and running by mid-2010. This will be a key step
forward in enhancing the effective contribution by the
United Nations to the promotion of women’s rights and
participation worldwide, including in conflict and postconflict situations.
The recent adoption of resolution 1888 (2009)
and its request for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General to provide
leadership and improve coherence and coordination of
United Nations action against sexual violence in
conflict was a major step forward. Ensuring full
participation and rights of women and girls is the best
way to prevent sexual violence, and the mandate of the
new special representative should be put in place with
that in mind.
Moreover, we need indicators for tracking what
has or has not been done. In that regard, we are
delighted that the new resolution sets a timeline for the
development of global indicators. However, indicators
need to be complemented with a mechanism for
monitoring compliance and with the political will to
make the cost of non-compliance much higher than it is
today. Ultimately, the cost of excluding women from
peacemaking and peacebuilding is peace itself.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Sekudo (Nigeria): On behalf of the Nigerian
delegation, I would like to commend the Vietnamese
presidency of the Security Council for initiating this
important meeting on the landmark resolution 1325
(2000), which was adopted unanimously by the
Council nine years ago. Nigeria welcomes the depth of
the analysis made by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2009/465) and the effort to translate
resolution 1325 (2000) into practical reality for women
and girls all over the world. We convey our
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary General for her
statement. We also commend the contributions of
Ms. Rachel N. Mayanja, Ms. Inés Alberdi and

17

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Ms. Asha Hagi Elmi Amin, and we thank them for their
briefings.
As resolution 1325 (2000) affirms, the needs of
women and girls transcend the traditional socioeconomic, political and cultural considerations, but
also include the need to guarantee their security and
access and an enabling environment that ensures their
meaningful participation in society. This meeting thus
affords us the opportunity to assess the actions we have
taken — of the lack of them — in fulfilment of our
collective obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).
Without a doubt, we need new strategies to accelerate
the fulfilment of those obligations.
It is heartening that some Member States have
demonstrated the effectiveness of mainstreaming
gender as a viable strategy for the implementation of
the resolution. This is borne out by the good example
of the Indian Government in deploying an all-female
peacekeeping unit in Liberia, an act that has not only
encouraged Liberian women’s participation in their
country’s security forces, but has also emboldened
women to report cases of abuse. Another commendable
example is the programme for the treatment and care of
rape victims by the Forum for African Women
Educationalists.
Commendable as those actions are, more needs to
be done to develop national action plans for the
implementation of the resolution by Member States.
Indeed, the Secretary-General’s report indicates that
only 16 Member States have developed national action
plans. This is an issue that requires our urgent
attention.
The effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) will require an integrated approach. It will
require us to change our mindsets so that women and
girls are no longer depicted as mere victims of war. It
will also require us to acknowledge and highlight the
roles and positive contributions of women and girls to
society. In addition, issues of gender justice,
accountability and rehabilitation must form part of
intervention programmes to assist women and girls.
With regard to the protection of women and girls
from sexual violence, Nigeria reiterates its firm support
for resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009) and for a
zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence against
women and girls. It is in this context that we commend
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur in the Sudan for providing police and military

18

escorts for women and girls to enable them to
undertake their tasks. In addition, we reiterate our
support for conflict-prevention measures to reduce
threats to women and girls.
We urge Member States to respond to the needs
of women and girls guided by the tenets of human
security. As the 2003 final report of the Commission on
Human Security noted, human security means
protecting vital freedoms. It means protecting people
from critical and pervasive threats and situations, and
building on their strengths and aspirations. It also
means creating systems that give people the building
blocks of survival, dignity and livelihood. Indeed,
resolution 1325 (2000) created obligations that we
unanimously accepted nine years ago. We must
therefore join hands to fulfil these obligations. My
Government stands ready to work with the Council and
other Member States in the discharge of these
commitments.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Singapore.
Mr. Menon (Singapore): I should like to express
my warmest congratulations to you, Mr. President, and
to Viet Nam on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of October and for
having organized this important debate on women and
peace and security. As a fellow member of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, we wish you
every success and are confident that you will do an
excellent job as President of the Council for this
month. Our warmest congratulations also go to the
delegation of the United States for the exemplary
manner in which it handled the presidency of the
Security Council last month.
One of the most famous symbols of the global
search for peace is the Nobel Peace Prize, which is
awarded every year to the person who has done the
most to promote peace in the world. What is less well
known is the fact that Alfred Nobel, the Swedish
inventor who created the prize, was actually inspired
by a woman — the Baroness Bertha von Suttner, a
peace activist who campaigned tirelessly against the
wars in Europe in the late nineteenth century. Alfred
Nobel had her in mind when he wrote in his will that
the Peace Prize should be given to the most deserving
person, a Swede or a foreigner, a man or a woman.
The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) by the
Council was an acknowledgement of the truth borne

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

out by most of human history that women play a
powerful role in the promotion of peace and security.
This is evident when women are allowed to participate
fully, equally and effectively in all stages of the peace
process — peacekeeping, peace negotiations and
peacebuilding — and are similarly involved in the
development and implementation of post-conflict
strategies, reconstruction and consolidation. As my
colleagues have already spoken with great eloquence
on these issues, I simply wish to emphasize a few key
points.
There remains a serious gap in the translation of
commitments made on paper into reality. It is a sad fact
that the impact of conflict is borne disproportionately
by women. For instance, over 70 per cent of the
casualties
in
recent
conflicts
have
been
non-combatants, most of them women and children.
Moreover, conflicts have profound implications for
women’s basic health and survival. Of the countries
that have the highest lifetime risks of maternal death
today, most are at war or in a post-conflict situation. In
addition, as a country begins to emerge from conflict,
women and girls have specific priorities and needs in
such areas as physical security, socio-economic
conditions, education, income generation, access to
basic services, as well as gender-responsive law
enforcement and access to justice.
Unfortunately, these needs and priorities are often
not recognized or met. Studies have shown that there is
a substantial gap in financing for women’s needs in
post-conflict situations. This cripples the ability of
women to contribute meaningfully to their societies
and communities. Moreover, efforts to include women
in peacebuilding and reconstruction processes are often
limited. Women make up 52 per cent of the world
population but comprise only 7 per cent of negotiators
on official negotiating delegations. In addition, women
often lack the organizational force to make their voices
heard in political and economic decision-making. As a
result, women are prevented from making the
contributions that they would like to make to postconflict governance and the consolidation of peace.
It is vital that the international community
redouble its efforts to empower women, especially
ahead of the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) next year. We look forward to
the report of the Secretary-General, as requested by the
resolution that the Council has just adopted, which will
provide important recommendations on how to address

09-54249

women’s participation and their inclusion in
peacebuilding and planning in the aftermath of
conflict. Singapore was pleased to co-sponsor this
resolution, as well as resolution 1888 (2009) last week,
ably led by the Vietnamese and United States
delegations, respectively. What these two texts show is
that the United Nations must lead by example to
address gender issues in United Nations mandates,
including the greater participation of women in
political, peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions.
The simple presence of women military, police
and civilian peacekeepers on the ground has a
tremendous positive effect on local communities by
reaching out to and serving as powerful role models for
local women. Women currently constitute just 2 per
cent of military personnel and 8 per cent of police
personnel in United Nations peacekeeping missions,
and more should be done to encourage greater female
participation. During the INTERPOL General
Assembly to be held in Singapore later this week,
Singapore will be working with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) to promote DPKO’s
“Women in Peacekeeping: the Power to Empower”
global campaign to recruit more women police for
peacekeeping operations. The continuing need for the
increased participation of female officers in United
Nations peacekeeping operations will also be
highlighted in the outcome declaration of the
INTERPOL-United Nations ministerial meeting.
I should like to end where I began, with the
Nobel Peace Prize. When Alfred Nobel created the
Nobel Peace Prize, he intended for Baroness von
Suttner to become the first recipient. However, it took
five more years before she was honoured in 1905 and
became the first woman to receive the Peace Prize. At
her presentation ceremony, Jørgen Løvland, then
Chairman of the Nobel Committee, said:
“History constantly demonstrates the great
influence of women. Women have encouraged the
ideas of war, the attitude to life, and the causes
for which men have fought, for which their sons
were brought up, and of which they have
dreamed. Any change or reformation of these
ideas must be brought about chiefly by women.”
It is up to us to ensure that all women around the
world have the opportunity to exercise their profound
power to do so.

19

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

The President: I give
representative of Portugal.

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I should like to
begin by joining others in thanking you, Mr. President,
for holding this open debate on this very important
matter. I should also like to congratulate you on the
excellent concept paper you distributed before this
meeting. I should also like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Development Fund for Women for their
fruitful and comprehensive interventions.
Portugal naturally concurs with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union, but I should like to
make some additional remarks.
The adoption of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) represented a landmark in the promotion and
protection of human rights. It not only brought to the
attention of this organ the pressing issues of gender
equality and the empowerment of women, but it also
made clear that women have a role to play in conflict
situations, besides that of victims, as peacemakers and
peacekeepers.
It is our belief that the equal participation of
women and men in decision-making processes has a
positive impact on the international security system,
thus favouring the implementation of the objectives of
the Security Council - maintaining peace and security.
At the same time, it is of fundamental importance that
we develop policies that envisage the promotion of the
political, economic and social roles of women in postconflict situations.
It is undeniable that situations of conflict have a
great impact on women. They are too often victims of
violence and of sexual violence used as a weapon of
war. And at the same time, they very often become the
main providers of economic security and survival to
their families. There is thus the need to ensure that, in
post-conflict situations, we also build on their
experiences.
Portugal reaffirms its commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We adopted
last August our national plan of action to contribute to
the implementation of that document at the national,
regional and international policy levels. The drafting of
this national plan of action involved a one-year long

20

participatory process, which encompassed wideranging governmental contributions together with
broad and public consultations with universities, nongovernmental organizations, media and other relevant
civil society sectors and international networks.
Our national plan recognizes the specific impacts
of contemporary wars on the lives of women and
addresses the efforts to prevent, combat and mitigate
these impacts. Our plan, which will extend to 2013, is
built around the objectives of strengthening women’s
participation and representation in all efforts to
promote peace and security; promoting gender
mainstreaming in the sectors of security, such as
peacekeeping missions and security system reform;
justice and development aid; and reinforcing the
protection of women and girls in conflict and postconflict areas.
Allow me briefly to highlight five main
objectives of our plan. It seeks, first, to increase
women’s participation and mainstream gender equality
in all phases of peacebuilding processes and at all
levels of decision-making; secondly, to promote
capacity-building on gender equality and gender-based
violence, as well as other aspects covered by
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008), for all those
involved in peacebuilding and development aid efforts;
thirdly, to promote and protect women’s human rights
in conflict areas and post-conflict scenarios, taking into
account the prevention and elimination of gender-based
violence and the promotion of the empowerment of
women; fourthly, to invest in and disseminate
knowledge on issues concerning women, peace and
security, including awareness-raising among decisionmakers and the broader public; and lastly, to ensure the
participation of civil society in the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and the national plan of action.
Our national plan thus embodies Portugal’s
concern over the vulnerability of women and girls in
post-conflict situations, together with our national
commitment to developing measures to answer the
needs of women in these situations. In concrete terms,
this is translated at the international level into the
promotion of policies, strategies and legislation to
prevent armed violence, including domestic armed
violence, as well as in the systematic integration into
development programmes of a gender dimension and
training for development actors in this field.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Furthermore, our national action plan emphasizes
that women and girls are relevant and capable actors of
change and development, and is based on the
conviction that, first, it is critical that we overcome the
traditional perspective of women and girls as being
exclusively vulnerable victims in need of protection,
and that, secondly, it is thus essential to implement
measures that guarantee that this perspective will be
taken into consideration at all levels of peacebuilding
processes by the international and local actors
involved.
Finally, I wish to say that the Portuguese
Government interprets this resolution as extending
beyond armed conflicts and humanitarian aid to
include the promotion of policy coherence at the
national level concerning issues such as disarmament
and weapons control, public security and the
elimination of gender-based violence.
Nearly 10 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), there has obviously been enormous
progress, but we must recognize that its aims have not
yet been fulfilled. I encourage the Council and its
members to carry on the good work in that direction.
The President: I
representative of Iceland.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Jónasson (Iceland): Let me at the outset
thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate on
women and peace and security to discuss the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The focus
you have chosen for our discussion, “Responding to
the needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations
for sustainable peace and security”, is highly relevant
and provides ample scope for reflecting on what the
focus of our work should be in light of the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the resolution next year.
Iceland maintains a strong commitment to
resolution 1325 (2000), being one of the few countries
that have adopted a national action plan pursuant to the
resolution. The Icelandic Government has decided to
focus its work related to resolution 1325 (2000) on
post-conflict reconstruction and women’s access to
peace negotiations, being convinced that the inclusion
of women in peace processes is a security issue
essential to sustainable peace.
In particular, Iceland has supported the
extraordinary work of the International Women’s
Commission for a Just and Sustainable Palestinian-

09-54249

Israeli Peace. This is an organization where women
from opposite sides of the conflict, together with a
group of women from the international community,
have managed to find viable ways to promote peace
and peaceful alternatives to conflict.
Last summer, Iceland organized an international
conference on resolution 1325 (2000), entitled
“Women Negotiating Peace”, which highlighted how
best to ensure that women are included in formal and
informal peace processes. Allow me to contribute to
this discussion by recapitulating some of the main
issues addressed at the Reykjavik conference. Four
themes were predominant.
First, the conference emphasized the importance
of raising awareness of resolution 1325 (2000) and
recognized the importance of using the forthcoming
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the resolution for
that purpose. Awareness should be promoted in the
international community, within the United Nations
system, as well as within Member States and societies
in or emerging from conflicts.
Secondly, there is need for increased high-level
commitment to the resolution, both within the United
Nations system and by the Member States. Here, the
maw concern was the issue of gender architecture
within the United Nations system, which now has been
alleviated in part through the unanimous adoption of
General Assembly resolution 63/311, calling among
other things for a new and consolidated United Nations
gender entity to be headed by an under-secretarygeneral. The Security Council could establish a
working group on resolution 1325 (2000) and set an
example by incorporating the gender perspective when
discussing conflict.
Thirdly, there was a strong call to the United
Nations system and Member States to use the tenth
anniversary as an impetus to get serious about
implementation. The Secretary-General should insist
on accountability for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) by the United Nations system. To increase
the focus on results, the High-level Steering Group
chaired by the Deputy Secretary-General, should focus
on the implementation of 1325 (2000). More women
should be appointed as special representatives and
envoys of the Secretary-General, and gender advisers
should be accorded a higher status to ensure that
gender mainstreaming does not become sidetracked.
On the membership’s side, the lead must be taken in

21

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

implementing the resolution, prioritizing the adoption
and implementation of national action plans.
Finally, but perhaps most importantly, the
conference identified a clear need for accountability
and reporting mechanisms to ensure successful
implementation. Therefore, the Security Council is
urged to consider the setting up of a mechanism for
holding Member States accountable for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). The
mechanism should be based on clear performance
targets and timelines and have the necessary political
backup to report on achievements and failures of
implementation by Member States. Resolution 1612
(2005) regarding the use of child soldiers might
provide a convenient model for how reporting and
accountability can be ensured.
One of the workshops at the conference in
Reykjavik approved recommendations on how to mark
the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) next
year. Time does not allow me to mention them here.
The nine recommendations will be circulated with the
printed version of my text. The anniversary provides us
with an opportunity to draw attention to the resolution,
promote
greater
commitment
and
improved
implementation and work towards the strengthening of
the resolution. Let us seize that opportunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Allow me to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on Viet Nam’s
assumption of the Security Council presidency.
Australia was an original sponsor of resolution
1325 (2000), and we value the opportunity today to
address the Council on the issue of responding to the
needs of women and girls in post-conflict situations for
sustainable peace and security. Women can be, of
course, as we know and as we have heard, powerful
agents of change for peace and security. The historical
comments on the Baroness von Suttner and her
influence in inspiring the Nobel Peace Prize, which we
have just had recalled for us by our colleague from
Singapore, have eloquently reminded us of that fact.
Early recognition of and response to the special needs
of women and girls post-conflict, obviously, as we
know, helps to lay a solid foundation for sustainable
peace. Australia is itself very alert to that reality.

22

We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/465). We also welcome the deployment by
UNDP of senior gender advisers, including to Papua
New Guinea, Timor-Leste and Nepal. We were
particularly encouraged by the report’s focus on the
vital issue of access to social services such as
education and health, including maternal and
reproductive health.
We endorse all of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations and would like to address just a few
of them today. First of all, we would value the
convening in 2010 of a high-level event to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000). This would provide a very useful opportunity
to take stock of our implementation and assess, at the
highest levels — and this does need to be done at the
highest levels — what remains to be done to capitalize
on
recent
momentum
towards
enhanced
implementation. We congratulate those 16 countries
that have formulated national action plans. Australia
itself needs to do better on this. We need to accelerate
our own efforts, and we would bring to a high-level
event concrete advice on further, practical measures
beyond those we have already undertaken to further
implement resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, we agree that impunity for genderbased crimes must not be tolerated. We congratulate
the Council for its adoption last week of resolution
1888 (2009). As our Finnish colleague has just said,
this was a major step forward, and we must now do
absolutely whatever we need to ensure its
implementation. I should say that my own country is
deeply concerned with the reported high prevalence of
rape and other forms of grave sexual violence in
Myanmar. The absence of effective judicial and
security institutions to ensure accountability, prevent
violence and combat impunity remains a pressing
challenge in many post-conflict societies. Formal
justice systems must provide accessible recourse for
women.
Thirdly, women’s equal and full participation in
all efforts toward the maintenance and promotion of
peace and security, as well as reconciliation, is critical.
We agree that increasing women’s role in decisionmaking bodies is an obvious key. In post-conflict
situations, women need to be represented, of course,
early, integrally and at all stages during peace
negotiations, and this will bolster the priority given to
women’s recovery needs and should build a more solid

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

peace. Improved electoral participation is also
essential, and we note with appreciation, in particular,
the report’s focus on the efforts of Timor-Leste and its
partners to enhance the quality and quantity of
women’s representation and participation in village
council elections, which were held earlier this year.
This sets a helpful precedent in promoting genderresponsive reconstruction and local development
agendas.
Fourthly, we agree with the Secretary-General
that an accurate, more coherent system of data
collection is necessary to monitor progress, address
gaps in implementation and better facilitate the sharing
of best practices. When developing such tools,
consideration should be given to collecting and
analysing information on areas including female heads
of households, women’s land use patterns, access to
credit, membership in agricultural cooperatives,
participation in formal employment, reproductive
health and educational status.
Finally, we welcome the General Assembly’s
recent progress towards establishing a composite
United Nations gender entity, and we very much look
forward to further strengthening of United Nations
coordination on gender issues, including on women
and peace and security matters.
Women’s capacity for peacebuilding must be
strengthened, particularly where women are themselves
mobilizing to end conflict and foster peace and
reconciliation in their own communities.
Australia is partnering throughout the Pacific and
Asia to build local and regional capacities. We were
pleased to be involved in the International Women for
Peace Conference held in Timor-Leste in March and to
support the travelling road show exhibition of that
Conference, which strengthened, locally, women’s
roles in peacebuilding and conflict resolution. In the
Pacific, we are also pleased to support the regional
women’s community media network on women and
peace and security, which raises awareness of and
supports the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
through media initiatives in Fiji, Tonga, Solomon
Islands and Bougainville, Papua New Guinea.
The role of civil society organizations is, of
course, also essential. We are encouraged by the
sustained and concerted efforts of many individuals
and organizations worldwide that campaign in this
field. Australia was particularly pleased to support the

09-54249

“Peace Talks” initiative of the International Women’s
Development Agency, which raised awareness on
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
Pacific through training for civil society organizations
from Solomon Islands, Tonga, Fiji and Bougainville.
To conclude, while we recognize that there have
been improvements in our united efforts to respond to
the needs of women and promote the role and voice of
women in post-conflict societies, very clearly, we all
must recognize that further very determined efforts are
required. As we approach the tenth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), Australia certainly recommits
to this compelling objective, an objective, as I said,
that we must all ensure is achieved.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Let me,
at the outset, congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
convening of this open debate on women and peace
and security. We express our appreciation for the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2009/465) and to
Ms. Rachel Mayanja, the Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General on Gender Issues and Advancement
of Women, and Ms. Inés Alberdi, the Executive
Director of the United Nations Development Fund for
Women, for their important presentations today.
This meeting is being held almost ten years after
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security, to evaluate what has been achieved
so far regarding the concrete and legal protection of
women in armed conflicts. This requires of us an
affirmation that, despite the light shed in the resolution
on the suffering of women in armed conflict and the
resolution’s role in strengthening international
cooperation, there are still many challenges that we
need to overcome to realize the full implementation of
its provisions.
In particular, there is a lack of requisite
information, data and legislation, which are either
missing or not made use of during armed conflicts.
This sometimes leads to impunity for the perpetrators
of crimes against women. Practical, legislative and
judicial efforts must be strengthened to enhance
women’s opportunities to exercise their right to live in
peace and security, within a comprehensive range of
policies that achieve equality in rights and duties
among all communities and subsequently lead to

23

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

achieving full social and economic development in all
spheres.
Here we have to underline the complementarity
between the pillars of development, peace and security
outlined in the Millennium Declaration. Providing
security for women means strengthening United
Nations capacities in the field of dispute settlement.
This is not confined to dispute management but also
requires focusing on the enhancement of the
socio-economic development of women in a way that
will foster their ability to deal with security challenges.
That is why the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), which calls for the appointment of a special
representative of the Secretary-General on sexual
violence against women in armed conflict, was a step
in the right direction. We had hoped, however, that his
or her mandate would have included all forms of
violence perpetrated against women in situations of
armed conflict, and not be limited only to sexual
violence while excluding other grave violations such as
killing, maiming and torture.
However, there is no doubt that expanding the
mandate of peacekeeping operations to include the
protection of women from sexual violence has
contributed to the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Empowering women and increasing their
participation in decision-making processes, including
in designing and implementing strategies, would
contribute effectively to the full implementation of the
resolution. The same applies to the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission and United Nations
agencies, programmes and funds, which should include
the effective participation of the international
community, civil society and relevant nongovernmental organizations to enhance the role of
Governments and communities in protecting women
and providing them with better services to help them
overcome challenges.
In turn, that requires coordination between the
new special representative of the Secretary-General on
sexual violence against women in armed conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. There is a great need to
achieve synergy and coordination between those two
high-level United Nations officials, in particular
because they are concerned with the safety of two
important members of the family, namely, women and
children. It should be borne in mind, however, that the

24

mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict is broader
and more inclusive, as it is not limited to addressing
sexual violence.
In that regard, it is of crucial importance that we
underline the role of education, culture and
empowerment in improving the status of women in
peace as well as armed conflict situations. All schools
must be protected from deliberate bombardment — not
only in places mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, such as the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Afghanistan and Pakistan, but also in the
occupied Palestinian territories, where Israel bombed
schools in Gaza. Such actions must be condemned and
investigated as inhuman assaults against peace and
security.
In line with its historical role, Egypt has been
eager to assume its responsibilities in strengthening
regional cooperation among States in the Arab region
and countries of the African continent. The First Lady
of Egypt is leading that campaign through the Suzanne
Mubarak Women’s International Peace Movement,
which promotes international and regional awareness
of the gravity of the issue. Its work includes the
convening of numerous meetings and regional
seminars, in cooperation with United Nations
programmes and funds, to enhance the capabilities of
States in designing and implementing national action
plans. Those plans should include the active
participation of women’s peace organizations focusing
on youth and the culture of peace. The goal is to
effectively implement resolution 1325 (2000) while
paying particular attention to issues related to the
protection of women and children in conflict situations
by, among other things, promoting international efforts
to combat the phenomenon of human trafficking and
strengthening the effective participation of women in
peacebuilding,
peacekeeping
and
post-conflict
reconstruction in a way that protects their right to live
in peace and provides them with the necessary security
to help them assume their role in developing their
societies while guaranteeing a better future for new
generations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): My delegation
appreciates the convening of this debate, which
provides an opportunity for us to focus our attention on

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

the protection of the rights of women and girls, in
particular in situations of armed conflict and their
aftermath. I would also like to take this opportunity,
Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency.

reported to have been committed by security forces
against civilians caught in armed conflict and its
aftermath. In fact, no allegations of rape were made
against our security forces as they successfully
advanced against those terrorists.

Resolution 1325 (2000) has promoted greater
awareness across the United Nations system and the
international community about those most vulnerable
to sexual and physical harm as well as social,
economic and political disempowerment in conflict and
post-conflict situations. The international community
must work together to effectively put an end to those
most vicious and inhumane forms of gender-based
exploitation. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
recommendations.

It is also noteworthy that none of the mandate
holders of the United Nations has found any evidence
of such offences having been committed by our armed
forces during that campaign. One of the factors that
may have contributed to that record is the training
provided with the assistance of the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the prompt action
taken whenever allegations were made.

The empowerment of women is one of the most
effective mechanisms for their protection. My country,
Sri Lanka, ratified the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women
28 years ago, and has taken proactive steps to fully
implement its provisions through national legislation.
Our Constitution itself protects women’s rights. We
have also adopted a women’s charter that embodies the
principles of the Convention and provides for women’s
participation in peacebuilding through communitybased programmes. Sri Lanka has also established a
Ministry of Women’s Affairs, which spearheads
national programmes for the advancement of women
and the protection of their rights. Our penal code lists
rape as a serious offence punishable with rigorous
imprisonment, not exceeding 20 years, and provides
for the offender to pay compensation to the victim,
consistent with the determination of a court of law.
We also note with appreciation the report
(S/2009/465) of the Secretary-General to the Council
in pursuance of resolution 1820 (2008). We note with
concern the continued use of sexual violence against
civilians, widely and systematically, in particular
against women and girls in armed conflicts and their
aftermath.
Sri Lanka was embroiled in an armed conflict
against a brutal terrorist group for 27 years. That
conflict ended in May of this year with the defeat of
that terrorist group. Throughout their campaign to
defeat those terrorists, our security forces maintained
the highest discipline. We can proudly report that we
are not among the countries that the SecretaryGeneral’s report lists where grave sexual offences are

09-54249

I would like to cite for the benefit of the Council
the case of Krishanti Kumaraswamy, a 16-year-old
schoolgirl who was raped and murdered by 6 soldiers
on 7 August 1996, 13 years ago. Our Government
launched an investigation into the case. The six
soldiers involved were arrested, prosecuted and given
the maximum sentence of life imprisonment. I cite that
incident to illustrate the fact that strong and definitive
action against those responsible for committing acts of
sexual violence serves as a deterrent. In that context, it
is deeply regretted that reference has been made to
Sri Lanka, including it among countries where rape is
alleged to have been used as a tactic of war. In fact, not
even the terrorist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam,
despite their tendency to exaggerate incidents for
propaganda purposes, made such an allegation against
the security forces of Sri Lanka as they advanced to
eliminate them.
We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendation that equal attention be given to sexual
violence in all situations of concern where it is
perpetrated against civilians, and that the United
Nations remain engaged to take on a greater global
advocacy role on the issue of sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations. We also strongly
support the recommendation of the Secretary-General’s
that increased participation of women in post-conflict
governance and reconstruction should be ensured.
My delegation also welcomes the high-level
ministerial meeting planned for next year to
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.

25

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, and thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/465) on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
Belgium also wishes to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for having taken the initiative to
organize this very important debate.
With regard to the fight against sexual violence,
this past year will be a landmark in the annals of the
United Nations. In just over one year, the Security
Council has adopted resolution 1820 (2008), expanded
the follow-up mechanisms of resolution of 1612 (2005)
and recently, with the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), provided the United Nations with practical
tools to tackle sexual violence in the field.
Belgium, which had the privilege of participating
in the drafting and adoption of resolution 1820 (2008)
while it held a seat on the Security Council, welcomes
the cohesion and vision the Council has demonstrated
in this field throughout this period. We hope for the
swift appointment of the new special representative of
the Secretary-General on sexual violence and
establishment of the team of experts called for in
resolution 1888 (2009). We are ready to assist these
two mechanisms in carrying out their missions.
The fight against sexual violence is one thing; the
broader question of the role of women and their place
in peace negotiations, peacebuilding and reconstruction
processes is quite another. Resolution 1325 (2000) is
and must remain, in our view, the key instrument
guiding our actions in this area. However, as far as the
implementation of this resolution goes — excuse me
for speaking frankly, Mr. President — the international
community really has nothing to be proud of. We must
keep our eyes on the bigger picture.
Of course, some progress has been made. Fifteen
years after the Beijing Conference, notably thanks to
the industry of the Commission on the Status of
Women, we can affirm that questions relating to gender
have found their place in official United Nations
discourse. We also recognize the efforts that have been
made by the Secretary-General to ensure greater
representation of women at a high level in the United
Nations administration, even though there remains a
long way to go.

26

If we make the effort to look beyond our New
York bubble and cast an eye towards the situation on
the ground, we are forced to recognize that the
situation of women living in countries in conflict or
emerging from it has not really improved since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) nine years ago. For
Belgium, this status quo is unacceptable. It is
specifically the lives of such women that we committed
to improving when we adopted resolution 1325 (2000).
As far as Belgium is concerned, the situation is
very simple. A year from now, we will celebrate the
passage of 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). We therefore have one year left to fill the
gap that exists between the programmes envisioned in
New York or our capitals on the one hand, and, on the
other, their financing and implementation on the
ground. Without significant efforts in that direction, it
will be a sad anniversary indeed that we celebrate next
year.
What can we do in one year? Probably a great
deal more than we imagine. First, several essential
measures can be taken easily, almost overnight, and at
very little cost to the United Nations. Such measures
might include, for example, increasing the number of
women in United Nations mediation teams and in
particular the appointment of a female chief negotiator.
Similarly, a gender adviser should be appointed in the
Department of Political Affairs.
Secondly, and in order to ensure that the specific
needs of women are truly taken into account and
earnestly responded to in peacebuilding and
reconstruction processes, we must put our money
where our mouth is when it comes to gender budgeting.
We must allocate sufficient resources to women’s
programmes. This is an effort which it behoves each
and every one of us to undertake with urgency, not
only here but also at the national level.
Thirdly, we must support and encourage the
growing presence of women among the Blue Helmets
and police officers in peacekeeping operations. We can
all strive in this regard to develop women’s units and
enhanced expertise on gender issues within our own
armed forces and police forces.
Fourthly, Belgium cannot emphasize strongly
enough the importance and usefulness of developing
national action plans for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). Belgium is proud to announce
that it developed such a plan of action last year and is

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

ready to share its experience with any Member State
that may be interested.
In conclusion, with regard to developing such
national action plans, Belgium wonders whether the
Peacebuilding Commission could play a more
significant role in the countries in which it is active. In
the Central African Republic, the Commission, chaired
by Belgium, has already striven as far as possible to
ensure the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1820 (2008). It would take but a small additional
effort to develop a national action plan in partnership
with the national authorities, and Belgium is prepared
to help.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hoeeg (Denmark): I should like first of all to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency. I should also like to associate my
delegation with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union.
I should like specifically to thank the presidency
for having convened this meeting and thereby once
again directing the attention of the Security Council to
the indispensable and vital role of women in all efforts
to build and maintain peace and security.
The increased awareness of gender across the
United Nations system is indeed encouraging. In this
respect, Denmark welcomes the recent decision of the
General Assembly to establish a United Nations gender
entity. We hope that the entity will bring about the
much needed improvements to the work of the United
Nations, including in the area of international peace
and security. We look forward to receiving a proposal
on the details of the entity, as well as the early
appointment of the new under-secretary-general. We
must not lose momentum on this topic.

processes such as in peace negotiations,
constitutional and electoral reforms and
reconstruction and reintegration on the other”
(S/2009/465, para. 77).
That link between the impact of war on women and the
possibility of using the potential of women in peace
negotiations and reconstruction is precisely what we
must focus on in our implementation of the resolution.
Resolution 1325 (2000) is the very backbone of
Security Council resolutions on women and peace and
security, highlighting the necessity of addressing the
issue of women as peacebuilders as well as victims of
war. Women’s empowerment and respect for women’s
rights are among the prerequisites for sustainable peace
and stable, democratic development.
Let me highlight three key areas for future work
in this field. First, we must work to achieve greater
active participation of women in peacebuilding and
reconstruction. Secondly, we must enhance recognition
of the special needs and rights of women and girls
before, during and after armed conflict. Thirdly, we
must provide for the protection of girls and women
against violence, including gender-based violence such
as rape and sexual abuse, and we must end impunity
for gender-related crimes. Allow me in this respect to
take this opportunity to welcome the Council’s
adoption last week of resolution 1888 (2009), which
Denmark co-sponsored.

The report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2009/465) presents an
overview of achievements, gaps and challenges, as
well as recommendations for further actions to
accelerate the implementation of Resolution 1325
(2000). The report introduces its conclusions thus:

These three objectives are also those that
Denmark is prioritizing in its new national action plan
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000). In order to
be able to monitor progress, we have developed
indicators for each objective. Last year, Denmark
revised its national action plan. The new plan for 20082013 is based on experience from our first plan.
Among the lessons learned is that we need to ensure
the full cooperation of all stakeholders in the
peacekeeping and security processes, in all phases and
at all levels. In the new Danish plan, a stronger
emphasis is placed on using the untapped potential of
women and on involving them actively and on an equal
basis in peacebuilding processes and decision-making
at all levels and with a focus on visibility at the country
level.

“The significance of resolution 1325 (2000)
lies in the way it links the impact of war and
conflict on women on the one hand, and promotes
their participation in various peace and security

The Danish national action plan was formulated
in a participatory manner involving all relevant
national stakeholders. An annual dialogue with civil
society is planned and an inter-ministerial working

09-54249

27

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

group is responsible for reporting on the plan’s
implementation. I have elaborated in some detail on the
Danish national action plan and its objectives, since
resolution 1325 (2000) in itself will not do the trick. It
must be implemented. Action plans must be formulated
and actions undertaken and monitored. We fully share
the Secretary-General’s concern over the resolution’s
slow implementation, as implementation is obviously
the key to any resolution’s being worth the effort put
into finding the right words.
Resolution 1325 (2009) is a strong resolution,
and we all have an obligation to implement it
effectively. We see the adoption of today’s resolution
1889 (2009) as a step towards strengthening our joint
efforts in that respect. Some progress has been made
and should be recognized. Incorporation of gender
perspectives into peace processes is emerging, but
slowly. United Nations agencies and an increasing
number of Governments have developed action plans.
International cooperation is also increasing. That is
positive, but not enough.
Denmark fully agrees with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General on ensuring accountability.
We also emphasize the stated need for concerted efforts
to collect data. At the end of the day, it is results that
count. It is the responsibility of the United Nations
system, as well as of national Governments, to increase
the visibility of the results of initiatives undertaken to
ensure that the resolution has a genuine impact on the
role and status of girls and women in conflict.
We hope that we will soon come much closer to
full and equal participation of women in peace
processes, at all levels of negotiation and decisionmaking, and that we can not only effectively protect
the rights of women but also dramatically reduce and
eventually eliminate sexual violence. We have cases
that show that progress is possible. Rwanda is an
excellent example of how a country can emerge
successfully from conflict when women enjoy equal
rights and decision-making power. Resolution 1325
(2000), if and when it is effectively implemented in
other conflict situations, can provide similar, positive
results.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of October,

28

and to thank you for convening this meeting so early in
your presidency. There has recently been noteworthy
positive momentum in this Chamber concerning the
rights of women, and it is my hope that we can benefit
from that momentum here today.
Worldwide, women start at a disadvantage. In
some countries, this means wage discrepancies and
debates over harassment in the workplace. But in
conflict and post-conflict situations, the substantial ills
facing societies concerned are magnified with regard to
women. When a society is poor, proportionally more
women go hungry. When education or health care is
lacking, women and girls are the first to be deprived.
And when a nation faces substantial insecurity, women
find themselves more vulnerable, more restricted and
more cut off from necessary resources.
The situation of women in Afghanistan became
an issue of wider international interest when the
Taliban first began enforcing its brutal, misogynistic
social policies and Afghan women became hunted
people in their own homeland. Thus, when the Taliban
was toppled in 2001, it was seen at least partially as the
stroke that freed Afghan women from their chains.
Afghanistan and the international community made a
promise to each other that what happened under the
Taliban would never happen again. More importantly,
we made the same promise to the women of
Afghanistan.
Over the past eight years, we have kept those
promises to the best of our ability. The Afghan
Constitution guarantees equal rights to women and
representation in the Government. Afghanistan has
endorsed the Millennium Development Goals, is a
signatory to the Beijing Platform for Action and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, fully supports the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), and has put in place a legal and political
framework that protects and promotes the rights of
women. Beyond these legal initiatives, Afghan women
have seen tangible improvements in their daily lives,
including improved access to education, health care
and basic infrastructure. Afghanistan’s national action
plan for women ensures that women and girls receive
equal access to these resources.
Further, and perhaps most importantly, Afghan
women now play an active role in the socio-political
life of Afghanistan. Women have been appointed to

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

high governmental posts and comprise a guaranteed
percentage of representation in local and national
governing bodies alike. In the most recent election,
women ran for positions in provincial councils in
greater numbers than ever before, and there were even
two female candidates for President. More than 60,000
women were trained and volunteered as observers, poll
workers and ballot counters. And, despite the
increasingly turbulent security situation, more than
2 million women across the country came out to vote.
Despite these positive developments, Afghan
women do not enjoy the freedom and security they
deserve. In order to fully satisfy our promise to the
women of Afghanistan, we need to understand the roots
of the problems as well as the situations today that
frustrate our efforts.
First, enduring insecurity has always played a
central role in women’s suffering in Afghanistan. In the
past, insecurity caused a complete breakdown in
infrastructure and resources, resulting in backbreaking
poverty and lack of access to health care and basic
education. Today, restricted access to the most insecure
parts of the country perpetuates this situation and
hinders progress. The Taliban is increasingly targeting
civilians, particularly women and girls, to deny them
access to basic services and rights. In addition,
insecurity promotes a gun culture that values brute
force over the rule of law. The resulting danger keeps
women confined to their homes out of fear for their
safety and honour, further restricting their access to
services and public life.
Secondly, extremist ideologies of oppression have
primarily threatened women over the past 30 years.
Throughout the 1990s, the Taliban and other armed
groups engaged in severe violence against women.
Crimes against women, including sexual violence and
forced marriage, were justified and protected by
extremists. Unfortunately, as long as insecurity and
extremism persist, Afghanistan cannot be freed from
this perversion of perspective and action regarding
women.
In addition to those root causes, weak and fragile
State institutions in parts of Afghanistan have,
regrettably, restricted the Government’s ability to fully
protect the rights of women. An infant justice system
and police force do not yet have the training or the
resources to adequately investigate, prosecute and
punish crimes. And our underdeveloped bureaucracy

09-54249

has not yet acquired the capacities necessary to meet
the demands placed upon it. In Afghanistan, there is
not a lack of will for progress, but circumstances have
proved to be a formidable opponent to its achievement.
Despite these continuing challenges, Afghanistan
is committed to ensuring that all women fully enjoy
their rights in safety. With the help and support of the
international community, we are addressing weak and
insufficient governance through capacity-building and
the strengthening of our institutions and our security
apparatus. In that regard, we emphasize the importance
of the new focus of the international forces on
protecting the population, which will help to minimize
violence against women. Further, we are continually
trying to improve the legal status of Afghan women
and to uphold international juridical and legislative
standards, for example through the review of more than
60 of the more controversial articles of the proposed
Shia family relations law.
The Government of Afghanistan is committed to
representing the interests of all Afghans, male and
female, young and old. We are encouraging Afghan
women to take a proactive and vocal role in their
future, as that is essential to re-weaving the economic,
social and political fabric of Afghanistan. Above all, in
our political pursuit of national reconciliation, we must
not break the promise that we made to ourselves and to
Afghan women in 2001. We cannot betray women’s
rights and security in exchange for a shallow peace in
Afghanistan, because, in doing so, we would betray our
own hope for a stable future. Instead, we must unite
around the ideal of equal justice and rights for all.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Papua New Guinea.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): Sir, I wish you
and your delegation well during your presidency of the
Council for this month. We also commend the
delegation of the United States of America for its
leadership during the month of September. I should
also like to make two acknowledgements. We align
ourselves with the statement to be delivered later on
behalf of the Pacific small island developing States. I
also acknowledge my colleague from Australia for
having mentioned my country in his statement and for
all the assistance that his country is giving us.
Mr. President, as we approach the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) next year, we commend your

29

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

delegation for this timely debate and, specifically, for
focusing our collective attention on the theme
“Responding to the needs of women and girls in postconflict situations for sustainable peace and security”,
under the umbrella of the larger topic of women and
peace and security. Your delegation rightly notes in the
concept paper for this meeting (S/2009/490, annex)
that significant gains have been achieved in the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008), “particularly in enhancing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, including women and girls,
and promoting the participation of women in peace and
security processes” (para. 2).
While we note the foregoing, we also agree with
the important observation that your delegation makes,
that the situation is far from satisfactory, with gaps and
challenges remaining, particularly in the post-conflict
period, when women’s potential contribution to
peacebuilding is constrained owing to their exclusion
from the decision-making process and to inadequate
recognition of and financing for their needs.
There is no doubt that the international
community has fully accepted the fact that the
participation of women in conflict resolution and in the
post-conflict and peacebuilding process is an integral —
if not critical — part of the way forward in conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. We will continue to
support the mainstreaming of the participation of
women in the process.
We also make the observation that, even in the
pre-conflict stage — especially when the international
community becomes aware that a conflict is brewing —
the voices of women should be sought to determine the
nature and degree of the impending conflict situation.
As we alluded to in our statement in the debate on the
responsibility to protect held this year in the General
Assembly, too often, the voices of women are not
heard in the first instance, with this neglect having a
detrimental effect on many societies which eventually
fall into conflict.
Papua New Guinea’s own relevant but
unfortunate experience is borne out by the 10-year
conflict on the island of Bougainville, providing us
with an opportunity to reflect on the provisions of
resolution 1325 (2000). In April 1998, the Security
Council mandated a United Nations observer mission
to assist in and oversee the resolution of the conflict

30

and the peacebuilding process. The mission was
successfully completed in 2005.
As we approach next year’s fifth anniversary of
the withdrawal of the observer mission, we are mindful
of the observation made by Secretary-General in his
2009 report on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), in which he noted
that threats to peace are often most imminent in the
earliest post-conflict stage. This period offers a crucial
window of opportunity to ensure the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
While the restoration of peace continues on
Bougainville, we would respectfully submit that the
fragility alluded to by the Secretary-General cannot be
underestimated. As we continue to consolidate the
peacebuilding phase through the efforts of the
Government of Papua New Guinea, the autonomous
government of Bougainville, the United Nations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other
development partners, high demand will continue to be
placed on all parties to ensure that the hard-won peace
is never lost.
We commend the current United Nations project
entitled UN Project Bougainville, which aims to
provide
“support ... to continue to find ways to address
the long-term psychological impact that the
recent conflict has had on people through loss of
education, disruption to social services,
livelihood and income; successful completion of
the weapons disposal plan; implementation of a
number of peacebuilding initiatives and restoring
social services”.
However, in the context of today’s debate, I wish
to make the observation that perhaps there is a need for
more specific references to the provisions and the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). There
should be more clarity as to where and in which
specific areas women and girls should contribute in
this project.
On a regional basis, and in the wider application
of Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter —
especially in relation to the provisions of Article 52 —
the Pacific has made and continues to make every
effort to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000). Recently, the leaders of the Pacific Islands
Forum, at their fortieth Forum, adopted a

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

comprehensively packaged provision to address sexual
and gender-based violence, noting in paragraph 63 of
their communiqué that that phenomenon is
“now widely recognized as a risk to human
security and a potential destabilizing factor for
communities and societies alike. It remains
pervasive across the Pacific, and as it is still
considered a sensitive issue in most Pacific
cultures, its prevalence often goes underreported.
There is an urgent need to acknowledge the
prevalence of sexual and gender-based violence
in the Pacific at all levels of the community,
whether occurring in the domestic context or
during conflict and post-conflict situations”.
I would also mention that it is commendable that in our
region, many NGOs and civil society groups play
effective facilitation roles in enhancing the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) and, we would argue, should be continuously
engaged in that role.
All too often, women and children, including
girls, have been at the forefront of too many conflicts.
As innocent bystanders, they have been traumatized,
injured or killed and are often passed off as “collateral
damage”. The United Nations and its agencies — the
United Nations Development Programme, UNICEF
and, especially, the United Nations Development Fund
for Women — continue to do good work in the area of
conflict. While much has been achieved, much more,
obviously, needs to be done.
Lastly, there is a need, we argue, to tie into this
debate the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
and their achievement. Specifically, we note the need
to leverage the great opportunity offered by MDG 8:
that of partnerships. It is good, strong and strategic
partnerships that will help to strengthen the
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008) and 1888 (2009).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Argüello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by congratulating the Mission of
Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency and on
organizing this open debate, which reflects the resolute
commitment of the Security Council to the effective
follow-up and implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) almost 10 years since its adoption. We thank the

09-54249

Secretary-General
for
submitting
his
report
(S/2009/465). We endorse the recommendations
contained therein, in particular regarding the
establishment of monitoring and accountability
mechanisms for the implementation of the resolution at
the national, regional and international levels.
Argentina is among those countries that have
made progress in developing an implementation plan
for resolution 1325 (2000) in the defence sector. At the
same time, it is drafting a national plan that addresses
all the areas included in that instrument, and has
incorporated specific policies for the implementation
of resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual violence against
women in situations of armed conflict.
The participation of women in post-conflict
peacebuilding processes can be analysed from the
standpoint both of the United Nations system and of
the State. In the first case, it is essential to address the
issue of gender from the planning stage of activities in
the field and to sustain it in all phases of reconstruction
and peacebuilding. To that end, it is necessary to
improve the information systems of the various United
Nations agencies and programmes so as to have a full
understanding of the situation of women in a given
place. At the same time, the cooperation of Member
States is required in order to increase the participation
of women in the field as civilian, military or police
personnel.
From the viewpoint of the State, it is important
that the role of women in post-conflict reconstruction
activities be incorporated into national implementation
plans for resolution 1325 (2000). That involves not
only the deployment of a larger number of women in
the field, but also acknowledgement of the effective
role that women can perform in all stages of that
process, including as mediators in peace processes.
The empowerment of women is fundamental to
increasing their participation in reconstruction. The
new institutions should take into account the interests
and needs of women, and ensure their access to all
entities that guarantee the enjoyment of their rights.
However, at the same time, it is necessary to invest in
the education and training of women so that they can
play a role in the institutions thus established. That is
particularly important in the case of political parties,
electoral processes, judicial systems and security
institutions.

31

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

In that regard, it is crucial to work within the
State to put an end to gender violence. There is no
potential for empowerment in a climate of violence.
We therefore welcome the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009) with the broad support of United Nations
Members, and believe that its implementation will be
an effective step towards the eradication of impunity.
The role of troop-contributing countries in that task is
very important; in conjunction with the various United
Nations programmes and agencies, those countries are
in a position to advance joint initiatives to improve the
lives of the women in missions in which they
participate. Thus, for example, together with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women,
Argentina is currently organizing a workshop on
gender and human rights aimed at raising the gender
awareness of the Haitian authorities and people.
We believe that the systematic incorporation of
gender issues in post-conflict recovery projects cannot
be undertaken at the technical level or through
theoretical commitments, but that it depends to a large
degree on political will and adequate financing. Thus,
it is up to us to make that a reality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Viet Nam’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
present month and to express my appreciation to you
for convening this open debate. I also wish to extend
our congratulations to the United States delegation on
the successful deliberations during its presidency last
month.
I would like to extend my appreciation to the
Secretary-General for providing us with a progress
report (S/2009/465) on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and for the recommendations
contained therein. Ahead of the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October 2010,
we have an opportunity today in this open debate to
advance women’s participation in conflict prevention
and resolution and in peacebuilding.
Armed conflict is devastating to any human
being. However, it has disproportionate effects on
women and girls. Their voices are silenced in conflict
and their basic rights lost in the political and social
deterioration that accompanies conflict. They become
disempowered. A few days ago, the Security Council

32

unanimously adopted resolution 1888 (2009). That was
another commendable endeavour to further strengthen
the efforts of the international community to combat
sexual violence in armed conflicts.
There is still, however, much action that can be
taken by the international community to address the
challenges faced by women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations. We should continue to promote
at all levels awareness of the Geneva Convention of
1949 on the protection of civilians. The international
community should continue to devise strategies to ease
the bleak and harsh reality faced every day, particularly
by women and girls living in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Nonetheless, our strategies ultimately must not
merely treat women and girls as victims; they should
also be a central part of peace agreements. Women are
key partners in the post-conflict transformation
process. Women should be enabled and empowered to
play an active role in the many spheres of post-conflict
life beyond earning livelihoods by also participating in
political and peacebuilding processes. That should be
promoted in a systematic way.
The role of women in post-conflict situations is
paramount. Women serve as one of the main building
blocks and instruments of peace. Yet, due to continuing
violence during conflict, women face physical, mental
and social barriers in post-conflict situations that
undermine their role in peace. The international
community must recognize and address that challenge
effectively. Towards that end, international support
should meet the multidimensional needs of women and
girls in post-conflict situations. That objective needs to
be met with adequate funding.
During our deliberations on this issue last year,
Indonesia recognized the need to facilitate the full and
effective participation of women in all stages of peace
processes and peacebuilding. Indonesia supports more
women playing key roles in peacekeeping missions,
including as military and police personnel. For its part,
Indonesia has sent female personnel as military
observers, staff officers and members of our
contingents in the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

We should also ensure that peacekeepers have
adequate capacity to carry out provisions related to
gender issues. Moreover, it is important that provisions
on sexual violence within the mandates of
peacekeeping missions be in line with other provisions,
such as protection of civilians; they should be
developed with a clear and comprehensive concept.
Mandatory training for all peacekeeping personnel on
addressing sexual violence should be continued and
supported.
The international community must help to restore
peace in conflict areas with the participation of women.
We commend the continued effort to incorporate a
gender perspective in all policies and programmes of
the United Nations system, facilitated by a strong
gender entity within the United Nations. However, we
note that gender-targeted projects in post-conflict areas
remain limited. The United Nations should promote
gender role modelling, taking into consideration the
perspective of developing countries in post-conflict
situations.
The Security Council, in accordance with its
mandate should continue to address the root cause of
violence against women in armed conflict. At the same
time, the role of women should continue to be
promoted in sustaining peace following conflict.
For those reasons, Indonesia very much
welcomes the Council’s adoption of resolution 1889
(2009) earlier today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mrs. Kavun (Ukraine): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, and the delegation of Viet Nam for
organizing this open meeting and giving the Council
and Member States an opportunity to have a broad
exchange of views on such an important issue: the
empowerment of women for sustainable peace and
security.
We would also like to commend the determined
efforts of the Security Council members aimed at
finding effective ways to protect women and to ensure
their full participation in endeavours to maintain peace
and security. In this regard, we express our support for
Security Council resolution 1888 (2009), adopted last
month under the presidency of the United States.
Ukraine fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of Sweden on

09-54249

behalf of the European Union, and, in line with the
Union,
considers
gender
equality,
gender
mainstreaming and the empowerment of women not
only as important objectives, but also as the means to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals and an
essential part of the development agenda.
Ukraine, as a non-permanent member of the
Council back in 2000, was one of 15 countries that
voted in favour of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000). This decision of the Council, no doubt, was and
is the milestone document on empowerment of women.
We welcome the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of that resolution
(S/2009/465) and support its recommendations. At the
same time, my country shares concerns expressed by
the Secretary-General regarding the lack of
implementation of the resolution.
The question before us today is a complex one. In
response to the increased targeting of women and other
civilians that has become a shameful instrument of
contemporary warfare, the international community has
done a lot, but much still remains to be done. The
Security Council has adopted several resolutions on the
protection of children and civilians in armed conflict,
wherein it urged all parties to take special measures to
protect women and girls from rape and other forms of
sexual violence.
However, in spite of all international efforts,
women continue to be the most vulnerable victims of
armed conflict, targeted for the most brutal forms of
sexual violence. In addition to that, women also
experience the trauma of losing relatives and friends in
times of armed conflict and of having to take
responsibility for the care of surviving family
members. They also constitute the majority of refugees
and displaced persons.
My country is greatly concerned about this
situation and strongly condemns the targeting of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict. In this
regard, we welcome the Security Council’s efforts to
pay a special attention to the particular needs of
women affected by armed conflict when considering
action aimed at promoting peace and security.
It is important that the Secretary-General’s
reports to the Council dealing with specific conflict
situations and developments in the field also
incorporate gender perspectives in addressing various
aspects of conflict analysis and conflict resolution. It is

33

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

also important to be sure that personnel involved in
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding
operations have appropriate training on the protection,
rights and particular needs of women. Security Council
resolutions setting up or extending peacekeeping
operations should provide a clear mandate to address
the protection of women and girls affected by conflict
against all sexual violence, abduction, enforced
prostitution, trafficking and threats imposed by
military, paramilitary and other groups.
We believe that the Security Council has a special
responsibility to support women’s participation in
peace processes by ensuring appropriate gender
balance in United Nations peacekeeping missions. We
welcome the fact that the Council has already
recognized the important role of women in conflict
resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding and has
emphasized the importance of promoting an active and
visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective in
all policies and programmes when addressing armed or
other conflicts.
The presence of women in United Nations
missions can foster confidence and trust among the
local population, which are critical elements in any
peacekeeping mission. In performing their tasks,
women are perceived to be compassionate, unwilling to
opt for force over reconciliation and ready to listen and
learn, and they are widely seen as contributors to an
environment of stability and morality that fosters the
progress of peace.
At the same time, women are still
underrepresented in decision-making with regard to
conflict. Their initiatives and visions for peace and
security are rarely heard during peace negotiations. In
this regard, I would like to stress that women should
not be viewed primarily as victims of armed conflict;
the international community should use the potential of
women as agents of preventive diplomacy,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Being an active participant in United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, Ukraine has for years been
contributing women civilian police and military
observers to United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We reiterate our readiness to continue working
constructively with other Members States in order to
ensure the protection of women in armed conflicts and
women’s participation in peace processes.

34

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Puri (India): Let me begin by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council.
We are happy to participate in today’s open
debate on women and peace and security. The theme of
today’s discussion, namely, “Women and peace and
security: responding to the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations for sustainable peace and
security”, is both timely and pertinent. India attaches
very high importance to ensuring concrete action in
this area, and welcomes the report (S/2009/465) of the
Secretary-General.
We co-sponsored resolution 1888 (2009), which
was adopted last week under the presidency of the
United States. We were also happy to co-sponsor
resolution 1889 (2009), which was adopted today.
Nevertheless, let me underscore that the issue of
women and peace and security has implications that are
cross-cutting, as well as multi-dimensional. Therefore,
the need to discuss those issues in the universal
forum — the General Assembly — cannot be overemphasized.
India has consistently held that greater
participation by women in areas of conflict prevention,
peace negotiations, peacekeeping and post-conflict
reconstruction is the sine qua non condition for lasting
peace and security. As far as the United Nations is
concerned, its achievements have been at best modest,
in particular in terms of the deployment of women in
peacekeeping forces. Women currently comprise only
8 per cent of United Nations police officers, and about
2 per cent of the military personnel, deployed in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Given the critical
role of the United Nations in peacekeeping operations
and peacebuilding in post-conflict countries, we firmly
believe that the United Nations must lead by example.
Precisely for those reasons, India has contributed a
female peacekeeping unit of 100 personnel, which is at
present deployed in Liberia. That mission in Liberia
stands out as the only one of its kind among the
ongoing United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We commend the work of the Secretary-General
in mainstreaming the gender perspective in the United
Nations recruitment process. We hope that that process
will be institutionalized at the earliest possible time,
and that we will achieve a gender balance in the United

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Nations system, especially in the field, where is it most
urgently required. There is also great need to ensure
greater representation of women in high decisionmaking positions at the United Nations.

I would also like to register my delegation’s
thoughts and sincere condolences to the peoples of the
two Samoas, Indonesia and the Philippines after the
recent disasters that have befallen their communities.

It is a matter of deep regret that the international
community has to repeatedly debate the issue of sexual
and other forms of violence against women and girls in
situations of armed conflict. That abhorrent behaviour
has to be unequivocally, unambiguously and resolutely
condemned, whether it is perpetrated by parties to
armed conflicts, peacekeeping personnel, including its
civilian component, or humanitarian actors.

As we meet today to evaluate the progress made
so far in the implementation of this historic resolution,
my delegation is delighted to note that much progress
has been made in the implementation of the relevant
resolutions adopted in that regard at the levels of our
individual countries, the United Nations and other
related institutions. We are particularly encouraged by
the collective resolve over the years to address the
issue of gender equality and the advancement and
empowerment of women, which is evident in the
number of resolutions and presidential statements
adopted by the Council alone, not to mention those
adopted by the General Assembly.

The promotion and protection of the human rights
of women and girls in armed conflict continues to pose
a pressing challenge. There should be no tolerance for
gender-based violence. All cases of gender-based
violence in an armed conflict must be investigated, and
the perpetrators prosecuted. Let me assure the Council
that India will continue to contribute positively to
United Nations efforts to protect vulnerable groups, in
particular women and children, in conflict and
post-conflict societies. That needs to be done in a
comprehensive manner and with the active
involvement of all the departments and agencies of the
United Nations. I would also like to stress that the
international community needs to enhance cooperation
by providing new and additional financial resources
and by sharing experiences, expertise and capacity
building in areas of justice and rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): As you know,
Mr. President, Sierra Leone is in the labyrinth of a
post-conflict situation. We are also on the Council’s
agenda. We therefore welcome the convening of
another meeting on the issue of women and peace and
security, which this time focuses on measures taken to
respond to the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations. I would like to thank you, Sir,
for taking the initiative. I also congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of October. My thanks also go to the
entire membership of the Council and to the SecretaryGeneral for their continued engagement in promoting
and protecting the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, peacebuilding and the fight against
sexual violence in armed conflict.

09-54249

Almost two months ago, on 7 August, we met in
the Chamber to assess the progress we have all made in
implementing resolution 1820 (2008), which was
adopted in June of last year and pertained to the use of
sexual violence in armed conflict. During that debate,
we provided a detailed account of our own experience
with sexual exploitation and abuse, which was used as
a tactic of war by the belligerent forces during our
decade-long civil war. We also highlighted the
legislative and administrative measures adopted to
address that scourge, as well as the challenges faced in
their implementation.
We made concrete proposals on how we could
work in concert to prevent and respond to sexual
violence, including with regard to the need to appoint a
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security to lead our collective
response to the use of sexual violence in armed
conflict. That is why we wholeheartedly welcome the
recent adoption, on 30 September, of resolution 1888
(2009) to complement resolution 1820 (2008), which
was the first-ever resolution to recognize the threats
posed by sexual violence to the maintenance of
sustainable peace and security. We further reiterate our
support for the Secretary-General’s call for the
appointment of a Special Representative to enhance
effective coordination.
In addition to the international human rights
instruments dedicated to the promotion and protection
of the rights and welfare of women and children that
we have ratified, Sierra Leone, as a post-conflict

35

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

country, has continued to demonstrate its strong
commitment to promoting the agenda of women and
girls by mainstreaming their concerns into our national
development policies, programmes and plans — as
evident in our setting up of a ministry devoted to the
affairs of women and children, the adoption of a
national policy on both gender mainstreaming and the
advancement of women, the amendment of laws
considered to be discriminatory against women, as well
as the inclusion of this issue into our poverty reduction
strategy paper.
Consistent with those commitments, and with a
view to ensuring that our hard-earned peace and
democracy are sustained, we have continued to adopt
practical measures to respond to the needs of our
women and girls, especially in areas such as decisionmaking and women’s full participation in, and
ownership of, peacebuilding and recovery processes,
health,
education,
protection
against
abuse,
exploitation and violence and combating HIV/AIDS.
Driven by the conviction that, as principal
victims of war, women and their children should be
brought on board in peacemaking, peacebuilding and
peace consolidation processes, as well as with regard to
national recovery, some practical measures have been
taken by our Government along those lines. In the
years since the Lomé Peace Agreement and the Beijing
Conference, there has been considerable improvement
in the status of women in Sierra Leone at the national,
regional and international levels vis-à-vis their
participation in public affairs.
There has also been an increase in women’s
representation in decision-making positions. Women
are now appointed to important ministerial positions in
the areas of foreign affairs, gender and housing. They
were already represented in 2000 in the Ministry of
Development and Economic Planning. Women have
headed important Government commissions, such as
the National Commission for Democracy and Human
Rights and, quite recently, the National Electoral
Commission. They have also been appointed
chairpersons of strategic parastatal bodies and given
ambassadorial positions. As I speak, we now have
more female heads of chancery in our diplomatic
missions than ever before.
In the security sector, one of the steps we have
taken to demonstrate our commitment to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) was to

36

establish an institution known as Women in Security
Sector-Sierra Leone, which has a mandate to promote
the issue of women, peace and security. As a further
demonstration of our commitment to see women in
management positions in the security sector, a female
combatant officer was promoted to the rank of
brigadier and appointed assistant chief of defence staff
for personnel and training. Similarly, a senior female
police officer is now the assistant inspector-general of
police for professional standards.
Producing a child-friendly version of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission’s report was meant to
increase the involvement of children in the process.
The 50/50 Group, a non-partisan organization
that works to increase women’s influence in public
policy through sensitization has improved the public
perception of women in politics. In its drive for gender
equality, it has brought on board other partners to look
into laws that are discriminatory against women.
In 2002 and 2004 we organized a series of nationwide training programmes for female aspirants to both
parliamentary and local government elections. The
training was meant to provide female aspirants with the
relevant skills to overcome some of the barriers that
have over the years inhibited them from taking an
active part in politics. We are also raising awareness
for a 30 per cent quota for women’s representation in
the Cabinet.
In 2001, we embarked upon setting up a task
force for women in politics within the Ministry of
Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs to work
on reducing barriers to women’s participation in
politics, increase the registration of women voters and
advocate for women’s political empowerment.
However, the task force, which would have been in a
better position to lobby and advocate for an increase in
the participation of women in public activities, could
not be sustained owing to the lack of funds.
It is also important to note the Government’s
support for the Mano River Women’s Peace Network,
an organization comprised of women from Guinea,
Liberia and Sierra Leone that has worked to
complement nationally driven initiatives to consolidate
peace, prevent future conflicts and restore the
confidence needed to establish sustainable peace and
security, not only in the Mano River Basin but also in
Africa as a whole.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

A major priority of my Government has been a
commitment to ensure that our women and girls enjoy
the highest attainable standards of health in our bid to
achieve the objective of healthy living. In that regard,
we have continued to take initiatives that are consistent
with Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5 by
embarking upon extensive programmes to enhance
maternal and infant health care. The sensitization
campaign on immunization, family planning, obstetric
care and the training of traditional birth attendants,
among other actions, is contributing to a reduction in
maternal and infant mortality rates.
Even in the face of the current global economic
meltdown, the Government of Sierra Leone has not
relented in adopting measures to mitigate the impact of
the crisis on health care delivery services for our
women and girls by adopting a gender-sensitive
response to the issue. The Government of Sierra Leone
has made commitments to support the right of women
and girls to basic health care delivery services. For
instance, quite recently, at a high-level event on the
sidelines of the general debate that was co-hosted by
the British Prime Minister and the President of the
World Bank on the theme “Investing in Our Common
Future: Healthy Women, Healthy Children — More
money for health and more health for the money”,
President Ernest Bai Koroma of Sierra Leone made a
commitment to launch a new health sector strategic
plan to respond to challenges such as the high cost of
drugs and inadequate facilities and health care delivery
services, in particular for those residing in rural areas.
The President views those challenges as detrimental to
his agenda for change in the area of health; and thus
the need for the new health policy sector strategic plan,
which is intended to achieve the following.
First, the plan aims to introduce a fair health care
financing mechanism that includes the protection of
women and children through the abolition of fees
charged for services. Secondly, it is intended to move
us towards universal coverage, especially with regard
to safe motherhood and child health. Thirdly, it will
endeavour to improve collaboration with partners,
including in strengthening the transparency and
accountability of health spending and in enhancing
accountability to citizens. In order to achieve those
priorities, the President also pledged to increase health
sector spending to the 15 per cent target of the Abuja
Declaration.

09-54249

Under the Roll Back Malaria programme, the
President of Sierra Leone joined other African leaders
to launch an African leaders’ malaria alliance. At the
same time, he made another commitment to defeat
malaria, which is a major killer of children and women,
and in particular of pregnant women.
We have made significant strides in the area of
education by adopting affirmative action to promote
girl-child education — a measure taken to eliminate
gender disparity in education. In order to translate that
into reality, we have introduced free and compulsory
primary education and created incentives to encourage
the retention of girls in schools. That has led to a
higher primary school enrolment of girls in recent
years.
In addressing the need for those children whose
educations were interrupted by the war, or who never
had the opportunity to attend school, we have modified
some of our education programmes to cater to children
10 to 15 years of age by introducing a programme
providing complimentary rapid education for primary
schools, in which the normal six-year primary
education programme has been compressed to three
years in order to give beneficiaries an opportunity to
eventually join the formal education system.
Several other measures taken to eliminate gender
disparity and promote the education of the girl child
have also yielded positive results. For instance, more
parents are now proud to send their girls to school,
even in regions of the country that were previously
against the education of girls.
I do not wish to repeat all that was said in the
previous debate on the use of sexual violence in armed
conflict. Rather, I would like to place on record the
following additional measures taken to contain that
phenomenon.
First, with assistance from UNICEF and other
development partners, we have worked to reunite waraffected children with their families and have been able
to successfully reintegrate them into their communities.
Secondly, we have set up a couple of technical and
vocational training institutions in most areas in the
country to keep them gainfully engaged. Thirdly, we
have enacted a law against human trafficking to
address the problem of human trafficking and
abduction as a cross-cutting issue.

37

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

The global fight against the HIV and AIDS
pandemic remains a priority of the Government of
Sierra Leone. That is why we see the move to develop
policies and guidelines relating to children and HIV
and AIDS, such as support for the prevention of
mother-to-child transmission, as well as pediatric care,
as appropriate and timely.
With barely a year until the tenth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) in October
2010, we in Sierra Leone still believe that, in spite of
the gains accrued thus far, there is still a need for more
action if we are to fully implement resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions.
For our part, given our post-conflict situation,
much has been done to promote and protect the rights
of our women and girls. Nonetheless, we earnestly
believe that we still need to do more if our women and
girls are to fully enjoy their inalienable right to a life
free of discrimination, abuse and exploitation.
Achieving women’s full and equal participation and
representation at all levels of Government, in
Parliament and in the judiciary, which already headed
by a female chief justice and with no less than three
female Supreme Court judges and a woman heading
the Office of Administrator and Registrar General, is
still a major objective of our Government.
The capacity of our national machinery for the
advancement of women is, however, restricted by a
lack of much-needed human and financial resources.
Health and education facilities remain inadequate,
especially in rural areas. Cultural practices that favour
boys over girls still exist, though on a minimal scale.
We have yet to introduce human rights education,
which has the potential to increase the quality of
education and respect for all in the learning
environment, into our school curriculum. The
increasing number of street children, especially child
hawkers, those orphaned by AIDS and other vulnerable
young people, has become a critical issue, particularly
in the face of the HIV and AIDS pandemic. There is
also a need to pay attention to the matter of training
personnel to deal with issues such as human
trafficking, juvenile justice and the sexual abuse of
children.
In the light of these constraints, I would like to
avail myself of this opportunity to thank all our
development partners for their continued support for
our efforts at empowering our women and at

38

transforming them from victims of sexual abuse,
violence and exploitation into respected members of
our global community. Only through sustained
collaborative efforts can we succeed in promoting their
rights and contain gender-based violence. That is why
we will always recognize the role of the United
Nations, particularly the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, in efforts to make women
and gender issues central to the peacebuilding agenda
of the United Nations.
Let me conclude on the note that, as a nation
emerging from a conflict situation, Sierra Leone has
done much indeed to promote and protect the needs of
our women and girls. With continued political will and
commitment, we earnestly believe that we can still do
more with the available resources given the right level
of international support, assistance and collaboration.
The President: I again request speakers to kindly
limit their statements to no more than five minutes in
order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. I thank representatives for their
understanding and cooperation.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Serbia.
Mr. Starčević (Serbia): Let me first thank the
Security Council for the opportunity to address it today
on the very important topic of responding to the needs
of women and girls in post-conflict societies. I would
also like to thank the President of the Council, Mr. Le
Luong Minh, Ambassador of Viet Nam, and the
delegation of Viet Nam for organizing this open debate.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Sweden on behalf of the European
Union, and I will therefore limit myself to a few
remarks on the issue.
Several side events held during the course of the
sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, such as
the marking of the sixtieth anniversary of the adoption
of the Geneva Conventions, the ministerial meetings on
the implementation of the Paris Commitments and on
violence against girls, as well as the adoption of
resolution 1888 (2009) on women and peace and
security in this body last week, have clearly indicated
the need for more concerted and decisive action at the
national and international levels in dealing with the
most vulnerable population in conflict and postconflict societies.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

My country joined the sponsors of resolution
1888 (2009), thus expressing its determination and
commitment to work with the international community,
as well as at the national level, on the full
implementation of the cornerstone resolution 1325
(2000), the tenth anniversary of whose adoption we
will commemorate next year, and of all subsequent
Security Council resolutions on that issue. I believe
that resolution 1889 (2009), adopted today, will further
contribute to our common goals of eliminating all
forms of violence against women and girls, improving
women’s participation in post-conflict planning and
peacebuilding, and their full participation in decisionmaking.
The last decade of the twentieth century was
marked by intolerance, violence and conflicts in the
region of the former Yugoslavia. Vulnerable groups,
such as women, children, the elderly and others, were
indeed the most affected by those tragic events. Even
today, 10 years after the countries of the South-Eastern
European region significantly improved their
cooperation in their advance towards membership of
the European Union, Serbia continues to provide
shelter to more than 90,000 refugees from
neighbouring countries and over 200,000 internally
displaced persons (IDPs) from our southern province
of Kosovo, many of whom are single mothers, girls and
older women.
Serbia has spared no efforts in providing
assistance and support to these populations during their
protracted displacement. We firmly believe that there is
a need for a more visible and substantial engagement
of the international community in the province of
Kosovo, as well as stronger regional cooperation, to
find a durable and sustainable solution for the refugees
and IDPs.
With the painful experience of conflict behind us
and after the democratic changes in the Republic of
Serbia, my country has embarked upon a
comprehensive process of democratic reforms in the
fields of the economy, justice, security and human
rights. In those processes, the empowerment of women
through their full engagement in decision-making has
been recognized as vital to the ongoing reforms.
During the past 10 years, we have made significant
efforts to ensure greater representation of women in
Parliament and other decision-making bodies.

09-54249

Today, in Serbia, women hold many high-ranking
positions in all three branches of the Government. The
Speaker of Parliament, as well as the Ministers of
Finance, Justice and Youth and Sports, are women. The
increase in the number of women in the judiciary is
also significant. The Presidents of the Constitutional
Court and of the Supreme Court are women. Women
judges are dealing with the most sensitive cases, such
as processing war crimes, organized crime and
corruption. The presence of women in the police and
the military is also increasing.
Bearing in mind the importance of the
engagement of women in peacekeeping, peacemaking
and peacebuilding operations, the Republic of Serbia
has so far deployed 14 women in its contingents in
several United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Last but not least, recognizing the significance of
the role of civil society in addressing the issues of
women and girls in post-conflict situations, I would
like to mention that in Serbia there is a very vibrant
network of non-governmental organizations led by
women, who are very active in addressing the issues of
war crimes, transitional justice and reconciliation.
In conclusion, let me assure the Council that the
Republic of Serbia will continue to support the efforts
of the Security Council on these important issues and
that we will strive to contribute to the full
implementation of its resolutions, including the one
adopted today.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): Let me begin by
aligning myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of the presidency of the European Union
(EU), as well as by thanking you, Mr. President, for
making this an open debate. The very large number of
speakers today makes clear the importance that the
membership of the United Nations as a whole attaches
to the subject of women and peace and security.
There are two dimensions to this subject. The
first one is women and girls as victims of violence. As
the discussion in the Security Council last week again
made clear (see S/PV.6195), such violence is often
employed as a weapon of war. That necessitates a
different way of operating in crisis management and
peacekeeping. For instance, military patrols need to
take place between villages and water points at the

39

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

crack of dawn to protect women fetching water. We
also need to be aware that brutal forms of violence
against women in sudden outbreaks of violence can be
early warning signs of instability.
But even women who have been violated have a
voice. These are not merely voices of victims, but
voices of citizens who want to contribute directly to
conflict prevention, the maintenance of peace and postconflict reconstruction in their countries. That is the
second dimension: the empowerment of women in
matters of peace and war.
We therefore welcome resolution 1888 (2009),
which the Council adopted last week, as well as
resolution 1889 (2009), which was adopted today and
which the Netherlands would have wished to sponsor.
That is because those resolutions give women more of
a voice in these matters — for example, through the
country reports to the Security Council. They also give
us new tools, such as the set of indicators that the
Secretary-General is requested to submit for use at the
global level to track implementation. These can be very
useful for monitoring progress and for results-oriented
planning.
Furthermore, we welcome the fact that, in the
resolution adopted this morning, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office are
encouraged to systematically include women in
peacebuilding efforts and to improve the participation
of women in political and economic decision-making
from the earliest stages of the peacebuilding process.
But enhancing the role of women in matters of peace
and war is not limited in its impact to countries in
which conflicts take place or have taken place, it also
has consequences for the other Members of the United
Nations.
As far as military operations are concerned, a
study by Sweden, Norway, Finland and the Netherlands
on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the
provincial reconstruction teams in Afghanistan showed,
among other things, that the effectiveness of the
International Security Assistance Force in cooperating
with, and winning the trust of, the Afghan population is
improved if the armed forces of troop-contributing
nations include more women. Incorporating more
women into armed forces is an important element of a
coherent and comprehensive approach to the issue that
we are discussing today. A seminar being organized by
Spain and the Netherlands, to take place on 13 and

40

14 October in Madrid, will focus on how to make
progress in that respect.
This also implies working closely with civil
society in our countries, as we are doing in the
Netherlands. We have had a very positive experience in
working
together
with
non-governmental
organizations, both in developing and implementing
and monitoring our national action plan.
As far as our bilateral cooperation with other
countries is concerned, let me give the Council two
examples. Burundi and the Netherlands collaborate in
the integration of elements of resolution 1325 (2000)
into the ethics training course for Burundi’s uniformed
services. And in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Netherlands supports the establishment of
collective funding arrangements to address sexual and
gender-based violence under the stabilization plan for
that country, in collaboration with its Government and
with other donors.
Let me end by underlining that our discussion
today forms part of the wider debate on gender issues
and should also be seen in the light of the decision by
the General Assembly to establish a United Nations
composite gender entity (see General Assembly
resolution 63/311). We look forward to an early
proposal on the details of that entity, including
regarding its cooperation with the relevant advisers and
special representatives. The coherence of United
Nations efforts with regard to gender issues should be
ensured. We therefore expect the swift appointment of
the new Under-Secretary-General. As the Swedish
Ambassador said earlier today in his statement on
behalf of the EU, we must not lose momentum on this
matter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Morejón (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): Over
the past 60 years, the United Nations has played a
central role in combating all forms of discrimination
and violence against women. It has also made a
contribution to redoubling efforts to promote gender
equality, and in particular to the establishment of an
internationally agreed normative framework that
provides guidance for the efforts of Governments and
other stakeholders. In following up those efforts,
Ecuador has ratified every relevant international treaty.
We have also sponsored various General Assembly
resolutions on this issue.

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

The Security Council’s adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) marked a milestone in acknowledging the
importance of mainstreaming the gender perspective at
all stages of a peace process. That resolution also
reflected the Council’s interest in the situation of boys
and girls in armed conflict, the protection of civilians
and the prevention of conflict.
Ecuador has taken due note of the first report
(S/2009/362) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1820 (2008), which refers
to various efforts by States to eradicate this evil.
Despite the significant efforts led by the SecretaryGeneral and the Security Council, Ecuador believes
that it is urgent to achieve greater cooperation among
the principal organs of the United Nations, bearing in
mind that the General Assembly is the universal body
charged with providing a normative framework to
guide the decisions of all States.
Ecuador believes that all Member States, as well
as the United Nations system, should more coherently
and systematically apply international law and
implement the programmes and policies aimed at
combating ongoing complex problems hindering the
achievement of the rights of women. Since 2008, my
country has had a new constitutional framework that
lays the foundations for participatory democracy. The
preamble of our Constitution also acknowledges the
rights of women and provides for a way to move from
equality on paper to genuine equality by identifying
how those who have been victims of inequality and
discrimination due to tradition, history, culture or
religious attitudes are to be treated.
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize that, in an
effort to ensure equality between men and women,
Ecuador is working to identify the most appropriate
way of setting up a national gender equality council.
The challenges are numerous. But there is a
reality that must be changed. Allow me, therefore, to
reiterate the decision of the Government and the people
of Ecuador to continue to cooperate with the
international community to ensure the right of women
to lives free from violence and to guarantee their full
participation in mediation and negotiation processes,
all aspects of peacekeeping operations, the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the post-conflict
reconstruction process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

09-54249

Ms. Medina-Carrasco (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to thank you for
organizing this important debate on a most important
issue.
We should like our statement to serve as a
reflection on this issue. We are concerned at the tone of
a number of statements, and we should like our
delegation’s statement on behalf of the Government of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to be properly
understood.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
respectful of the norms of international law and the
commitments undertaken in that context. Violations of
women’s human rights, given their many social,
economic and political implications, undermine human
coexistence and constitute serious crimes that
compromise the dignity of women, as established in
various instruments of international law. The
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela reaffirms its clear
and firm commitment to promoting and respecting
women’s human rights and its support for the
elimination of all forms of violence against women,
including sexual violence.
Venezuela believes that all relevant United
Nations human rights entities should address the
problems experienced by women in situations of armed
conflict. We draw attention to the role that should be
played by the Human Rights Council in that regard.
We express our concern, however, at the fact that
the Security Council continues to address General
Assembly agenda items, which are outside the scope of
its purview. That does not contribute to the adequate
and balanced consideration of such items.
With regard to peacekeeping operations, we
believe that the Security Council cannot be both judge
and party. We are concerned at the possibility that,
under article 16 of the Rome Statute, the Council could
indefinitely stall an investigation or proceedings being
conducted by the International Criminal Court in this
area, particularly when agents or officials of a
permanent Council member are involved. We are
referring in particular to the Council member that
denies the Court’s competence and demands that
countries into which it makes military incursions grant
diplomatic immunity to its agents and its military and
security personnel. That situation strongly promotes

41

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

impunity for serious crimes against women and
children. This is an aspect that should be of concern to
all United Nations Member States.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela fully
supports all efforts made within the General Assembly,
its funds and its programmes to ensure the
comprehensive consideration of the advancement of
women and their genuine empowerment in the context
of an egalitarian and just society that respects their
rights.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Colombia.
Mr. Montoya (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. We thank you for issuing the concept paper
(S/2009/490, annex) serving as the basis for today’s
discussion.
Colombia’s
experience
demonstrates
the
importance of implementing gender strategies that
include the social, economic and cultural dimensions,
among other factors. Thus, since 2003, the national
Government has been carrying out an affirmative
policy that ensures women’s empowerment in all areas.
For example, mindful of the particular needs of women
at the local level, we are promoting the establishment
and enhancement of women’s community councils,
which are spaces for discussion in departments and
municipalities, created to increase their participation
and increase the visibility of the role that they play in
development in their regions. This tool links women to
the Government’s policies and programmes, promotes
development with gender equity and encourages or
strengthens gender mainstreaming processes at the
regional level.
In that connection, we are advancing the rural
women’s agenda, which includes actions to enhance
respect for and guarantee the effective enjoyment of
rural women’s rights. The Office of the Adviser on
Women’s Equality, a governmental entity, has launched
a project to increase the visibility of and enhance the
situation of indigenous women, young women and
girls, as part of the policy entitled “Women: Builders
of Peace and Development”. To that end, three regional
laboratories and a central forum have been established
to create spaces for dialogue and raise awareness about
the importance of the efforts being made by women in
their communities. The space created for dialogue

42

between the Office of the Adviser and the indigenous
women participating in the three laboratories is
contributing to the development of a joint programme
of work that includes efforts being made by women in
their own areas. The goal is to develop an affirmative
action plan for indigenous peoples, with an emphasis
on women.
In addition, with the support of the European
Union and citizen support, the programme Laboratories
of Peace has been established in violence-affected
areas. Through the programme, with the tools of the
rule of law, we are exploring courses of action that
Colombian society and local communities must take to
address violence and promote sustainable development.
Women are benefiting from and/or carrying out
projects to promote peace in their areas.
In the peacebuilding process, entities of the
Colombian State are working together to ensure the
inclusion of a gender-based perspective, as well as full
participation by women in violence prevention.
Furthermore, we have developed guidelines for
assistance to displaced persons, taking a gender-based
approach. The objective of the guidelines is to assist in
consolidating public policy aimed at displaced persons,
in order to provide effective assistance that meets the
specific needs of women and addresses the impact of
displacement on them. The guidelines were based on
three guiding principles: participation, a rules-based
approach and a gender-based approach. They are
structured around three phases: prevention and
protection, emergency humanitarian assistance, and
socio-economic stabilization.
Additionally, the State has made efforts to ensure
access to justice and special protection for women
victims of displacement and sexual violence
perpetrated by illegal groups. The Office of the
General Prosecutor is promoting a comprehensive
action strategy to uphold the fundamental rights of
women victims. The programme is based on a specific
methodology to address the impact of this phenomenon
on Colombian women.
Our national policy for the social and economic
reintegration of those who have left illegal armed
groups seeks to ensure that institutional actions fully
incorporate a gender-based approach. In particular,
assistance to women, children and ethnic minorities in
the reintegration process is taken into account by
identifying the characteristics of population groups and

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

promoting the family’s dynamic role in the process.
Likewise, we are carrying out a programme to prevent
violence in families that include reintegrated persons.
Strengthening the role and the capacity of
women, as well as respect for their rights, is a central
aspect for the Government of Colombia. In such
efforts, the assistance of the United Nations system and
the international community is essential. My country,
as a member of the group Friends of 1325, will
continue to closely follow developments in the area of
women and peace and security. Colombia reaffirms its
commitment to the implementation of policies, plans
and programmes that broaden and strengthen the role
of women in peacebuilding.
The President: I now call on the representative
of the Federated States of Micronesia.
Mr. Lippwe (Federated States of Micronesia): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States represented at the United
Nations, namely, Fiji, Palau, Papua New Guinea, the
Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own
country, the Federated States of Micronesia. I wish to
start by thanking the Viet Nam presidency of the
Security Council for convening this important event.
We acknowledge and welcome the progress that has
been made in implementing resolution 1325 (2000) as
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report on women
and peace and security (S/2009/465). In particular, we
note that there has been progress in developing the
capacity of both Member States and United Nations
bodies to implement the resolution. Awareness of the
issue of women and peace and security and the
capacity to address that issue on the ground are of
course critical to successful implementation, and we
encourage the focus on this matter.
However, as the Secretary-General’s report notes
and as the distinguished speakers before me have also
remarked today, much work remains to be done to
achieve implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). We
note with concern that significant progress is still
needed to ensure the equal and substantive
participation of women at all levels in peace and
security decision-making, particularly in negotiations
in post-conflict situations. And we are deeply
concerned that peace agreement negotiations and
planning for disarmament, demobilization and

09-54249

reintegration continue to take place
consideration of resolution 1325 (2000).

with

little

In
overcoming
the
obstacles
to
the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), the Pacific
small island developing States strongly support the
need identified in the Secretary-General’s report to
establish effective monitoring and accountability
mechanisms for implementation at the global, regional
and national levels and for the Security Council to
establish these mechanisms as a matter of urgency.
Without such mechanisms we consider it difficult to
make further substantive progress. This should be part
of an overall strengthened effort, with increased
funding, on the part of the Security Council, as well as
all United Nations bodies and Member States, to
implement resolution 1325 (2000). Also, in order to
provide a more coordinated approach to the work on
women and peace and security, we support the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a special
representative for this area.
In discussing the needs of women and girls in
post-conflict situations under the general topic of
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), it is critical to
consider prevention of conflict situations, particularly
in relation to the security implications of climate
change. Unabated climate change risks increased
violent conflict in many parts of the world, with its
consequent impact on women and girls, potentially
beyond the capacity of the international community to
adequately respond.
The Pacific small island developing States raised
the issue of the link between climate change and
security last year at the open debate on women and
peace and security convened by the Security Council
under the presidency of the People’s Republic of
China. Since then, we have seen the unanimous
adoption of General Assembly resolution 63/281
relating to the possible security implications of climate
change. This was the first time that the international
community recognized an explicit connection between
climate change and international peace and security.
Pursuant to paragraph 2 of the resolution, the
Secretary-General will prepare a report on this matter,
and we thank him sincerely for his work on this
important issue. We would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Governments of
Finland and Liberia for organizing the successful HighLevel Event on peace and security through women’s
leadership held in New York last month.

43

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

Climate change has adverse effects on the
distribution and quality of natural resources such as
fresh water, arable land, coastal territory and marine
resources. Such changes can increase competition for
available resources, weaken Government institutions
and lead to internal and international migration.
Furthermore, such adverse effects can create obstacles
that substantially interfere with the ability of nations to
maintain territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence. These effects of climate change create a
severe risk of increased violent conflict in many parts
of the world, and along with it the consequent impact
on women and girls, both during and after conflict. We
consider that climate change severely jeopardizes
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Our understanding of the directions taken by the
Secretary-General in his forthcoming report on the
possible security implications of climate change is that
he emphasizes the need to focus on ways to prevent
such security issues, and we fully support that
approach. By adequately responding to the climate
crisis, the international community could prevent likely
conflict situations triggered by climate change, thus
protecting the rights of women and children. This is an
opportunity that we must seize. In addition, we
reiterate our call for climate change and security to be
an annual item on the United Nations agenda and for a
focal point to be established within the Organization to
monitor and respond to the growing security
implications of climate change. If the United Nations
responds to the threat of climate change, it has the
potential to truly prevent conflict and thereby reduce
violence against women.
The Pacific small island developing States
confirm their commitment to the full implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), and with the support of all
Member States, we are hopeful of further advancement
as we move towards the resolution’s tenth anniversary.
The President: I now invite His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Acting Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, to speak.
Mr. Antonio (African Union): Mr. President, on
behalf of the African Union, I wish to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council,
and I join previous speakers in commending you for
organizing this open debate. Our appreciation also goes
to Ambassador Rice for the excellent work she has
done during the month of September. We are also

44

grateful to the various speakers who briefed the
Council this morning.
As I am participating in a Council meeting for the
first time in my new capacity as Acting Permanent
Observer of the African Union, I would like to take this
opportunity to state our gratitude to the Council for the
support and cooperation accorded my predecessor,
Mrs. Lila Ratsif Andrihamanana. The African Union
also deeply appreciates the attention this Council
continues to devote to issues of concern to Africa, and
I look forward to working with the Council.
The African Union welcomes open meetings such
as the one we are holding today, since this enables us
to share information on successes, opportunities and
lessons learned and to reflect together on the new
synergies needed to improve the content and delivery
of concrete action in the field. In this connection and in
support of the earlier statement by the Netherlands, the
African Union welcomes as a major step forward
General Assembly resolution 63/311 authorizing the
establishment of a composite agency on gender
equality to be headed by an Under-Secretary-General,
and urges the Security Council to lend its full support
to the Secretary-General’s efforts in this area in the
coming period.
We are also pleased that next year’s tenth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) coincides with
the start of the African Women’s Decade, 2010-2020,
declared by the Assembly of the African Union in
January 2009, and which we hope will also open other
avenues for further strengthening cooperation between
our two organizations in working toward greater
gender equality.
Turning to the specific topic of today’s debate,
the African Union has continued to develop specific
policies and institutional capacity for addressing the
challenges women face during conflict and its
aftermath. Key measures taken include the
strengthening of the African Women’s Committee on
Peace and Development and the adoption of the
African Union Gender Policy by the Assembly of the
Union in January this year. The Policy stresses the
need to reinforce respect, equality and the human
dignity of men and women in all areas, and to enforce
zero tolerance for gender-based violence, sexual
harassment, assault, rape, gender stereotyping, sexism
and abusive language, in particular in situations of
conflict. It further stresses the need to ensure adequate

09-54249

S/PV.6196 (Resumption 1)

sanction and punishment for such acts, and underscores
the need for the full implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). It also stresses that the Paris Principles and
Guidelines on Children Associated with Armed Forces
or Armed Groups should be used as the basis for
programmatic interventions in Africa, which must
include measures to prevent sexual abuse as a weapon
in armed conflict.
The African Union Gender Policy also calls for
the mobilization of women leaders to participate in
peace mediation and related processes, an objective
that has been mentioned by many speakers in this open
debate. The African Union is further committed under
the Policy to working to address human and drug
trafficking and to articulate gender perspectives
relating to child labour, prostitution and abuse.
I should now like to focus on the opportunities
and challenges which lie on the path ahead, in
particular from the perspective of peace and security.
First, we have been greatly honoured by the leadership
and important contributions of women in Member
States such as Mozambique, Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Networks of
women have also been involved in the northern Uganda
peace talks in Juba and in ongoing efforts for lasting
peace and security in the Sudan and Somalia. However,
I should like to underscore the need to strengthen the
involvement of women in such processes. Concrete
actions must be taken to ensure that the lessons learnt
thus far are fully integrated into the cooperative efforts
being made by the United Nations and regional
organizations for the maintenance of international
peace and security. This includes the participation of
women in peacekeeping operations at all levels.

09-54249

Secondly, we in the African Union face the
challenge of ensuring that our emerging peace and
security architecture — which includes the African
Standby Force, the Continental Early Warning System,
the Panel of the Wise and our subregional
arrangements for peace and security — adequately
reflect our vision for women and peace and security.
We are determined to address this challenge, and
continue to count on the support of the Security
Council and our international partners in this respect.
Finally, as part of ongoing efforts to strengthen
the mobilization of resources and support peacekeeping
operations conducted by regional organizations such as
the African Union, we would like to underscore the
importance of ensuring that efforts centred on women
and peace and security are adequately covered in the
strategies to be developed. With these few remarks, I
wish to reaffirm our commitment to cooperation with
the United Nations and our international partners on
this matter and other questions of common interest.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list.
On behalf of the Vietnamese delegation, I should
like to express my deepest appreciation to all
representatives, the Secretariat, the interpreters, the
camera team and the security personnel for their
patience and cooperation in helping us accomplish
today’s long meeting.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

45
