IX.

Resolutions adopted on tbe reports of tbe Slxtb Commlttee

Bearing in mind that, for various reasons, there are particularly favourable opportunities for co-operation and
mutual advantage between neighbouring countries in
many fields and various forms, and that the development
of such co-operation may have a positive influence on intemational relations as a whole,
Considering that the great changes of a political, economic and social nature, as well as the scientific and technological advances that have taken place in the world and
led to unprecedented interdependence of nations, have
given new dimensions to good-neighbourliness in the conduct of States and increased the need to develop and
strengthen it,
Taking into account the working papers conceming the
development and strengthening of good-neighbourliness
between States, as well as the written replies sent by States
and intemational organizations on the content of goodneighbourliness and on ways and means to enhance it,47
the views expressed by States on this subject and the reports of the Sub-Committee on Good-Neighbourliness set
up by the Sixth Committee, 48
Recalling its opinion that it is necessary to continue to
examine the question of good-neighbourliness in order to
strengthen and develop its content, as well as ways and
modalities to enhance its effectiveness, and that the results
of this examination could be included, at an appropriate
time, in a suitable international document,
1. Reaffirms that good-neighbourliness fully conforms
with the purposes of the United Nations and shall be
founded upon the strict observance of the principies of the
United Nations as embodied in the Charter and in the
Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in
accordance with the Charter ofthe United Nations, and so
presupposes the rejectioó of any acts seeking to establish
zones of influence or domination;
2. Calls once again upon States, in the interest of the
maintenance of international peace and security, to develop good-neighbourly relations, acting on the basis of
these principies;
3. Reaffirms that the generalization of the long practice of good-neighbourliness and of principies and rules
pertaining to it is likely to strengthen friendly relations
and co-operation among States in accordance with the
Charter;
4. Takes note of the report of the Sub-Committee on
Good-Neighbourliness, 49 which functioned within the
Sixth Committee during the forty-second session of the
General Assembly;
5. Decides to continue and to complete at its fortythird session, on the basis ofthe present resolution and the
report of the Sub-Committee, the task of identifying and
clarifying the elements of good-neighbourliness and to
begin the elaboration of a suitable international document
on the development and strengthening of goodneighbourliness between States within the framework of a
sub-committee on good-neighbourliness;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Development and
strengthening of good-neighbourliness between States".
94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987
47 See A/36/376 and Add.1, A/37/476, A/38/336 and Add.1 and
A/40/450 and Add. l and 2.
48 See A/C.6/40/L.28 and Corr.1, A/C.6/41/L.14 and A/
C.6/42/L.6.
49 A/C.6/42/L.6.

42/159.

299

Measures to prel'ent international terrorilm
which endan1en or takes innocent human li-.es
or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms ud
study of the underlyin1 ca111e11 of tho&e forms
of terrorism ud acts of -.iolence which lle in
misery, frustration, ariel'uce and despair ud
which cause some people to sacriftce humu
lil'es, including their own, in an attempt to effect radical changes:

(a) Report of the Secretary-General;
(b) Conl'ening, under the auspices of the
United Nations, of an international
conference to define terrorism and to
differentiate it from the struale of
peoples for national Uberation
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3034 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972, 31/102 of 15 December 1976, 32/147 of 16 December 1977, 34/145 of 17 December 1979, 36/109 of
10 December 1981 and 38/130 of 19 December 1983,
Reaffirming its resolution 40/61 of 9 December 1985,
adopted without a vote, and the importance thereof in the
consideration of the question of intemational terrorism
and, in particular, in the strengthening of co-operation in
preventing and eliminating terrorism,
Recalling the recommendations of the Ad Hoc Committee on Intemational Terrorism contained in its rel)Ort to
the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session,'50
Recalling also the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,3 the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security, 51 the Definition of Aggression4 and relevant instruments on intemational
humanitarian law applicable in armed conflict,
Further recalling the existing international conventions
relating to various aspects of the problem of international
terrorism, inter alía, the Convention on otfences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft, signed at
Tokyo on 14 September 1963,52 the Convention for the
Suppression ofUnlawful Seizure of Aircraft, signed at The
Hague on 16 December 1970, 53 the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil
Aviation, concluded at Montreal on 23 September 1971,~
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents, adopted in New York on
14 December 1973, 53 and the International Convention
against the Taking of Hostages, adopted in New York on
17 December 1979,56 as well as the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, adopted at
Vienna on 3 March 1980,
Convinced ofthe importance ofthe observance by States
of their obligations under the relevant intemational conventions to ensure that appropriate law enforcement measures are taken in connection with the offences addressed
in those conventions,

50 See Ojjicial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth Session,
Suff/ement No. 37 (A/34/37).
Resolution 2734 (XXV).
52 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 704, No. 10106.
53 /bid., vol. 860, No. 12325.
54 /bid., vol. 974, No. 14118.
55 lbid., vol. 1035, No. 15410.
56 Resolution 34/146, annex.

300

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

Deploring the continuation of all terrorist acts, including
those in which States are directly or indirectly involved,
which spread violence and terror, may result in loss ofhuman lives and material damage and jeopardize the normal
functioning of international relations,
Deeply disturbed by the world-wide persistence of those
acts of international terrorism which can pose a threat to
international peace and security and to friendly relations
among States,
Convinced of the importance of expanding and improving international co-operation among States, on a bilateral, regional and multilateral basis, which will contribute
to the elimination of acts of international terrorism and
their underlying causes and to the prevention and elimination of this criminal scourge,
Convinced that international co-operation in combating
and preventing terrorism will contribute to the strengthening of confidence among States, reduce tensions and ereate a better climate among them,
Reaffirming the principie of the self-determination of
peoples as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming a/so the inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence of all peoples under
colonial and racist régimes and other forms of alien domination, and upholding the legitimacy of their struggle, in
particular the struggle of national liberation movements,
in accordance with the purposes and principies of the
Charter and of the Declaration on Principies of lnternational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations,
Noting the efforts and important achievements ofthe International Civil Aviation Organization and the International Maritime Organization in promoting the security of
international air and sea transport against acts of terrorism, consistent with General Assembly resolution 40/61,
Appealing to ali States to take all appropriate steps to
prevent terrorist attacks against various forms of public
transport,
Urging all States to take effective measures, in accordance with established principies of international law, in
order that all acts, methods and practices of international
terrorism may be brought to an end,
Mindful of the necessity of maintaining and safeguarding the basic rights of the individual in accordance with
the relevant international human rights instruments and
generally accepted international standards,
Recognizing that the effectiveness of the struggle against
terrorism could be enhanced by the establishment of a
generally agreed definition of international terrorism,
Taking into account the proposaI 57 made at its fortysecond session to hold an international conference on
international terrorism, as referred to m agenda
item 126 (b),
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ,58
1. Once again unequivocally condemns, as criminal, ali
acts, methods and practices of terrorism wherever and by
whomever committed, including those which jeopardize
friendly relations among States and thcir security;
2. Deeply deplores the loss of human lives which results from such acts of terrorism;

57 See Official Records of the General Assembly. Forty-second Session.
Plenary Meetings, 44th meeting, and corrigendum.
5R A/42/519 and Corr. l and Add. 1

--------

3. Also deplores the pernicious impact of acts of international terrorism on relations of co-operation among
States, including co-operation for development;
4. Calls upan ali States to fulfil their obligations under
international law to refrain from organizing, instigating,
assisting or participating in terrorist acts in other States,
or acquiescing in activities within their territory directed
towards the commission of such acts;
5. Urges ali States to fulfil their obligations under international law and to take effective and resolute measures
for the speedy and final elimination of international terrorism and, to that end:
(a) To prevent the preparation and organization in
their respective territories, for commission within or outside their territories, of terrorist acts and subversive acts
directed against other States and their citizens;
(b) To ensure the apprehension and prosecution or extradition of perpetrators of terrorist acts;
(e) To endeavour to conclude special agreements to
that effect on a bilateral, regional and multilateral basis;
(d) To co-operate with one another in exchanging relevant information concerning the prevention and combating of terrorism;
(e) To harmonize their domestic legislation with the
existing international conventions on this subject to which
t hey are parties;
6. Appeals to ali States that have not yet done so to
1.:onsider becoming party to the international conventions
relating to various aspects of international terrorism relerred to in the preamble to the present resolution;
7. Urges ali States not to allow any circumstances to
obstruct the application of appropriate law enforcement
measures provided for in the relevant conventions to
which they are party to persons who commit acts of international terrorism covered by those conventions;
8. A/so urges ali States, unilaterally and in cooperation with other States, as well as relevant United Nations organs, to contribute to the progressive elimination
of the causes underlying international terrorism and to
pay special attention to all situations, including colonialism, racism and situations involving mass and fl.agrant violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms and
those involving alien domination and occupation, that
may give rise to international terrorism and may endanger
international peace and security;
9. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the International Civil Aviation Organization aimed at promoting
universal acceptance of and strict compliance with international air-security conventions, and its ongoing work on
a new instrument for the suppression of unlawful acts of
violence at airports serving international civil aviation;
1O. A /so welcomes the work undertaken by the International Maritime Organization on the problem ofterrorism
on board or against ships, and the initiative under way to
draft instruments on the suppression of unlawful acts
against the safety of maritime navigation and of fixed platforms on the continental shelf;
11. Requests the other relevant specialized agencies
and intergovernmental organizations, in particular the
Universal Postal Union, the World Tourism Organization
and the International Atomic Energy Agency, within
their respective spheres of competence, to consider what
further measures can usefully be taken to combat and
eliminate terrorism;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to seek the views of
Member States on international terrorism in ali its aspects

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

and on ways and means of combating it, including, inter alia, the convening, under the auspices of the United
Nations, of an international conference to deal with international terrorism in the light of the proposal referred to
in the penultimate preambular paragraph of the present
resolution;
13. Further requests the Secretary-General to follow
up, as appropriate, the implementation ofthe present resolution and to submit a report in this respect to the General
Assembly at its forty-fourth session;
14. Considers that nothing in the present resolution
could in any way prejudice the right to self-determination,
freedom and independence, as derived from the Charter of
the United Nations, of peoples forcibly deprived of that
right referred to in the Declaration on Principies of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly peoples under colonial
and racist régimes and foreign occupation or other forros
of colonial domination, nor, in accordance with the principies of the Charter and in conformity with the abovementioned Declaration, the right ofthese peoples to struggle to this end and to seek and receive support;
15. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its forty-fourth session.
94th plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/210.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country, 59
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and lmmunities of
the United Nations 60 and the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations,6 1
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of ali missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security ofthe missions and the safety
of their personnel are of great importance and concern to
Member States, as well as the primary responsibility ofthe
host country,
Noting with deep concern the continued acts violating
the security and the safety ofthe personnel ofthe missions
accredited to the United Nations,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to
be taken by the competent authorities of the host country,
in particular to prevent any acts violating the security of
missions and the safety of their personnel,
Considering further the issues raised by certain States
Members of the United Nations in response to the request
and to action by the host country to reduce the size of their
missions,
Conscious of the increased interest shown by Member
States in participating in the work of the Committee,

59
Oj]íciul Record., of the General Aswml,l_v. Furty-sccond Se,.,1t,1,
Su&lement No. 26 (A/42/26 and Corrl)
Resolution 22 A (l).
6l See resolution 169 (11).

301

l. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 83 of its report;
2. Strongly condemns any criminal acts violating the
security of missions accredited to the United Nations and
the safety of their personnel;
3. Urges the host country to take ali necessary measures to continue to prevent criminal acts, including
harassment and violations of the security of missions and
the safety oftheir personnel or infringements ofthe inviolability of their property, in order to ensure the existence
and functioning of ali missions, including practicable measures to prohibit illegal activities of persons, groups and
organizations that encourage, instigate, organize or engage in the perpetration of acts and activities against the
security and safety of such missions and representatives;
4. Renews its request to the host country and the Member States that raised the issues in response to the request
and to action by the host country to reduce the size of their
missions to follow consultations with a view to reaching
solutions to this matter, in accordance with the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United Nations;
5. Stresses the importance of a positive perception of
the work ofthe United Nations, expresses concern about a
negative public image and, therefore, urges that efforts be
continued to build up public awareness by explaining,
through ali available means, the importance of the role
played by the United Nations and the missions accredited
to it in the strengthening of international peace and
security;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively
engaged in ali aspects of the relations of the United Nations with the host country and to continue to stress the
importance of effective measures to avoid acts of terrorism, violence and harassment against the missions and
their personnel, as well as the need for any pertinent legislation adopted by the host country to be in accord with the
Headquarters Agreement and its other relevant obligations;
7. Decides to consider at its forty-third session the
question of the composition of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country;
8. Requests the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country to continue its work, in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 281 q (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
98th plenary meeting
17 December 1987

B
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principies of the Charter of
the United Nations and its relevant provisions,
Guided a/so by the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding the
Headquarters of the United Nations, of 26 June JQ47, 61
Taking note ofthe report ofthe Committee 011 Relations
with the Host Country,'\ 9
Having been apprised of the action being considered in
the host country, thc United States of America, which
