Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

5. Notes with satisfaction that the SecretaryGeneral's consideration for the needs of economy,
without prejudice to the success of the Conference,
has already led to reductions in the costs for 1972 and
expresses the hope that the same consideration will be
applied to the costs for 1971.
1916th plenary-meetin!{,
3 December 1970.

2655 (XXV). Report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency

The General Assembly,
Having received and examined the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency to the General
Assembly for the year 1969/1970,10
1. Takes note of the report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
2. Appreciates the increasingly dynamic and constructive role that the International Atomic Energy
Agency is playing in the peaceful application of nuclear
energy for the welfare of Member States;
3. Commends the work being undertaken by the
International Atomic Energy Agency to meet its safeauards responsibilities in accordance with its statute;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to llransmit to the
Director-General of the International Atomic Energy
~ncy the records of the twenty-fifth session of the
General Assembly relating to the Agency's activities;
S. Invites the International Atomic Energy Agency
to take these records into account in its future work.
1917th plenary meeting,
4 December 1970.

2699 (XXV). Report of the Security Council

The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly covering the period from 16 July
1969 to 15 June 1970.11
1927th plenary meeting,
12 December 1970.

2708 (XXV). Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Inde-pendence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained
m its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
and the programme of action for the full implementation of the Declaration, contained in its resolution 2621
(XXV) of 12 October 1970,
Recalling all its previous resolutions concerning the
implementation of the Declaration, in particular resolutions 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969 and
10 International Atomic Energy Agency, Annual Report
of the Board of Governors to the General Conference, 1 July
1969-30 June 1970 (Vienna, July 1970) and supplementary
report; transmitted to the Members of the General Assembly
by notes of the Secretary-General (A/8034 and A/8034/
Add.1).
11 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/8002).

1

2554 (XXIV) and 2555 (XXIV) of 12 December
1969,
Noting with grave concern that ten years after the
adoption of the Declaration many Territories are still
under colonial domination and racist regimes,
Deploring the continued refusal of the colonial
Powers, especially Portugal and South Africa, to
implement the Declaration and other relevant resolutions on the question of decolonization, particularly
those relating to the Territories under Portuguese
domination, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia,
Reiterating its conviction that the continuation of
colonialism in all its forms and manifestations-including racism, apartheid and activities of foreign economic
and other interests which exploit colonial peoplesand the attempts of some colonial Powers to suppress
national liberation movements by repressive activities
against colonial peoples are incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples and pose a threat to international peace and
security,
Strongly deploring the attitude of those States which,
in defiance of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, continue to
co-operate with the Governments of Portugal and South
Africa and with the illegal racist minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia,
1. Reaffirms its resolution 1514 (XV) and all its
other resolutions on the question of decolonization;
2. Notes with satisfaction the work accomplished
by the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
and expresses its appreciation to the Special Committee for its efforts to secure the complete and effective
implementation of the Declaration;
3. Approves the report of the Special Committee
covering its work durmg 1970,12 including the programme of work envisaged for 1971;
4. Urges all States, in particular the administering
Powers, and the specialized a~encies and other organizations within the United Nations system to give effect
to the recommendations contained in the report of the
Special Committee for the speedy implementation of
the Declaration and the relevant United Nations resolutions;
5. Reaffirms its recognition of the legitimacy of the
struggle of the colonial peoples and peoples under
alien domination to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence by all the necessary
means at their disposal and notes with satisfaction the
progress made in the colonial Territories by the national
liberation movements, both through their struggle and
through reconstruction programmes;
6. Urges all States and the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to provide, in consultation, as appropriate, with the
Organization of African Unity, moral and material
assistance to national liberation movements in the
colonial Territories;
12 Ibid.,

Supplement No. 23 (A/8023/Rev.1).

8

General Anernbly-Twenty-fifth Seuion

7. Requests all States, as well as the specialized
agencies and international institutions, to withhold
assistance of any kind from the Governments of Portu~al and South Africa and from the illegal racist
minority regime in Southern Rhodesia until they
renounce their policy of colonial domination ·and racial
discrimination;
8. Reiterates its declaration that the practice of
using mercenaries against national liberation movements in the colonial Territories constitutes a criminal
act and calls upon all States to take the necessary
measures to prevent the recruitment, financing and
training of mercenaries in their territory and to prohibit
their nationals from serving as mercenaries;
9. Requests the colonial Powers to withdraw immediately and unconditioµally their military bases and
installations from colonial Territories and to refrain
from establishing new ones;
10. Condemns the policies, pursued by certain colonial Powers in the Territories under their domination,
of imposing non-representative regimes and constitutions, strenithening the position of foreign economic
and other interests, misleadinJ world public opinion
and encouraging the systematic influx of foreign immigrants while evicting, displacing and transferring the
indigenous inhabitants to other areas, and calls upon
those Powers to desist forthwith from such policies;
11. Requests the. Special Committee to continue to
seek suitable means for the immediate and full implementation of the Declaration in all Territories which
have not yet attained independence and, in particular,
to formulate specific proposals for the elimination of
the remaining manifestations of colonialism, taking
fully into account the relevant provisions of the programme of action for the full implementation of the
Declaration;
12. Requests the Special Committee to make concrete suggestions which could assist the Security Council in considering appropriate measures under the
Charter of the United Nations with regard to developments in colonial Territories which are likely to
threaten international peace and security, and recommends that the Security Council take such suggestions
fully into consideration;
13. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to examine the compliance of Member States with the
Declaration and with other relevant resolutions on the
question of decolonization, particularly those relating
to the Territories under Portuguese domination, Namibia and Southern Rhodesia, and to report thereon to
the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session;
14. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
pay particular attention to the small Territories, and
to recommend to the General Assembly the most appropriate methods and also the steps to be taken to
enable the populations of those Territories to exercise
fully and without delay their right to self-determination
and independence;
15. Calls upon the administering Powers to cooperate fully with the Special Committee by permitting
the access of visiting groups to the colonial Territories
in order to secure first-hand information concerning
the Territories and to ascertain the wishes and aspirations of the inhabitants of those Territories under
their administration;
16. Requests the Secretary-General, having regard
to the suggestions of the Special Committee, to con-

tinue to take concrete measures through all the media
at his disposal, including publications, radio and television, to give widespread and continuous publicity to
the work of the United Nations in the field of decolonization, to the situation in the colonial Territories and
to the continuing struggle for liberation being waged
by the colonial peoples;
17. Requests Member States, in particular the administering Powers, to co-operate with the SecretaryGeneral in promoting the large-scale dissemination of
information on the work of the United Nations in the
implementation of the Declaration;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with the facilities and personnel
necessary for the implementation of the present resolution as well as the various resolutions relating to the
question of decolonization adopted by the General
Assembly and the Special Committee.
1929th plenary meeting,
14 December 1970.
2728 (XXV). Report of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Working Group
on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, 13
Recalling its grave concern about the acute financial
situation of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
its serious implications for the future work of the
Agency,
Bearing in mind the need to take all possible measures to prevent a reduction of the services being
provided to the Palestine refugees by the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
Taking into account the urgency to undertake such
action,

1. Approves the report of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East;
2. Endorses the recommendations contained in
paragraph 10 of the report of the Working Group and
urges the full co-operation of all concerned for their
implementation;
3. Requests the Working Group to continue its
work in accordance with General Assembly resolution
2656 (XXV) of 7 December 1970 and the present
resolution;
4. Renews its appeal to all Governments to join in
a collective effort to solve the financial crisis of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
1931st plenary meeting,
15 December 1970.
13 Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 35,
document A/8264.
