A /74/PV.41

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fourth session

41st plenary meeting

Monday, 9 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Muhammad-Bande  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Nigeria)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Baati (Tunisia),
Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 11
Sport for development and peace: building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal
Draft resolution (A/74/L.18)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now give
the floor to the representative of Japan to introduce
draft resolution A/74/L.18.
Mr. Mori (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): On behalf
of the Government of Japan, I would like to introduce
draft resolution A/74/L.18, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
Let me start by expressing my sincere gratitude to
Secretary-General Guterres and the States Members
of the United Nations for giving us the opportunity to
do so.
Just two weeks ago, His Holiness Pope Francis
visited Hiroshima and Nagasaki and delivered the clear
message that a world without nuclear weapons is not
only possible but necessary. This message resonated
deeply with many people in Japan. The atomic bomb
was dropped and exploded over Nagasaki, where,
during the Edo period, for 250 years, people had kept
the Christian faith, despite its prohibition. The atomic

bomb led some Japanese people to feel that their prayers
for peace would go unanswered, but the Pope’s message
lit our future with hope.
Throughout the years, we have seen numerous
threats to world peace, including wars. Ms. Greta
Thunberg’s impassioned speech on global warming
shocked, rocked and impressed people around the
world, including me.
The first time I addressed the General Assembly was
in 2000, at the Millennium Summit. As Prime Minister
of Japan at that time, I promoted human security as
one of the pillars of Japanese diplomacy and called for
the United Nations to fulfil its obligations in that area.
The Commission on Human Security was established
in 2001 upon the initiative of the Government of Japan
and then-Secretary-General Kofi Annan with a view
to significantly reducing the level of human suffering
and insecurity where it is most acute and prevalent. At
the 2007 United Nations High Level Event on Climate
Change, I stated that the challenge posed by climate
change is deeply related to the goal of achieving human
security for all, especially the poor and the vulnerable.
At that time, I also highlighted the importance of
providing assistance to developing countries.
In July 2000, the issue of infectious diseases was
introduced as a main topic for the first time, when it
appeared on the agenda of the Group of Eight summit
held in Kyushu-Okinawa, at which debate I presided.
In 2001, I attended the special session on HIV/AIDS
and engaged in candid dialogue with current SecretaryGeneral Guterres, who has been playing an outstanding

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-39959 (E)

*1939959*

A/74/PV.41

role in addressing this topic at the United Nations, as a
result of which support was marshalled to establish the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
Despite these years of striving to contribute to a
world of peace and prosperity, the harsh reality is that
I have had to admit my limitations. Nevertheless, I will
not give up on a world of peace and prosperity, no matter
how difficult it is to attain. The Olympic Truce draft
resolution (A/74.L.18) gives me hope because it makes
me aware that I am not alone. It is the embodiment of
the shared hopes of people across the globe that we can
free the world of conflict, at least during the Olympic
and Paralympic Games, and that we can live together
in mutual understanding and respect and with unity
in diversity.
I am truly humbled today to be able to address
the United Nations for a fifth time. Whenever I have
stood at this rostrum I have always kept my prayers
for human security and world peace and prosperity
in mind. Today I especially feel the presence with
me of former United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Mrs. Sadako Ogata, who regrettably passed
away in October. Mrs. Ogata, a special adviser to the
organizing committee for the Tokyo 2020 Games, was
a true friend. She accompanied me when, as Prime
Minister of Japan, I visited the African continent for
the first time, in 2001. She led me and our party through
the Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya. My Deputy Chief
Cabinet Secretary at that time, future Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe, joined me for the entirety of the trip. Prime
Minister Abe and I have committed to continuing to
work towards world peace and prosperity, carrying on
the cherished aspirations of the late Mrs. Ogata.
I was extremely impressed by International Olympic
Committee President Bach’s compelling thoughts on
world peace during our numerous discussions on the
Tokyo 2020 Games. President Bach has repeatedly told
both Prime Minister Abe and me that, in his view, the
global Olympic Truce initiative is something of great
value. We agree. He also expressed that thought to
the leaders who attended the Group of 20 summit at
Osaka in July. Today I hope to convey that sentiment
through the members of the General Assembly to the
entire world.
Peace is the concept at the root of Olympism. The
ancient Greeks competed in the Olympics some 2,800
years ago as a substitute for engaging in war. That idea
is today at the heart of the Olympic Truce. I believe that
2/22

09/12/2019

it is our mission to promote Olympism and pass it down
to future generations.
I attended the Tokyo 1964 Games when I was
27 years old. Looking back, I remember deeply feeling
and appreciating the peace that allowed athletes of
different countries to come together to celebrate the
Games. The Tokyo 1964 Olympic and Paralympic
Games were, for the Japanese people, an important
symbol of their recovery from the Second World War,
as it showcased for the world how Japan had come back
from the utter destruction it had faced just 19 years
prior. The 1964 Olympics also unleashed the positive
energy of the Japanese people and led to dramatic
economy growth.
I am delighted that in the same city of Tokyo, in
2020, the second Olympic and Paralympic Games
will showcase Japan’s peaceful and fully mature cities
for the world, as well as our recovery efforts in the
disaster-affected Tohoku area of the country. I would
like to express my sincere appreciation for the help and
support we have received from all over the world after
the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake. We hope that
our recovery efforts can be a source of encouragement
to those in Japan and throughout the world who have
suffered the severe consequences of natural disasters.
Giving courage to one another and standing together
will help us all be stronger.
Having realized through the Olympic and
Paralympic Games how precious peace is, Japan
wishes to give everyone in the world the opportunity
to appreciate peace through sports. To that end, we
have devised an international contribution-throughsport initiative called “Sport for Tomorrow”, which is
designed to provide opportunities for people to interact
with people from different countries across the globe.
We seek to use sports to develop human resources by
setting a target of involving over 10 million people across
more than 100 countries by 2020. We recently reached
the 10 million mark, including many Japanese young
people. To advance the trust and mutual understanding
among peoples that peace is built upon, the Host Town
project, a new initiative affiliated with the Tokyo 2020
Games will provide an opportunity for heart-warming,
grass-roots communication between athletes and the
residents of local communities in Japan, who will cheer
on the athletes they are hosting.
The main theme of our Games is unity in diversity.
World peace could be realized if all peoples around
19-39959

09/12/2019

the world lived together in mutual acceptance and
respect. The Tokyo 2020 organizing committee put this
theme into practice by becoming the first organizing
committee in history to operate the Olympic and
Paralympic Games through a single organization. It
has therefore been able to show the remarkable benefits
of unity in diversity. Furthermore, Tokyo will be the
first city to host the summer Paralympic Games for a
second time.
Through the twin lenses of unity in diversity
and living together peaceably on our precious Earth,
the Tokyo 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games are
also committed to the fulfilment of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). To this end, we have made
the gold, silver and bronze medals for the Games out of
recycled metals extracted from small electronic devices
no longer in use, such as old mobile phones. Similarly,
the materials used in the Paralympic and Olympic
torches, the relays of which will start on 26 March 2020,
come partially from recycled aluminium originally
used in the construction of prefabricated housing units
following the 2011 disaster. The podiums for the victory
ceremonies will be made with recycled plastic, including
marine plastic waste. Through such pioneering efforts,
we hope that the Tokyo 2020 Games will be a beacon of
light that illuminates the way to building a sustainable
world, including through the SDGs.
The 2019 Rugby World Cup, hosted by Japan
in November, was the first World Cup to be held in
Asia and the first to be held outside the developed
countries where rugby is widely played. World Rugby
Chairman Sir William Blackledge Beaumont hailed the
remarkable success of the tournament, saying it was
the “probably the greatest Rugby World Cup” in the
event’s 32-year history. Television viewership peaked at
53.7 per cent of the Japanese population, and the number
of visitors to the 16 fan zones across Japan reached
a new record, approximately 1.13 million people.
Close communication at 55 team camps spread across
61 municipalities had the great fortune of furthering
world peace, as well as the cause of the 2020 Tokyo
Olympic and Paralympic Games next year. We will
make every effort to extend the successful experience
of the Rugby World Cup to the 2020 Tokyo Games.
Everywhere one went, venues were packed. As I have
said elsewhere, people had not realized that there were
so many rugby fans in Japan. Their great number — as
well as the great success of the Rugby World Cup in

A/74/PV.41

general — stems from the close communication between
athletes and the local municipalities.
I believe that what is marvellous about sport is
the delight that comes with overcoming challenges to
achieve what was previously thought unachievable.
I will be 82 years old in the coming year. This could
be my last opportunity to stand before the General
Assembly. What I have learned through sport has
sustained my political career and life all these years.
By showing through sport that the impossible can be
made possible, our hope is to demonstrate that wars can
disappear from the globe, not just during the Olympic
Games but forever. If leaders are courageous enough
to openly share their opinions no matter how difficult
it may be to do so, agreements could replace fighting.
On the international stage, tensions are rising. Small
countries are suffering from confrontation between
large countries, and we cannot overlook the suffering
of the vulnerable. I therefore wish to repeat my prayer
for peace and prosperity in the world and express my
belief once again that, as set forth in the 2020 Tokyo
Games vision, sport has the power to change the world
and the future.
I am delighted to inform the General Assembly
today that more than 180 Member States are supporting
the draft resolution contained in A/74/L.18, submitted
by Japan. I would like once again to express my gratitude
to the Assembly for giving me this opportunity to
address this body and to ask all its members for their
support in adopting the draft resolution today.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to express our deep gratitude for the depth of
the representative of Japan’s statement, particularly
its emphasis on the role that multilateralism, sport
and the Olympic and Paralympic Games can play in
strengthening relations among Member States.
Mrs. Harqoos (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to take part
in this important discussion on sport for peace and
development. I will briefly outline the priorities of the
United Arab Emirates, which recognizes the important
role of sport in achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals and utilizing it in the service of humanity and
peace. We are pleased to join today the more than 170
sponsors of draft resolution A/74/L.18.
the

The United Arab Emirates believes in
importance of harnessing and enhancing

19-399593/22

A/74/PV.41

sporting abilities, especially among persons with
disabilities — or those who, in our country, we refer to
as persons of determination — which it does in keeping
with its commitment to implementing the Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and in its
full realization of the need to integrate such persons
into society.
The United Arab Emirates hosted the 2019 Special
Olympics World Games in Abu Dhabi, where over
7,500 athletes from 190 States took part. This was
the first time they had been held in the Middle East
since the Special Olympics were founded 50 years
ago. Furthermore, we hosted the World Para Athletics
Championships in Dubai last month, at which over 1,400
athletes from 122 States came to compete in track and
field events. The Championships were the last qualifier
for the 2020 Tokyo Paralympic Games.
My country attaches particular importance
to building a society that enjoys a high degree of
knowledge and stronger cultural awareness of jiu-jitsu
as an inspiring sport that enhances discipline and
respect for one’s competitor, as well as perseverance,
patience and self-confidence. The United Arab
Emirates hosted the World Jiu-Jitsu Championship last
month, in which 1,500 men and women athletes from
65 States around the world, including a United Arab
Emirates women’s team, came to participate under one
umbrella. The tournament was conducted collectively
and covered all the different categories. It was the first
time in the history of jiu-jitsu that a tournament was
held in a single place and time.
The United Arab Emirates also seeks to nurture
and support young sporting talent by holding round
tables and exchanging ideas with decision-makers.
Young people in my country recently held a youth panel
discussion on the topic of sporting youth leaderships.
The discussions focused on three main themes
pertaining to key challenges that young Emirati athletes
and leaders in the sports field managed to overcome,
academic courses related to sports administration,
and mechanisms for obtaining officials posts in
various sports.
In the lead-up to the 2020 Tokyo Olympic Games,
the United Arab Emirates held the International Sports
Creativity Conference under the theme “Tolerance and
peace in sport”, in which a group of young medallists
from the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympic Games and the
2018 Buenos Aires Youth Olympic Games participated.
4/22

09/12/2019

This event was part of our efforts aimed at supporting
and building the capacity of young Arab athletes so
that they may earn more Olympic medals and other
international titles and medals, especially at the 2020
Tokyo Olympic Games.
In closing, my country’s hosting of the
aforementioned international tournaments and our
welcoming of elite athletes from around the world are
not only in line with the United Nations action plan to
use sport to promote development and peace but also
embodies the tolerance that the United Arab Emirates
adopted as its national theme for 2019. As the seventyfifth anniversary of the United Nations approaches next
year, we believe that this is an important opportunity
to recall the comprehensive role that sports can play
in achieving goals of development and peace and in
fostering noble values among the peoples of the world.
Ms. Shareef (Maldives): The Maldives is pleased
to support and join in co-sponsoring today’s draft
resolution entitled “Building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal” (A/74/L.18).
The Maldives thanks Japan for its successful efforts in
coordinating the draft resolution. Let me also take this
opportunity to extend my delegation’s congratulations
and best wishes to Japan on its hosting of the imminent
2020 Tokyo Olympic Games. We are confident that
these Olympics will be an important opportunity to
bring people together and harness the power of sport in
promoting peace, tolerance and solidarity.
Sports can heal wounds, mend fences and cause
people to rise above their differences. Sport has the
power to change the world and transform humankind.
Sport, especially the Olympic ideal, has helped bring
together people of different cultures and nationalities,
continuing to enhance mutual understanding through
the spirit of friendship and fair play. To this day, the
Olympic torch symbolizes not only achievements in
sports but also a bridge that joins diverse communities
together and promotes tolerance and social inclusion.
This is the spirit of the Olympic Games. The Maldives is
proud to have been an active participant in the Olympic
movement since 1988. Since assuming office in 2018,
President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih of the Maldives
has given high priority to promoting education,
inclusiveness and better health through sport, which
fosters tolerance, understanding and cooperation
within society.
19-39959

09/12/2019

The Maldives continues to make significant
investments in sports infrastructure and promotes
opportunities for all. The Maldives has made it a
policy to designate a sports councillor for each of its
islands, which will enable the establishment of equal
pay between men and women in national sports teams
and boost female participation in sports, which in turn
will encourage the dissolution of traditional gender
stereotypes. Investments in sports will encourage
greater participation from young people in various
athletic fields and help them develop leadership skills to
become positive role models in their communities and
promote economic and social progress. Implementing
sports programmes at the national and local levels is
important to facilitate sustainable development and
peaceful coexistence. Our commitment to investing in
sports is rooted in our conviction that sports can promote
peace and development, as reflected in all 17 goals set
forth in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The Maldives is proud of the fact that it will be
hosting the eleventh edition of the Indian Ocean Island
Games in 2023, which will be the first time that the
Maldives will host these Games, which have been held
among the Indian Ocean island nations for 43 years.
The Maldives believes that organizing this event will
help us not only promote sports at home, but also
help bring together future generations in cooperation
and harmony. The Maldives believes that the Indian
Ocean Island Games will foster friendship and mutual
understanding and, through regional cooperation, create
a spirit of solidarity among all participating States.
The Government accords a high priority to
raising a new generation of health-conscious and
active Maldivians. We recently launched the Mission
Fit Maldives campaign to underline the national
importance of achieving the collective goal of a
healthier and fitter nation. In order to promote sports
as a vehicle for peace and development, it is important
that sports policies be inclusive, leaving no one behind.
The Government intends to modify at least 80 per cent
of sports facilities by 2023 in order to provide access
to people with disabilities and furnish women and girls
with equal opportunities to participate more fully in
national sports programmes.
There is no social activity more than sports that
brings people together in such great numbers with so
much passion and enjoyment. Regardless of age or
gender, sports are enjoyed by all. Sport inspires a nobler
cause, namely, the spirit of tolerance, togetherness,

A/74/PV.41

respect and social inclusion. We must continue to truly
recognize the power that sport has to change the lives of
individuals and rebuild communities for greater peace,
resilience and prosperity.
Mr. Al-Kuwari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): We are
pleased to take part in today’s important debate and join
the sponsors of the draft resolution entitled “Building a
peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic
ideal” (A/74/L.18) and others in the General Assembly
in adopting it. We welcome the content of the draft
resolution, which highlights the valuable contribution
sport makes in many key areas, including promoting
tolerance and understanding among peoples, education,
sustainable development, solidarity, fairness, social
inclusion and health, as well as in combating terrorism
and violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
The State of Qatar attaches special importance to
sport because we believe that it can create positive social
change that enhances peace and development. With
a view to achieving our national vision for 2030, the
State of Qatar has significantly invested in building and
developing sports facilities and related infrastructure
in accordance with international standards. As a result,
Qatar has been able to successfully host such major
sporting events as the 2006 Asian Games, the 2015
International Paralympic Committee Athletics World
Championships and other international tournaments.
Most recently, Qatar hosted the 2019 World Athletics
Championship, which concluded in October and saw
the participation of 2,000 male and female athletes from
209 States. Doha recently hosted the 24th Arabian Gulf
Cup Championship. Moreover, this week, the State of
Qatar will be holding the 2019 FIFA Club World Cup.
Qatar also looks forward to hosting the 2022 FIFA
World Cup tournament, which will be the first of its
type in the Middle East and the Arab world, and has
offered all the necessary capabilities to make it an
historic opportunity and championship legacy for
Qatar, the region and the world. The tournament will
greatly contribute to enhancing the values of peace and
tolerance among all the peoples of the world.
The Qatar Supreme Committee for Delivery and
Legacy is playing an important role in achieving those
goals. Several programmes and initiatives have been
launched, including Challenge 22, the Generation
Amazing programme and the Josoor Institute. Those
initiatives are aimed at empowering Arab young people
to participate in the preparations to host the FIFA

19-399595/22

A/74/PV.41

championship and at providing them with the tools and
skills to build a better future.
I would like to note the role of the Qatar Olympic
Committee, which has accomplished a great deal at the
national and international levels. It has supported the
Olympic movement in accordance with the principles
of the Olympic Charter and is spreading the culture of
the Olympics as widely as possible. The Committee
encourages participation in sport among all sectors
of society, promotes the development of athletes and
trainers, equipping them according to international
standards, and hosts local, regional and international
sporting events.
As the next host of the FIFA World Cup in 2022,
Qatar aspires to host an eco-friendly championship. It
will be the first tournament of its kind to be carbon
neutral, thanks to the use of solar energy on the fields
and cooling and lighting technology that saves energy
and water.
Through the Group of Friends of Sport for
Development and Peace, which Qatar co-chairs with
Monaco, my country seeks to enhance cooperation
at the international level in order to highlight the
important role that sport plays in enhancing sustainable
development and peace, especially by encouraging
tolerance, respect and community empowerment.
Qatar attaches special importance to preventing
terrorist attacks on unfortified locations, such as sports
facilities. It offers the capabilities and expertise it has
gained in enhancing international cooperation and in
capacity-building, in its collaboration with competent
international parties. Moreover, an agreement has been
signed between the Qatar-based International Centre
For Sport Security, which is a non-profit Organization,
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) in order to create a new form of cooperation
in the prevention of attacks on sporting events and in
the prevention, through sport, of violent extremism that
leads to terrorism.
We also recognize the importance of sport in
stopping violent extremism. In that regard, we have
worked with the United States of America, UNODC
and Football for Peace in organizing a special event
on enhancing sports capabilities to prevent violent
extremism on the margins of the General Assembly’s
high-level debate in September. Moreover, Qatar
supports ongoing efforts to prevent crime and violence
among young people through the UNODC Global
6/22

09/12/2019

Programme for the Implementation of the Doha
Declaration, which managed to reach 6,000 young men
and women by offering life-skills programmes through
sport as part of the Line Up, Live Up initiative, with the
goal of preventing drug use, violence and crime.
In conclusion, we affirm the Qatari State’s
willingness to cooperate with the International
Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic
Committee in order to make sport a tool to enhance
peace, dialogue and reconciliation.
Ms. Picco (Monaco) (spoke in French): Today, the
States Members of the United Nations are renewing
their trust in the power of sport by adopting draft
resolution A/74/L.18, on building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal.
In a few months’ time, we will once again
experience the rhythm of the events and performances
of Olympic and Paralympic athletes who inspire us
both through the records they set and through their
excellence. When the Olympic flame is lit in Tokyo
in July, Japan will have the honour of hosting the
Olympic and Paralympic Games for the fourth time,
just a few months after the success of the Rugby World
Cup. I commend the Japanese delegation for the draft
resolution we will adopt.
The introduction of new disciplines such as
baseball/softball, sport climbing, karate, skateboarding
and surfing attests to the stated ambition to attract new
generations. In that respect, the success of the Youth
Olympic Games, held in Buenos Aires in 2018, served
to strengthen the link between the Olympic movement
and young people around the world. We eagerly await
the Games to be held in Lausanne in a few weeks.
Japan, host of the thirty-second Olympic Games and
the sixteenth Paralympic Games, seeks the participation
of young people and the entire population in this global
event par excellence. Through its Sport for Tomorrow
and Host Town Initiative programmes, the Tokyo Games
will enable new partnerships and relationships between
people and athletes from all countries. The guiding
principle “Be better, together — for the planet and the
people”, set by the Tokyo Organizing Committee of the
Olympic and Paralympic Games, is a strong signal of
openness, encounter, exchange and conviviality that
will extend far beyond the Olympic Village.
In many ways, the legacy of the Games is not
limited to the context of sports. Let us consider, for
19-39959

09/12/2019

example, the message of hope conveyed by the parade of
athletes from the Republic of Korea and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea under a single flag at
Pyeongchang, and the message of unity conveyed by
the team of refugees. We also welcome the strategic
road map of the International Olympic Committee’s
Olympic Agenda 2020, which guided that progress. The
Committee has also taken steps to make the bidding
process and the Games more sustainable so that, in the
long term, the host cities can benefit from the Games’
momentum, particularly with regard to infrastructure,
to the future benefit of residents and users alike.
We encourage the International Olympic
Committee to continue its work aimed at promoting
the role of sport and public policy. That undertaking
is also in keeping with our own objectives as States
Members of the United Nations, and the actions of the
Olympic Committee and the United Nations to that end
are mutually reinforcing. Through its partnerships and
long-standing commitment to sport for development
and peace, as well as in the field of gender equality
and the fight against all forms of discrimination, the
Committee is a key player.
While the contribution of sport to a better world
and sustainable development was recognized back in
1993 through the inclusion of an item on the agenda
of the General Assembly, its alignment with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development could be further
developed. The Kazan Action Plan is also key for
guiding our Governments. Gender equality, integration,
education, social inclusion, professional integration
and the promotion of healthy lifestyles — there is no
area where sport is not a critical tool.
In the field of peace and security, sport is also a
relevant tool for reconciliation and the prevention of
violent extremism. Through its convening power and
its promotion of respect, mutual understanding and its
prohibition of all discrimination, sport offers platforms
for exchange to individuals and communities that would
otherwise have no contact with one another. In addition,
the security of world sporting events, particularly the
Olympic Games, is one of the main challenges that all
organizers must take into account, and we thank them
for that.
The Group of Friends of Sport for Development
and Peace, which I have the pleasure of co-chairing
with Ambassador Al-Thani of Qatar, has preserved
its role and its meeting places with the ever-growing

A/74/PV.41

number of representatives of friendly countries, as well
as with the participation of the Division for Inclusive
Social Development, which is the focal point within
the Secretariat, and the United Nations Department of
Global Communications, because we must reach out
and help to raise awareness through sports what the
United Nations does for all the people of the world.
Over the course of the year, the contribution of
sports has been pointed out by my delegation on the
margins of the meetings of the subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council, such as the Commission
for Social Development and the Commission on the
Status of Women, and those of treaty bodies like the
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
For example, the role that world-renowned sports
entities can play is illustrated by the big football clubs
with foundations and strong identities. They support
programmes for thousands of young people, who learn
values that will stay with them for the rest of their lives.
Sport is also a vehicle for raising awareness of
major issues in our societies, such as the difficulties
faced by female athletes, even at the professional level,
and the wage and award gaps that continue to be far
too large in many sports and competitions. These issues
were discussed with the Football Club des Girondins
de Bordeaux team and its president, who shared their
experiences with Member States.
Aware that sport, like Olympism, is a mindset and
a philosophy of life, this year we once again organized,
under the leadership of Dr. Jordan Metzl of the Hospital
for Special Surgery in New York, who is also an
author and triathlete, two Ironstrengths at the United
Nations. That friendly sport is a venue for New Yorkers
to meet people from the Member States and enables
participants to become familiar with the role of sport
for development and peace and in the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In addition, in an ongoing effort to reach out
to young people in New York City, two sporting
events provided dozens of young New Yorkers with
unique opportunities to access the United Nations,
to learn about the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable
Development Goals and to play basketball on United
Nations grounds.
Under the impetus of His Serene Highness Prince
Albert II, member of the International Olympic
Committee since 1985 and President of the Monégasque
Olympic Committee, sport and its contribution to

19-399597/22

A/74/PV.41

sustainable development is one of the priorities of
the Principality of Monaco. From primary school
children to adults, Monaco offers all its citizens and
residents high-quality sports facilities that enable their
regular participation in the Summer, Winter and Youth
Olympic Games in a spirit of fraternity with the entire
Olympic family.
May the Tokyo Olympic and Paralympic Games be
crowned with success and may all of its athletes bring
to life the Olympic spirit and ideal.
Mr. Ang (Singapore): My delegation would like to
express its appreciation to Japan for its work on draft
resolution A/74/L.18, entitled “Building a peaceful
and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
Singapore is pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution
and we wish Japan every success in hosting the Olympic
and Paralympic Games in 2020.
Sport is a phenomenon that brings both tangible and
unseen benefits to societies. Sport has the unique ability
to bring diverse people and communities together. We
celebrate our sporting heroes as a nation. We take part in
sporting activities with family, friends, colleagues and
strangers, deepening our bonds in the process. Through
sport, we teach our children values, such as caring for
others in society. Sport is also an important enabler
of sustainable development and is recognized for its
contribution to development and peace, promotion of
tolerance and respect, and empowerment of individuals
and communities.
Sport is an important part of Singapore’s
nation-building and national identity. In 2012, we
launched Vision 2030, Singapore’s national sports
blueprint, which empowers Singaporeans to live better
through sport. Vision 2030 envisages sport as a driving
force for positive change by strengthening individuals,
communities and the nation through a lifetime of
sporting opportunities. Today, we are witnessing
the positive impact of that initiative. There has been
an increase in overall physical activity levels across
different age segments, as well as in the percentage
of Singaporeans who view sport as an activity that
promotes social cohesion.
In Singapore, sport plays a key role in bringing
together Singaporeans of different social and
educational backgrounds, ethnicities and religions.
Under Vision 2030, the Sports Facilities Master
Plan guides our development of community nodes
and innovative spaces to serve sporting needs at the
8/22

09/12/2019

national, regional, town and neighbourhood levels,
so that the majority of Singaporeans have access to
public sports and recreational facilities within walking
distance from their homes. We have also established
ActiveSG as the national movement for sport and
physical activity, integrating and activating spaces,
programmes and partnerships to create sporting
opportunities for all. There are now more than
1.85 million ActiveSG members and more than 10,000
ActiveSG programmes for children, adults, seniors and
persons with disabilities, which create opportunities
for them to exercise and play together.
We
strongly
believe
in
sport
without
boundaries — that sport should be inclusive, affordable,
and easily accessible, regardless of age, ability, gender
or social status. The SportCares initiative was launched
in 2012 as a force for social good to engage at-risk
youth and mitigate youth delinquency. Programmes
such as Saturday Night Lights provide a platform
for at-risk youth to play football and receive formal
football training while learning life skills and values.
That initiative has since grown to include programmes
for seniors and persons with disabilities and special
needs. Our national sport volunteer movement, Team
Nila, also creates opportunities to bring different
segments of the community together to give back to
society through a common passion for sport. Team Nila
volunteers have contributed to the success of many
sporting events hosted by Singapore, such as the 28th
Southeast Asian Games.
At the regional and international levels, sport
transcends national boundaries and plays an important
role in bringing people together and building bridges
and understanding among societies. As we speak, more
than 5,000 athletes are competing in 56 sports in the
30th Southeast Asian Games, in the Philippines, in a
spirit of friendly competition that reflects and reaffirms
the close ties of friendship, community and family
among the peoples and countries of our region.
Singapore renews its call to harness and recognize
the value of sport with a view to building a more
inclusive, sustainable and prosperous future for
our peoples.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Dating back to the eighth
century B.C., the ancient Olympic Games were a force
for peace and solidarity among ancient Greek cityStates that could declare a truce for a period of seven
days before the beginning and after the end of the
19-39959

09/12/2019

A/74/PV.41

Games. The ultimate goal was the peaceful conduct of
the Games, which was ensured by protecting the city
from invasion and by ordering the people and State
authorities to refrain from interfering with the safe
passage of the athletes. As Thucydides claimed, when
States violated the truce, their athletes were banned
from participating in the games.

Committee and the delegation of Japan in today’s
meeting. As a co-sponsor of the draft resolution on the
Olympic Truce, China urges all Member States to act in
accordance with the provisions of the draft resolution
by striving to bridge differences, resolve disputes and
end the use of all military force and hostilities during
the Olympic Games.

The concept of the Olympic truce was born in
the age of antiquity and was maintained for a period
of 1,200 years. The Greeks viewed the Games as
an opportunity to replace conflict with friendly
competition. However, the ideal of the Olympic Truce
was also of great importance for the revival of the
Olympic Games in the modern era as an invaluable
tool to advance international cooperation and promote
world peace.

Sport is an important factor in social development
and human progress. The Olympic spirit is the common
aspiration of peoples around the world, as it promotes
unity, friendship, peace, exchanges among countries
and the integration of civilizations, as well as their
harmonious coexistence. The Olympic Games are
not only an arena for athletes but also a bridge of
friendship for people of all countries. The modern
Olympic Games bring together people of different
countries, ethnicities and cultural backgrounds,
enhance mutual understanding and promote social
cohesion, while significantly contributing to world
peace and development.

In today’s world, an emphasis on Olympic peace
has become a major feature of modern Olympic
ideology. The foundation of the International Olympic
Truce Centre, for the creation of which Greece actively
engaged with the International Olympic Committee,
gave the pursuit of peace a new dynamism. Most
importantly, the inclusion of the Olympic Truce in the
United Nations framework through the adoption of
relevant resolutions granted a distinct role to the ideal.
We should bear in mind that in a world of differences,
inequalities and conflicts, agreement on even a
temporary truce is an achievement for the international
community. Therefore, it is our responsibility to
continue to promote the Olympic Truce and spare no
effort to ensure its actual implementation.
In 2020, Japan will host the Tokyo Olympic and
Paralympic Summer Games. I take this opportunity
to wish Japan every success in that demanding
endeavour. For the rest of us, it is our task to fulfil our
responsibilities by observing the Olympic Truce and
thereby making peace an attainable goal. We should
all find inspiration in next year’s Olympic Games and
reflect on how sports could be used as a useful tool to
reduce tensions and build bridges.

Throughout the world, the international community
faces multiple challenges. Unilateralism, protectionism
and bullying behaviour have severely undermined
multilateralism, disrupted the international rule of
law, brought about unnecessary confrontation and
weakened mutual trust, friendship and cooperation
among peoples of all countries. Many experts are
concerned that the world will witness a schism. The
international community is at a crossroads. Do we want
multilateralism or unilateralism, unity or division,
cooperation or confrontation and progress or regression?
China’s approach towards such key issues is very
clear. We stand firmly by multilateralism and the vast
majority of United Nations Members, support fairness
and justice in line with the current reality and advocate
a mutually beneficial world and a common future.
China will always promote world peace, contribute to
global development, defend the international order and
work towards building a community of a shared future
for humankind.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation supports the adoption of draft
resolution A/74/L.18 on building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal, as it
represents a call for justice by all Member States. China
wishes the XXXII Tokyo Summer Olympic Games
every success. We also welcome the participation
of Mr. Bach, President of the International Olympic

In 2022, Beijing will host the XXIV Winter Olympic
Games, which marks the return of the Winter Olympic
Games to a city that successfully hosted the XXIX
Summer Olympic Games. China will work closely
with the International Olympic Committee to present
a successful, exceptional and excellent Olympic Games
to the world, which will promote the development of
the Olympic Games and winter sports and fully bring

19-399599/22

A/74/PV.41

into play the positive role of sports in achieving world
peace, development and people-to-people exchanges.
We will hold a green Olympic Games and prioritize
ecological considerations, resource conservation
and environmental friendliness by developing and
implementing a low-carbon workplan, whereby
renewable energy will be used at all winter Olympic
venues to strive for carbon neutrality. We will advocate
the principles of broad participation, joint contributions
and benefit-sharing by actively mobilizing all sectors of
society in preparing for the Games and accelerating the
development and promotion of winter sports. We will
put the people at the centre so as to benefit them and
allow women, children and persons with disabilities
more opportunities to take part in sports activities.
We will continue to promote openness at the
Olympic Games through the Beijing Winter Olympic
Games. We will strengthen sports cooperation and
people-to-people and cultural exchanges between
China and the rest of the world. China will create a new
window for promoting the Olympic spirit, exchanges
among civilizations and mutual understanding. We will
combat corruption and uphold integrity in hosting the
Olympic Games, strengthen oversight of the preparations
and adopt a zero-tolerance approach towards doping so
that the Beijing Winter Olympic Games is as clean and
pure as ice and snow. We welcome Member States to
the Beijing Winter Olympic Games in February 2022.
Ms. Sánchez Rodríguez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the President for convening this plenary
debate under agenda item 11, entitled “Sport for
development and peace: building a peaceful and better
world through sport and the Olympic ideal”, during
which draft resolution A/74/L.18, co-sponsored by our
delegation, has been introduced. We would like to take
this opportunity to thank the delegation of Japan for
presenting the draft resolution and for its efforts during
the negotiations. The consideration of this issue within
the United Nations supports its value as a determining
factor for development and peace.
We reaffirm that, as established by UNESCO,
the pursuit of physical activity and sport is a
fundamental right for all, contributing to the complete
and harmonious development of human beings. We
must ensure that mechanisms and institutions for
the exercise of that right exist and properly function,
without discrimination or limitations. In that regard,
although progress has been made at the international
10/22

09/12/2019

level, much remains to be done to systematically ensure
and guarantee the exercise of that right by children,
women, the elderly and people with disabilities. In
that context, we must also ensure that technology does
not supplant the benefits of social interaction and that
urban infrastructure meets the demands and needs of
those groups for their advancement, without barriers
or obstacles. Moreover, we must work to change the
perception of sport as just another chore or a mere
hobby for some people. Sport and physical education
must be part and parcel of our culture of life and an
intrinsic component of our daily activities.
Through the triumph of the Cuban Revolution
on 1 January 1959, sport became a right enjoyed by
all Cubans, to the benefit of their quality of life. Its
widespread practice from that time to the present day is
one of the major achievements of our Revolution, with
Commander Fidel Castro Ruz at its helm. With a view
to turning that principle into a reality, the practice of
sport in Cuba became a constitutional right. The Cuban
Constitution, which was recently approved by the
National Assembly of People’s Power and ratified by
a popular referendum held on 24 February, states that
“people have the right to physical education, sports and
recreation as essential elements of their quality of life”.
The national education system guarantees the
teaching and practice of physical education and sport as
part of the overall education of children, adolescents and
youth. The State ensures the conditions that guarantee
that the necessary resources are devoted to promoting
and practicing sport and recreation for the Cuban people
and to preparing, nurturing and developing sports
talents. The institutionalization of sport in Cuba led
to the establishment of the National Institute of Sport,
Physical Education and Recreation — the governing
body of the Cuban sports movement — which runs our
specialized educational centres and sports facilities.
We prioritize the training of high-performance
athletes and guarantee the quality of their sports
careers. The Cuban people are proud of all the athletes
who, through their sacrifice and dedication, have raised
our small island so high. Our promotion of a culture
of physical activity and the quality of the training of
athletes are internationally recognized. In that regard,
Cuba has shared its best practices and experience in
response to requests for cooperation from numerous
developing countries.
19-39959

09/12/2019

We reiterate our condemnation of any attempt to
politicize sport or to steal talented athletes, especially
those from developing countries. That negative practice
must stop. Sport must be seen as a bridge for peace and
an avenue to promote development and understanding.
Mr. Mavroyiannis (Cyprus): I fully subscribe to
the statement of the European Union, and I wish to
make some additional remarks because of my country’s
strong links to the Olympic ideal, formed through
Cyprus’ participation in the Olympic Games since their
initiation in antiquity.
I would like to thank Japan for submitting this
year’s draft resolution on the Olympic ideal (A/74/L.18)
and wish it every success in organizing the next
Olympiad. I welcome the presence of the President
of the Tokyo Organising Committee of the Olympic
and Paralympic Games, Mr. Yoshiro Mori. I also
wish to express appreciation to the President of the
International Olympic Committee, Mr. Thomas Bach,
for his presence here today and his work to promote the
ideals for which the Olympic Games stand.
If the Olympic ideals were upheld, things would
be much easier for us here at the United Nations. The
creation of a peaceful environment, in the hope that this
would have implications more lasting than the duration
of the Games themselves, was always consubstantial
to the Olympic ideal. The sacred tradition of the
Olympic Truce — the cessation of hostilities before,
during and after the Games to ensure the safe passage
of athletes — was underpinned by three morals: the
futility of war, the denunciation of violence and the
subjugation and the superiority of pursuits that bring
people together; the quest for freedom, shared values,
the intrinsically noble character of fairness and
synergy; and the recognition of their contribution to
the prosperity of all and to the further development of
culture and civilization.
Sport has a unique capacity to bring people together.
It is also the most powerful tool to build ethos among
our young people. Creating a culture of sportsmanship,
fair play, hard work and personal sacrifice in pursuit
of a goal — dignified rivalry, relishing victory
and accepting defeat — can go further than any
knowledge-based education. If we managed to build
that values-based culture at the individual, community
and national levels, the mission of the United Nations to
bring peace, development, respect for rules, respect for
rights and freedoms, equality, solidarity, tolerance and

A/74/PV.41

non-discrimination, social inclusion, health and many
others, would be made much more feasible.
Cyprus remains committed to the endeavour
of promoting peace by bringing to the forefront the
virtues of humanity that prove we were created for
something more noble than conflict, and striving for
the prevalence of culture, peace and security as the core
instincts of human civilization.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): The importance of sport in
society is undeniable. Sporting activities bring people
together, foster understanding and tolerance among
the participants and promote the important values of
teamwork, discipline, and perseverance. Sporting
activities serve as an avenue of entertainment and
recreation and bring a valuable educational dimension.
To young children, sport serves as a powerful learning
tool, reinforcing the values of hard work, respect
and equality.
Sport and the Olympic ideals contribute to building
a peaceful and better world by educating youth
through mutual understanding, the spirit of friendship,
solidarity and fair play. In that light, the social value of
sport is unquestionable. A spectrum of the Sustainable
Development Goals further acknowledges the
important role sport plays in the promotion of health,
education and the advancement of peaceful societies.
Sport contributes to improving the health and fitness
of society by involving people in physical activity. It
instils healthy lifestyle choices among young people
and strengthens societal welfare into the future.
Sport plays an important part in children’s
development, opening children to the value of
cooperation, teamwork and tolerance. Developing those
skills at an early age will aid children immensely in their
professional futures. Furthermore, sport encourages
balanced participation, promotes the self-confidence of
children and addresses gender issues.
Sport is an important enabler of peace to
strengthen friendly relations among nations, people
and communities, regardless of cultural differences
and political viewpoints. In that context, Cambodia
will proudly host the 2023 Southeast Asian Games and
is confident that they will promote friendly relations
among the participating States and beyond.
In conclusion, Cambodia is pleased to join other
Member States in co-sponsoring draft resolution
A/74/L.18, which was introduced by the President of

19-3995911/22

A/74/PV.41

the Organising Committee of the Olympic Games.
The Royal Government of Cambodia will continue to
promote sport to advance its contributions to global
peace and development.
Mr. Wax (Israel): Sport is a universal language
centred around people, to which participants and
spectators alike learn to celebrate excellence and
discover the idea of sportsmanship — the idea that one
must try one’s hardest from start to finish and be graceful
and respectful towards one’s opponent, no matter who
wins or loses and regardless of the background, religion,
gender or nationality of the opponent.
We are proud to have co-sponsored the important
draft resolution A/74/L.18, which encompasses many
ideals that are paramount to achieving peace and a
healthy global society. That is one of the most important
contributions of sport. Israel is host to numerous
programmes aimed at enabling and encouraging
all members of its diverse society to take part in
sporting activities.
Organizations like Budo For Peace use traditional
martial arts to teach the behavioural values of
tolerance, mutual respect and harmony to youth from
Arab, Jewish and Christian communities. The Israel
Sports Center for the Disabled works with athletes with
disabilities from all backgrounds in a variety of sports.
Most recently, the Alliance for Middle East Peace was
nominated as one of eight international finalists for
the prestigious Prince Albert II of Monaco’s Peace and
Sport Award, for the Athletes for Peace event that it
hosted earlier this year. That event brought together 400
Jewish, Arab, Bedouin, ultra-Orthodox, immigrants,
refugees and special-needs participants to celebrate the
International Day of Sport for Development and Peace.
Professional athletes are often idolized by their
fans. Their achievements on the field inspire millions
and their conduct, both on and off the field, influences
the behaviour and perceptions of many people. When
fans see their role models embracing diversity on the
field and respecting their opponents, that goes a long
way towards promoting diversity in society. However,
when role models act in an ungracious or hostile
manner, that has the opposite effect.
When athletes are excluded from sporting events,
that negates the essence of sportsmanship. As enshrined
so well in the Olympic Truce, politics have no place
in the world of sports. It is up to all who believe in
peace and equality to ensure that international sporting
12/22

09/12/2019

competitions are open to everyone. We must not turn
a blind eye to those who insist on politicizing sports
events, and the Olympics in particular.
Unfortunately, as we have seen again over the past
year, Iran still refuses to allow its athletes to compete
against Israeli opponents, forcing its own athletes
to shamefully forfeit or lose in competitions to avoid
the possibility of competing as required. I say “force”
as, despite Iran’s claims to the contrary, the whole
world witnessed only a few months ago at the World
Judo Championships in Tokyo how disgraceful and
heartbreaking it can be for those athletes who spend
their lifetimes practicing and preparing to compete
only to be bullied by their own country, which refuses
to let them fulfil their dreams and potential when they
are so close to achieving their ultimate goal.
As stated in the draft resolution before us, sport
can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance and
understanding among people and nations. If States
Members of the United Nations and international
sporting bodies, such as the International Olympic
Committee (IOC), strive to promote peace and
understanding through sport, surely they cannot
tolerate such behaviour, which, as the IOC has stated in
the past, is contrary to the rules of fair play and against
the spirit of friendship embodied in the Olympic values.
We encourage all Member States, and particularly
the sponsors of the draft resolution, to not simply
adopt the draft resolution in theory, but to try to fulfil
its intent. We therefore support the International Judo
Federation for its recent decision to stand up against
discrimination and finally suspend Iran from all
competitions for its ongoing refusal to allow its athletes
to compete against their Israeli counterparts. We also
support the International Paralympic Committee for
stripping Malaysia of the right to host the 2019 World
Para Swimming Championships, after it disgracefully
refused to let Israeli athletes compete.
We believe that other international sporting bodies
should also work to stop such behaviour, which is
in direct contrast to the draft resolution that we are
discussing today and a blatant violation of the Olympic
Charter and IOC code of ethics. It is hard to believe that
in this day and age, Member States still strive to host
international sporting events, while not permitting the
participation of all athletes.
The Olympics is one of the most remarkable
global events. Through sports, we can promote peace
19-39959

09/12/2019

and development as we run, swim and jump towards
the future. We wish Japan the best of luck in hosting
the upcoming 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games,
which will without a doubt inspire millions around the
world. As an enthusiastic fan of the Olympic Games
and the Olympic ideals, I look forward to the Games,
hopeful that sports will be the winner, promoting
peace and dialogue among all nations, and not boycotts
and politics.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): At the outset, I thank the
President of the Organising Committee of the Olympic
Games for having introduced the timely draft resolution
A/74/L.18, entitled “Sport for development and peace:
building a peaceful and better world through sport and
the Olympic ideal”, which we are proud to co-sponsor.
We recognize the valuable contribution of sport to
promoting education, sustainable development, peace,
cooperation, social inclusion and health at the local,
regional and international levels and take note that, as
declared in the 2005 World Summit Outcome document,
sport can contribute to an atmosphere of tolerance
and understanding among peoples and nations. Kenya
takes pride in being part of the wider Olympic family
and is globally regarded as a sporting nation due to
our patriotic and gallant athletes, whose exploits have
defined Kenya’s lasting sporting brand.
We note that the General Assembly, in resolution
73/24 of 3 December 2018, on sport as an enabler of
sustainable development, called upon future hosts
of the Olympic Games and the Paralympic Games to
include sport, as appropriate, in conflict prevention
activities and to ensure the effective implementation
of the Olympic Truce during the Games. It is expected
that the Tokyo 2020 Games will be a useful opportunity
to harness the power of sport to advance the world
by fostering an atmosphere of peace, development,
resilience, tolerance and understanding.
Kenya has prioritized the promotion of sports
by enacting the Sports Act 2013, with the purpose
of harnessing sports for development, encouraging
and promoting drug-free sports and recreation,
establishing sport institutions and providing for the
administration and management of sport and sport
facilities countrywide.
To promote the Paralympic Games in the country,
Kenya — which has at least 1.2 million people with
physical challenges — assists many by enrolling them
in Special Olympics programmes, essentially because

A/74/PV.41

sport helps in developing their psychomotor, cognitive,
physical and social skills. The active involvement of
persons with disabilities in sport and the Paralympic
Games contributes to the full and equal realization
of their human rights, as well as respect for their
inherent dignity.
In the pastoral areas of the country, Kenya has
encouraged sports as a means of fostering peace
among neighbours. In recognizing that sports can
deter radicalization, prevent violent extremism and
prevent violence in general, we therefore welcome the
designation of 6 April as the International Day of Sport
for Development and Peace.
In conclusion, Kenya reiterates that the promotion of
sport for development and peace needs all our support,
commends the International Olympic Committee and
the International Paralympic Committee for their noble
tasks and, finally, wishes Japan success in hosting the
Tokyo 2020 Olympic and Paralympic Games.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 64/3, of 19 October 2009, I now call on the
observer of the International Olympic Committee.
Mr. Bach (International Olympic Committee):
Allow me to thank you, Sir, for the great honour to
address the General Assembly today. My thanks and
gratitude also go to the Government of Japan, under the
leadership of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, for submitting
draft resolution A/74/L.18, on building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal.
On behalf of the International Olympic Committee
(IOC), I would like to particularly thank the
representatives of Monaco and Qatar, co-chairs of the
Group of Friends of Sport for Development and Peace,
as well as the many Member States that have sponsored
the draft resolution.
As a permanent observer to the United Nations, the
IOC has closely accompanied that process. It is indeed
encouraging to see the wide-level support from Member
States for the draft resolution. When our founder Pierre
de Coubertin revived the Olympic Games exactly 125
years ago, he saw it as a way to promote peace among
all nations and people. On our 125th anniversary year,
the draft resolution for adoption today demonstrates
clearly that his vision endures. The draft resolution is a
powerful reminder of the shared values on which both
the United Nations and the IOC are built.

19-3995913/22

A/74/PV.41

As the United Nations looks ahead to its seventyfifth anniversary next year, what better time could
there be than this Olympic Year 2020 to celebrate our
shared values? As Secretary-General António Guterres
eloquently declared, “If there is a true symbol of
peace in our world, it is the Olympic spirit”. With the
adoption of the Olympic Truce draft resolution today,
the Assembly is supporting the Tokyo 2020 Olympic
Games as that true symbol of peace in our world.
Today is therefore a welcome opportunity to
reaffirm the commitment of the IOC to our shared
values of peace, solidarity and respect. Both of our
organizations are guided by universality, equality,
non-discrimination and the rule of law. The alignment
of our common values and principles is reflected in the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). In the SDGs,
the United Nations specifically highlights sport as
an important enabler to achieve, in particular, peace,
health, education and the empowerment of women.
Our commitment to sustainability is reflected in
our comprehensive Olympic Agenda 2020 reforms. In
fact, we have made sustainability a central element
of all our activities. We walk the talk. That is true
for the Olympic House — our new IOC headquarters
building — which is the most sustainable building in
the world in its category. It is also true for the way the
Olympic Games will be run in the future.
The Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games will be the most
prominent expression of the IOC’s commitment to our
shared values, and the SDGs in particular. Thanks to the
Olympic Agenda 2020, we will achieve gender balance
at the Olympic Games for the first time in Tokyo, with
the highest number of female athletes ever in history,
at about 49 per cent, which sends a strong message of
gender equality to the world.
In the spirit of our reforms, our friends from the
Tokyo Organising Committee of the 2020 Olympic
and Paralympic Games, under the great leadership of
its President, His Excellency Mr. Yoshiro Mori, are
promoting sustainability in an outstanding way. Tokyo
aims for carbon-neutral games. From the Olympic
medals made from recycled electronics, to powering
the Olympic Games with renewable energy or using
zero-emission vehicles, among many other actions, the
Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games will be an inspiration for
sustainable development and inclusion, also with regard
to the Paralympic Games. That is why I would like to
particularly express my gratitude to President Mori
14/22

09/12/2019

for his unwavering personal dedication to our values
and principles. The Tokyo 2020 Olympic Games will
be followed by far more than half of the world’s entire
population. Billions of people will see the greatest
sporting event on our planet.
The athletes from each and every one of the
countries represented here will inspire the world.
They will inspire and unite their peoples. They will
bring pride and joy to everyone. It is their sporting
performance, effort, excellence, emotions, joy and
tears that create the magic of the Olympic Games. At
the same time, I can say from my own experience as
an Olympic champion, participating in the Olympic
Games makes one humble because one becomes part
of something bigger — part of an event that unites the
world, an experience that promotes the shared values of
all humankind and a truly global community.
At the Olympic Games, there is no discrimination.
At the Olympic Games, everyone is equal. At the
Olympic Games, everyone respects the same rules. The
Olympic Games are the only event today that brings the
entire world together in peaceful competition.
In Tokyo, the world will see united athletes from
all 206 national Olympic committees and from the
IOC Refugee Olympic Team. While those 11,000 best
athletes of the world are competitors in sport, they will
also be living peacefully together under one roof in the
Olympic Village. That is the Olympic message of peace
to all of humankind. Our gracious Japanese friends and
hosts will interpret that mission of the Olympic Games
in an excellent way.
We can we achieve that universality only if we
enable everyone to participate. To that end, we need
solidarity. That is why the IOC distributes 90 per cent
of all its revenues for the benefit of the athletes and
the development of sport and Paralympic sport around
the globe. In hard figures, that means that we spend
$5 billion over the four years of one Olympiad. Each and
every one of the national Olympic committees benefits
from that support. But no one need worry — not a
single cent of taxpayers’ money is in the IOC budget.
Another illustration of that solidarity is the IOC
Refugee Olympic Team. Exactly four years ago in this
very Hall, I announced the creation of the Refugee
Olympic Team (see A/70/PV.39). Those refugee
athletes then competed on an equal basis with all the
other athletes at the 2016 Rio de Janeiro Olympic
Games. Standing here again four years later, I wish I
19-39959

09/12/2019

could announce that we no longer need an IOC Refugee
Olympic Team. But unfortunately, the reasons for
which we created that team persist. That is why we will
once again have an IOC Refugee Olympic Team for the
2020 Tokyo Olympic Games. Our aim in that regard is
to send a strong message of hope to all refugees and,
at the same time, also raise awareness across the world
about the global refugee crisis.
In order to achieve that global solidarity and true
universality, the IOC and the Olympic Games must
be politically neutral. We can accomplish our mission
to unite the world only if the Olympic Games stand
above and beyond any and all political differences. Our
political neutrality goes hand in hand with the autonomy
of sport. We can be neutral only if we are autonomous.
With that autonomy, we can ensure the worldwide equal
application of the rules and laws of sport. Starting with
its adoption in 2014 of the historic resolution 69/6,
the General Assembly has recognized and supported
that autonomy that is so central to our mission. That
is why I am grateful to be able to personally ask the
Assembly for its continued support for the autonomy
of sport and the political neutrality of the IOC and the
Olympic Games.
In our fragile world, we see our shared values and
principles challenged in many ways, not only in the
international community but also in sport. In sport, we
can see an increasing erosion of respect for the global
rule of law. Some believe that the rule of law does not
apply to them or even want to impose their own laws
on others. Solidarity is under threat, while mistrust and
self-interest are on the rise.
Some want to devalue the Olympic Games to a
purely profit-driven business model. To them we say
that we are a values-based organization. For the IOC,
money is not an end in itself. For the IOC, money is just
a means to achieve our mission of uniting the world in
peace and solidarity. Universality is threatened when
our political neutrality is not respected. Our political
neutrality is undermined whenever organizations or
individuals attempt to use the Olympic Games as a
platform for their own agendas, howsoever legitimate
they may be. The Olympic Games are a sport celebration
of our shared humanity. They are not and must never be a
platform for advancing political or any other potentially
divisive ends The IOC is fully committed to preserving
and strengthening these values and principles of respect
for the rule of law, solidarity and political neutrality.

A/74/PV.41

But our commitment is not enough. We depend
on the support of Governments to ensure our mission
and neutrality. That is why we are so grateful for
the Assembly’s support for this Olympic truce draft
resolution. In supporting this draft resolution, the
Assembly is also supporting the values and principles
that unite us. We urge everyone to take those values
and principles into account when taking decisions that
affect sport. In this Olympic spirit of universality,
solidarity and peace, I invite everyone to join hands
and celebrate our unity in all our diversity at the 2020
Tokyo Olympic Games and beyond. Let us demonstrate
together that our shared humanity is stronger than the
forces that seek to divide us.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/74/L.18, entitled “Building a peaceful and
better world through sport and the Olympic ideal”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/74/L.18, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Argentina,
Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, the Central
African Republic, Chad, Colombia, the Comoros, the
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, France, Gabon, the
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Lichtenstein,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, the Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, the Netherlands, the Niger,
Nigeria, North Macedonia, Oman, Pakistan, Papua

19-3995915/22

A/74/PV.41

New Guinea, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, South Sudan, the Sudan, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Timor-Leste, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States
of America, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to commend the very large number of Member
States that co-sponsored draft resolution A/74/L.18. I
would also like to thank the Japanese delegation, which
drew up the list of sponsors and prepared the draft
resolution in a way that united all Member States.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/74/L.18?
Draft resolution A/74/L.18 was adopted (resolution
74/16).
The Acting President: It is a great pleasure for me
to thank His Excellency Prime Minister Mori Yoshiro,
President of the Tokyo Organizing Committee for the
2020 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games, for his
presence and for introducing resolution 74/16. It has
been a great honour for us to listen to his presentation
of the resolution. I wish the Prime Minister a safe
trip home.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, who has requested to exercise
the right of reply.
Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): As
usual, today the representative of the Israeli regime
made unfounded claims that are contrary to the
situation on the ground. These allegations are used
as a tool to divert attention from the brutalities of the
regime against the Palestinians. Indeed, it is very ironic
that a regime that is well known for its atrocities and
apartheid policies, which are well documented by the
various United Nations organs and agencies, talks about
its non-discriminatory policy on sport. Representatives
of the Israeli regime would do better not to speak
about its inclusive approach towards sport while
discrimination against Palestinians is a characteristic
16/22

09/12/2019

of this apartheid regime, with its shameful 72-year
history, which can be summed up in merely a few
words — occupation, brutality, massacre and flagrant
violation of human rights.
As long as the most basic rights of the innocent
Palestinian people are grossly violated on a daily basis,
how can we expect this regime to provide opportunities
for Palestinians under its illegal sovereignty to be
involved in a sports event? It goes without saying that
the Israeli regime has a long history of following an
opportunistic policy to mislead others and divert
attention from its inhuman and savage actions
against innocent Palestinians and other nations in the
Middle East.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): The
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 11.
Item 31
Prevention of armed conflict
(a) Prevention of armed conflict
Draft resolution (A/74/L.12 /Rev.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Draft resolution
A/74/L.12.Rev.l, which I have the honour to introduce
today under sub-item (a) of agenda item 31, entitled
“Prevention of armed conflict”, focuses on a
pressing legal and political issue, the problem of the
militarization of the occupied territory of Ukraine, in
particular the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol. The draft addresses a matter of
fundamental concern to my country and, I believe, to
the United Nations membership at large.
Since February 2014, the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol have been occupied
by the Russian Federation. The attempt to annex that
sovereign Ukrainian territory was not recognized
by the international community, as evidenced by
resolution 68/262, on the territorial integrity of
Ukraine. Since the Russian Federation’s occupation of
Crimea, there has been no respite in the progressive
militarization of the Crimean peninsula. Specifically, it
involves destabilizing transfers of weapon systems by
Russia to the territory of Ukraine that include nuclear19-39959

09/12/2019

capable aircraft and missiles, weapons, ammunition
and military personnel.
The occupation and subsequent militarization of
Crimea have led to the expansion of the area in which
Russian warships and military aircraft are being
used in the Black Sea region and as far as the entire
Mediterranean basin. That activity therefore has farreaching consequences for security not only in the
Black Sea area but in the whole of Southern Europe,
North Africa and the Middle East. The multiple military
exercises that are conducted by the Russian armed
forces in and around Crimea reflect Russia’s aggressive
policies towards Ukraine and other Black Sea littoral
States. Such exercises also portend considerable longterm negative consequences for the environment in
the region.
The Russian Federation is also actively militarizing
the Sea of Azov by increasing the number of warships
and expanding its presence throughout the Sea of Azov.
The progressive militarization of the Sea of Azov not
only has implications for maritime trade and supplies
into Ukraine but poses an additional military threat to
Ukraine and is contributing to a deterioration in the
security situation in the region. The illegal construction
of a bridge across the Kerch Strait between Russia and
temporarily occupied Crimea has been a substantial
contribution to that threat, in particular by facilitating
the further militarization of Crimea and the presence
of additional Russian maritime and other forces in
the area on the pretext of protecting the bridge and
its infrastructure.
The unlawful action taken by the Russian
Federation in the Black Sea on 25 November 2018,
when three Ukrainian vessels were barred from
entering the Sea of Azov via the Kerch Strait and
subsequently attacked and captured by Russian ships
on the pretext that they were violating Russian borders,
are yet more proof of the urgency of the problem of
the militarization of Crimea and parts of the Black
Sea and the Sea of Azov. We took positive note of the
Russian Federation’s release of 24 personnel and their
vessels. Regrettably, however, the vessels themselves
were returned in unusable condition, without weapons,
documents or parts of their equipment, including
sensitive communication systems.
I have already stressed that as the Russian
Federation continues its militarization of the occupied
Crimean peninsula and the maritime area around it, the

A/74/PV.41

security situation in the region continues to deteriorate.
What is more alarming is that the occupying Power
is taking steps to nuclearize Crimea, specifically by
deploying carriers and other means capable of delivering
nuclear weapons, and by actively developing nuclear
infrastructure on the peninsula. Taking into account
Crimea’s strategic location in the region and the fact that
Ukraine is a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons as a non-nuclear-weapon State, the
Russian Federation’s deployment of nuclear forces in
Crimea constitutes a serious challenge to the existing
non-proliferation regime and should be met with an
appropriate response by the international community.
On the broader international scale, Russia’s
advances in its hybrid war against Ukraine, if not
resolutely addressed and reversed, could invite
aggressive ventures on the part of other, hitherto
hesitant actors and open a Pandora’s box in other parts
of the world. By tackling this threat, therefore, each
and every State Member of the United Nations will be
contributing to its own peace and security.
Given the current volatile security situation in
the areas mentioned and its potentially far-reaching
negative implications, Ukraine, together with a
group of 23 States, has submitted an updated draft
resolution entitled “Problem of the militarization of
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as parts of the Black Sea
and the Sea of Azov”. As the Assembly can see, the
number of sponsors has increased to 42. We are very
grateful for this strong solidarity and support, and I
believe we are now speaking on behalf of all the sponsors
of the draft resolution and the wider United Nations
membership. The main goals of the draft resolution are
to urge the Russian Federation to withdraw its military
forces from Crimea and to stop the illegal occupation of
Ukraine’s territory, as well as to ensure that Russia halts
its harassment of commercial vessels and restrictions
on international shipping in the Black Sea and the Sea
of Azov.
By bringing the issue of the militarization of
Crimea before the General Assembly, Ukraine and
the draft resolution’s other sponsors are not seeking
confrontation or politicization. Rather, we want to
emphasize that it is of the utmost importance that
every Member State fully support the principles of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
I hope that the draft resolution will enjoy the same
support and constructive attitude from Member States

19-3995917/22

A/74/PV.41

as have other General Assembly resolutions on Ukraine.
I urge all Member States to vote in favour, which would
be a clear demonstration of their strong commitment to
the principles of international law and the Charter.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We
shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/74/L.12/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor for explanations of vote
or position before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): The draft resolutions that the General
Assembly adopts generally fall into three groups.
The first group is consensus draft resolutions. Work
is done on them, positions are agreed on and Member
States often reach difficult compromises, because
they understand the power of the message that such
collective decisions send. Fortunately, that is how a
majority are adopted.
The second is draft resolutions that individual
Member States are unable to support, for one reason or
another. As a rule, these scenarios are also the result of
painstaking, expert efforts. We in the General Assembly
try to avoid such results, since the non-consensus
nature of such resolutions makes their implementation
significantly less effective.
Lastly, there is the third and smallest group of draft
resolutions, which are introduced for political reasons
and have no relationship to reality. As a rule they are
supported by about a third of Member States on a basis
of bloc discipline, while a majority of delegations
either abstain or do not participate in the voting,
thereby demonstrating their true attitude to such
initiatives. They do not usually even involve expert
consultations, since the task of reaching a consensus
or obtaining a majority of votes is not the point for the
State introducing the draft resolution. Their distinctive
feature is that after their adoption, their authors, in
defiance of arithmetic and common sense, immediately
begin proclaiming the alleged significant support of
the international community. Of course, there can be
no doubt as to the defects of such arguments.
Today we are dealing with a clear example of the
third type. It is hard to understand what the aims of
the authors of draft resolution A/74/L.12/Rev.1 are in
making us waste our time for a second consecutive year
by considering a politicized, provocative text based
18/22

09/12/2019

on conjecture, speculation and distorted facts. The
Crimeans made their choice long ago. Under the threat
of a bloody massacre from the nationalists who came
to power in 2014, they reunited with Russia. History
has shown how right and prescient that decision was.
The residents of Donbas who merely asked that Kyiv
consider their concerns about the new Government
policies were attacked with bombs, shells and bullets.
The resulting ongoing internal conflict in Ukraine
has killed, wounded or maimed thousands of people
and left millions refugees or internally displaced.
According to various estimates, between 3 million and
4 million Ukrainians have settled or been forced to earn
their living in Russia alone. The Maidan authorities
and their Western sponsors are still trying to hide this
entire national tragedy under the guise of a mythical
Russian aggression.
This draft resolution is based on blatant lies and
assertions that things in Crimea are terrible and on
claims that Crimeans are languishing under Russia’s
annexation and occupation. It is revealing that in order
to ensure that no one can see the absurdity of this
Maidan propaganda for themselves, one of the draft
resolution’s paragraphs calls on Member States to
refrain from visiting Russian Crimea. That is a very farsighted step by the authors, since anyone who does visit
Crimea comes away with diametrically different views
and conclusions that bring down the entire premise of
the draft resolution like a house of cards. It is sufficient
to ask this year’s record number of 7 million tourist
visitors to the peninsula, 1 million of whom came
from Ukraine, about their impressions. They are not
hiding their opinions and are expressing them both in
interviews and through social media.
One would actually prefer not to dwell on the canards
that the Ukrainian draft resolution contains — lies upon
lies and untruths upon untruths. Even its title contains
a lie. The problem of the militarization of Crimea does
not exist. For members’ information, in accordance
with agreements between Russia and Ukraine before
2014, our country had the right to deploy up to 25,000
military personnel on the peninsula. In reality, there
were only 12,000 of them, versus 15,000 Ukrainians.
There are even fewer of them today, and we are publicly
informing the international community about that.
Right now I feel genuinely uncomfortable about
the fact that my colleagues in this Hall are once
again being dragged by the Ukrainian Permanent
Mission into a politicized, provocative propaganda
19-39959

09/12/2019

spectacle that nobody needs. I refer specifically to the
Permanent Mission of Ukraine because we honestly do
not understand Ukraine’s true position. It so happens
that a meeting of the Normandy quartet is taking place
in Paris this very day, ahead of which our Ukrainian
colleagues have done everything they can in words and
deeds to create a favourable backdrop. The adoption of
the draft resolution today was intended to hinder the
constructive course of that meeting. The fact is that its
authors have done their best to pull out of the closet all
the skeletons that the Ukrainian electorate had firmly
decided to lay to rest through their convincing vote for
President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and his party.
Incidentally, as preparations were being made
for the Paris meeting, we and everyone else involved
heard much that was positive and encouraging from
the President of Ukraine himself. And in any case,
what he said is entirely incompatible with the spin that
the delegation of Ukraine is now proposing for the
Assembly’s consideration. Ultimately, it is difficult
to avoid asking oneself whose orders our Ukrainian
colleagues are following. Are they those of the
Ukrainian people, who firmly support a rapprochement
with Russia and internal peace in their country, or
of the party of war, who do not want to give up their
positions and are thereby keeping Ukraine in a state of
chaos, civil war, misery and poverty?
In order to enable our colleagues to ask themselves
those questions, we will ask for the draft resolution
proposed by Ukraine, Western countries and their
satellites to be put to a vote. For understandable reasons,
we are calling for a vote against it. And in order to
ensure that no doubts remain about our Ukrainian
colleagues’ lying arguments, we urge everyone to come
to Crimea to see for themselves. We and the Crimean
people have nothing to hide and plenty to be proud of.
Mr. Al Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to explain its position
on draft resolution A/74/L.12/Rev.1, entitled “Problem
of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as
parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
The Syrian delegation continues to believe that
some members misuse the agenda item on the prevention
of armed conflict, through negative practices such
as submitting politicized draft resolutions that lack
consensus. Those same members insist on policies
of exclusion and unilateral action and disregard

A/74/PV.41

the established methodology based on holding
consultations, taking the concerns and positions of
States into account and providing sufficient time to
arrive at consensus draft resolutions. We are seeing a
strange and dangerous tendency on the part of some
Member States to abuse the agenda of the General
Assembly in order to put political pressure on States
and worsen disputes among them, even if that comes
at the cost of unnecessarily and needlessly overloading
our programme of work and exhausting the energy and
human and financial resources of the Organization in a
way that undermines the main objectives and purposes
of the Charter of the United Nations.
In short, such draft resolutions, and in this case
I mean A/74/L.12/Rev.1, are a clear reflection of
political and financial polarization and a direct effort
to spread disunity and discord. This draft resolution
should never be seen as an attempt by its sponsors and
supporters to achieve peace, security and development
in the region in question for everyone without exception
or discrimination.
Syria’s legal understanding and political position
regarding the situation in the Republic of Crimea are
based on the fact that the results of the referendum
conducted there on 16 March 2014 are reflected in the
current stable situation in the region. We reaffirm that
the draft resolution before us today is politicized and
unbalanced, and does not take account of the many
evolving facts and events in Crimea. As such, it cannot
help to stabilize the region but will rather enable
certain Governments to take advantage of the current
state of relations between two historical neighbours,
the Russian Federation and Ukraine, in order to exert
greater political pressure on Moscow.
It should be pointed out that today, at the very same
time that we are meeting here in the General Assembly,
the leaders of the Normandy quartet are meeting
in Paris. That summit is a clear example of how the
international community gives multilateral diplomacy
opportunities for resolving disputes between two
neighbours, and on that basis we call on the sponsors
of this draft resolution to reconsider their position and
to give multilateral diplomacy a serious and genuine
chance instead of deepening the dispute between
Moscow and Kyiv and turning the Assembly into a
platform for escalating tensions by proposing such
non-consensus draft resolutions.

19-3995919/22

A/74/PV.41

09/12/2019

In conclusion, in opposing the politicization of
the General Assembly, our position today is based
on our respect for the Charter of the United Nations
and international treaties, and on our commitment to
preserving the sanctity of the rules of procedure. We
must take care not to involve the General Assembly
in politicized matters or to overload its agenda with
non-consensus draft resolutions, especially when
they do not serve to resolve disputes at regional or
international levels or contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security in a region or the world
at large. We will therefore vote against draft resolution
A/74/L.12/Rev.1 and encourage all Member States to
do the same or to abstain from voting.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before
the voting.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/74/L.12/Rev.1, entitled “Problem
of the militarization of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, as well as
parts of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/74/L.12/Rev.1: Liechtenstein, the Marshall
Islands and New Zealand.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria, Canada,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino,
20/22

Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Vanuatu, Zambia
Against:
Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cambodia, China,
Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Nicaragua,
Philippines, Russian Federation, Serbia, Sudan,
Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Ghana, Grenada, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Jamaica,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kuwait, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mexico, Mongolia, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Solomon Islands,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
Draft resolution A/74/L.12/Rev.1 was adopted
by 63 votes to 19, with 66 abstentions (resolution
74/17).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Zambia informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): Before
giving the floor to those wishing to speak in explanation
of vote after the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): As a small country,
Singapore is deeply committed to multilateralism
and respect for international law. Singapore affirms
the principles of respect for territorial integrity
and non-interference in the domestic affairs of a
sovereign State, and respect for sovereignty and the
rule of law. Singapore opposes the annexation of any
19-39959

09/12/2019

A/74/PV.41

country or territory, since that is a clear violation of
international law.

Paris in the Normandy format, and we hope that its
results will bring positive momentum going forward.

Singapore notes that several changes were made
to the text of the resolution we have adopted this year
as resolution 74/17. While we have concerns about
some of the language used in the resolution, we will
continue to support it as a matter of principle because
it is fundamentally related to the question of Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Singapore also
reaffirms its clear and consistent view that all countries
must adhere to international law and support the right
to freedom of navigation, as provided for in the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

Mr. Mamdouhi (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation wishes to speak in explanation of vote to
reiterate its position on the Russian and Ukrainian
dispute. We are of the view that the parties concerned
should pursue the peaceful resolution of disputes
through direct political dialogue in furthering efforts
to achieve a workable solution to the issue, on which
agreements were reached in Minsk in 2015 and endorsed
by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015).

Mr. Tozik (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Republic of Belarus supports reaching peace and
agreement in Ukraine. We are certainly not indifferent
to the fate of the neighbours who are our brothers
and sisters in Ukraine, and resolving the conflict
there is crucial. Compliance by the parties with the
Minsk agreements remains the only appropriate basis
for resolving the crisis. We intend to continue to do
everything in our power to help the peace process, and
we are ready to continue to provide the conditions to
enable negotiations on the Minsk platform in any format.
We also want to note that the Monitoring Mission of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
which includes representatives of Belarus, plays an
important role in the settlement process. Belarus voted
against resolution 74/17, proposed by Ukraine, in
connection with our firm position on documents of this
kind. We consistently oppose overloading the agenda of
the General Assembly and its specialized bodies with
subjects that concern specific countries and are used in
order to pursue political confrontation.
Considering such resolutions in the United Nations
only increases confrontation and does not help us
to resolve specific issues on the ground. Today’s
resolution intensifies the negative rhetoric and reduces
the possibilities for finding a peaceful solution to
the situation. The resolution also lacks the necessary
references to the Minsk agreements. We think that
practically speaking, only real, live dialogue and not
unilateral accusations delivered from the rostrum of the
United Nations can bring Ukraine long-awaited peace.
We therefore support the efforts of the Trilateral Contact
Group on Ukraine and its working subgroups, which
regularly hold their meetings in Minsk. We welcome
the latest round of negotiations taking place today in

Given that there is an agreed international
mechanism in place that is supported by the Security
Council, addressing the dispute simultaneously in the
General Assembly could intensify existing differences
and exacerbate divisions among Member States
instead of achieving an effective resolution of the
issue. Such parallel action could even undermine the
internationally recognized agreed settlement format on
Ukraine. We need to strengthen the already mutually
agreed mechanism.
Our principled position is to support a peaceful
solution to the Ukraine and Russia dispute. We firmly
believe that the issue must be resolved by the States
concerned; any solution outside of that framework will
not work unless endorsed by both the Russians and
the Ukrainians.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): On many previous
occasions, Indonesia has reaffirmed its basic principle
of respecting and supporting the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. For us, respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States is the fundamental
principle governing relations among nations. Indonesia
is therefore against any action involving the annexation
of any sovereign country or territory, as that is a clear
violation of said principle as well as international law.
With regard to the current situation in Crimea,
Indonesia has continually and consistently emphasized
the importance of dialogue and diplomacy between
the States concerned in order to resolve the ongoing
problems in Crimea, the city of Sevastopol and part of
the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov.
Indonesia abstained in the voting on resolution
74/17 because we are convinced that the resolution of
the situation in Ukraine can be pursued only through a
peaceful settlement process, including direct political

19-3995921/22

A/74/PV.41

dialogue. We reiterate the need for all parties to exercise
maximum restraint to manage the crisis responsibly
and to uphold international law.
We call on all parties concerned to refrain from
taking any action that may further escalate tensions and
be detrimental to possible peaceful efforts.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): I now
give the floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Dabouis (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, as well as
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union remains steadfast in its
commitment to Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized
borders. The European Union reiterates that it does
not recognize the illegal annexation of Ukraine’s
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol by the Russian Federation and continues to
condemn this violation of international law. It remains
a direct challenge to international security, with grave
implications for the international legal order that
protects the territorial integrity, unity and sovereignty
of all States.
The European Union remains committed to fully
implementing its non-recognition policy, including
through restrictive measures. The European Union
calls again on States Members of the United Nations to
consider similar non-recognition measures in line with
resolution 68/262.
The increasing militarization of the peninsula
continues to have a negative impact on the security

22/22

09/12/2019

situation in the Black Sea region. The EU condemns
the fact that Russia, in violation of international
humanitarian law, automatically imposes Russian
citizenship on Crimean residents and conscripts them
into the armed forces of the Russian Federation.
Russia’s violations of international law have led to
a dangerous increase in tensions in the Kerch Strait and
the Sea of Azov. The unjustified use of force by Russia
against Ukraine on 25 November 2018 is a reminder
of the negative effects of the illegal annexation of the
Crimean peninsula on regional stability.
The European Union noted the release of unlawfully
detained Ukrainian seamen and the return to Ukraine of
the three vessels seized a year ago in the Black Sea near
the Kerch Strait. The European Union has repeatedly
stressed that Russia needs to comply with the order
of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of
25 May 2019 and return the seized vessels to Ukraine.
However, we were deeply disappointed to read reports
about the dismantled state in which the vessels were
returned to their legitimate owner.
The European Union condemns the construction
of the Kerch Bridge without Ukraine’s consent, which
constitutes a further violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty
and territorial integrity. The EU expects Russia to
ensure unhindered and free passage of all ships through
the Kerch Strait to and from the Azov Sea, in accordance
with international law. The illegal restrictions on such
passage have negative economic consequences for
Ukraine’s ports in the Azov Sea and the whole region.
The Acting President (spoke in Arabic): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 31.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

19-39959
