S/PRST/2004/34

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 October 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5052nd meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 October 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the items entitled “Justice and the
Rule of Law: the United Nations Role”, and “Post-conflict national reconciliation:
role of the United Nations”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council thanks the Secretary General for his report dated
3 August 2004, which reissued on 23 August 2004 (S/2004/616), and reaffirms
the vital importance that the Council attaches to promoting justice and the rule
of law, and post-conflict national reconciliation. The Council will consider, as
appropriate in its deliberations, the recommendations set out in paragraph 64
of the report.
“The Security Council urges the Secretariat of the United Nations to
make proposals for implementation of the recommendations set out in
paragraph 65 of the report, and draws attention in particular to the importance
of the practical measures set out in that paragraph that can be implemented
rapidly, including coordination of existing expertise and resources, setting up
data bases and web based resources and developing rosters of experts,
workshops and training. The Council urges Member States which are
interested in doing so to contribute national expertise and materials to these
developments within their means, and to improve their capacities in these
areas.
“The Security Council recalls the important statement made by the
Secretary General to the 59th session of the United Nations General Assembly
on 21 September 2004 and endorses his view that ‘It is by reintroducing the
rule of law and confidence in its impartial application that we can hope to
resuscitate societies shattered by conflict’. The Council stresses the
importance and urgency of the restoration of justice and the rule of law in
post-conflict societies, not only to come to terms with past abuses, but also to
promote national reconciliation and to help prevent a return to conflict in the
future. The Council emphasizes that such processes must be inclusive, gendersensitive and open to the full participation of women.
“The Security Council underlines the importance of assessing the
particular justice and rule of law needs in each host country, taking into
consideration the nature of the country’s legal system, traditions and
institutions, and of avoiding a ‘one size fits all’ approach. The Council
04-53938 (E) 061004

*0453938*

S/PRST/2004/34

recognizes that building national capacities and independent national
institutions is essential, that local ownership and leadership in that process
should be encouraged and respected, and that international structures can play
a complementary and supportive role.
“The Security Council emphasizes that ending the climate of impunity is
essential in a conflict and post-conflict society’s efforts to come to terms with
past abuses, and in preventing future abuses. The Council draws attention to
the full range of transitional justice mechanisms that should be considered,
including national, international and ‘mixed’ criminal tribunals, truth and
reconciliation commissions, and underlines that those mechanisms should
concentrate not only on individual responsibility for serious crimes, but also
on the need to seek peace, truth and national reconciliation. The Council
welcomes the report’s balanced appraisal of the lessons to be learned from the
experience of the ad hoc international criminal tribunals and ‘mixed’ tribunals.
“The Security Council recalls that justice and rule of law at the
international level are of key importance for promoting and maintaining peace,
stability and development in the world. The Council underlines also the
importance of helping to prevent future conflicts through addressing their root
causes in a legitimate and fair manner.
“The Security Council warmly welcomes the Secretary General’s
decision to make the United Nations work to strengthen the rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict societies a priority for the
remainder of his tenure. The Council invites the Secretary General to keep it
informed on the Secretariat’s progress in taking forward the recommendations
set out in paragraph 65 of the report and expresses the intention to consider
this matter again within 6 months.”

2
