S/PV.9100

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9100th meeting

Tuesday, 26 July 2022, 5.05 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Flynn
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Ms. Jacobs
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation concerning Iraq

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-43843 (E)
*2243843*

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

same day, that committee visited the site of the attack
to witness the devastation, collect evidence and engage
with witnesses and local authorities.

The meeting was called to order at 5.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Iraq
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Iraq and Türkiye to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Fuad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert.
Ms.
Hennis-Plasschaert:
I
thank
you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to provide an update
on recent tragic events in the Zakho district of the
Dohuk governorate, which resulted in the loss of nine
civilian lives and the injuring of 33 others.
In my most recent briefing to the Council (see
S/PV.9034), I questioned — and not for the first
time — the use of shelling and missiles as the new
normal for Iraq, warning that that was a very risky way
to advance interests, and one that further weakens the
State of Iraq.
Here is what we know so far. In the early afternoon
of 20 July, five artillery rounds struck the Parkha resort.
The resort is a well-known tourist destination and, as
would be expected at this time of year, it was packed with
visitors, including children. The first round impacted on
an unpopulated hillside overlooking Parkha. However,
the next rounds hit the centre of the resort, killing, as
I said, nine civilians, including three children, one of
whom was a 1-year-old infant, and injuring 33. Eleven
of the injured have reportedly undergone surgery, and
three remain in critical condition.
Immediately following the attack, Prime Minister
Mustafa Al-Kadhimi established a committee. The
2/14

26/07/2022

Based on its assessment of the evidence collected,
the Government of Iraq, in the clearest terms attributed
the tragic events to Türkish armed forces. In the
meantime, the Türkish Foreign Ministry issued a press
release, stating:
“Türkiye is against all kinds of attacks targeting
civilians, that it is ready to take all steps to reveal
the truth, calling on Iraqi Government officials
not to make statements under the influence of the
rhetoric and propaganda of the treacherous terrorist
organization and to cooperate in bringing the real
perpetrators of that tragic incident to light.”
The next day, on social media, the Türkish Embassy
in Baghdad stated:
“We join our condolences for our Iraqi brothers
who were martyred at the hands of the [Kurdistan
Workers’ Party (PKK)] terrorist organization.”
Meanwhile, also on 20 July, the PKK issued a
statement denying presence in the area, blaming
Türkiye for the attack.
In response to the tragic events, Iraq’s National
Security Council held an emergency session the same
day. That Council strongly condemned the Türkish
attack and rejected the use of Iraqi territory as a base to
attack neighbouring countries and settle accounts.
Among other directives issued, the Foreign
Minister was tasked with preparing an integrated file
on the repeated Türkish attacks against Iraq, as well
as to summon the Türkish Ambassador and recall the
Iraqi Chargé d’affaires from Ankara, without sending a
new ambassador to Türkiye. The Ministry for Foreign
Affairs noted that Iraq’s Government would resort to
the highest levels of diplomatic response, including the
Security Council.
On 21 July, Iraqi leaders from across the political
spectrum held a high-level meeting and issued a
joint statement condemning the Türkish attack and
supporting the procedures for international complaints.
On 23 July, Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi
met with Kurdistan Regional Government Prime
Minister Masrour Barzani. In the joint statement
issued after the meeting, the two sides expressed their
22-43843

26/07/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.9100

strong condemnation of the Türkish aggression on
Iraqi territory.

only recklessly heightens national and regional tensions,
but also causes, as we saw, grave human tragedies.

Also on 23 July, the Council of Representatives
convened to discuss the incident in the presence of
the Foreign and Defence Ministers, the Army Chief of
Staff and the Deputy Commander of Joint Operations.

The President: I thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her briefing.

In his presentation to Parliament, the Foreign
Minister noted that more than 22,700 Türkish violations
of Iraqi sovereignty had been recorded since 2018. He
also stated that the Foreign Ministry had submitted
296 memoranda of protest against Türkish interference
since 2018.
During the same meeting, the parliamentary
Security and Defence Committee recommended the
expulsion of PKK elements from Iraq, the withdrawal
of all Türkish forces, the redeployment of federal forces
along the border with Türkiye, the abolition of any
security agreements with Türkiye and a review of the
defence budget to enhance its military capabilities.
In essence: while no one wishes for further
escalation, Iraq demands that Türkiye withdraw its
forces from all Iraqi lands and calls for an investigation.
This horrific attack on a well-known and clearly
identifiable tourist site demonstrates a shocking
disregard for civilian life and for the universally
accepted standards of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law, which seek to
protect civilians. While all parties to any conflict must
take all feasible precautions to avoid harm to civilians
at all times, that was clearly not adhered to.
In my conversation with Iraq’s Prime Minister
yesterday, he once again emphasized the importance of
a transparent and thorough investigation, independent
or jointly. He said that it was vital to put a stop to
speculation, denials, misunderstandings and rising
tensions. Meanwhile, I understand that Türkiye is also
ready to address the issue jointly with Iraq in order to
determine exactly what happened.
In conclusion, as I said many times in past years,
Iraq rightfully rejects the notion that it can be treated
as an arena for external and regional rivalries, where
neighbours, and any other actor for that matter, violate
its sovereignty and territorial integrity routinely and
with impunity.
Indeed, it is of the greatest importance that all
attacks on Iraqi territory cease. Such aggression not

I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq.
Mr. Hussein (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): It is a great
honour for me to be here addressing the Security
Council. I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this urgent meeting. I take this opportunity
to congratulate Ambassador Costa Filho, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, on his country’s assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and on his tireless and transparent efforts in steering
the Council’s work. I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, for her briefing on the subject
of this urgent Council meeting. The Government of
the Republic of Iraq welcomes the press statement
(SC/14980) issued by the Security Council on Monday,
25 July, condemning the blatant attack.
On Wednesday, 20 July, at 1.50 p.m., the Türkish
army committed an act aggression against the territory
and sovereignty of Iraq and the lives of its citizens by
way of heavy artillery shelling on Iraqi families while
they were at the Barakh resort in Dohuk governorate,
resulting in nine martyrs, including one child who was
1 year old, and wounding 33 unarmed civilians. Civilian
infrastructure was damaged, causing material losses.
We informed the Security Council of the situation
in a letter dated 21 July, which contains details of
the incident.
Iraq condemns in the strongest terms the flagrant
aggression by the Türkish army against innocent
civilians and civilian property, which constitutes an act
of military aggression against the sovereignty, security
and territorial integrity of Iraq. It is a violation of, and a
threat to, regional and international peace and security.
That aggression is a violation of the provisions and
norms of international law, international humanitarian
law and the principles of good-neighbourliness. It is a
violation of the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the goals upon which the
Organization was founded.
In the aftermath of that military attack against
Iraqi territory, the Government of Iraq established
a national committee, which I chair, to investigate

22-438433/14

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

the circumstances surrounding the aggression. The
committee has gathered evidence from the site of the
attack, including shrapnel from heavy 155-millimetre
calibre artillery shells, which are the same as those
used by the Türkish army in the area surrounding the
resort. The committee will also establish guidelines to
deal with the crisis
That aggression is tangible evidence before the
Council on Türkiye’s disregard of Iraq’s demands to
end its continued military violations against Iraqi
sovereignty. Türkiye must withdraw its military forces
from Iraqi territories. For example, since 2018, the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Iraq issued 296 bilateral
official notes condemning those violations, which
were sent to its Türkish counterpart. To date, a total
of 22,742 violations have been recorded. All of them
have been documented in eight identical letters by the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Iraq to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and
the President of the Security Council. They have all
been published as official documents of the Council,
the most recent of which is contained in document
S/2022/500, dated 23 June.
Iraq already informed the Security Council of the
matter in 2015, resulting in its 7589th meeting (see
S/PV.7589) on the Türkish military incursion in Iraqi
territories. At that time, Iraq called on the Council
to adopt a draft resolution condemning the incursion
and calling on Türkiye to withdraw its military forces
from Iraqi territories. However, this time we address
the Council directly to complain and document this
crime against humanity, perpetrated in broad daylight
by the Türkish army in an area lacking any illegal
military presence.
Once again, we condemn before the international
community the illegal presence of Türkish military
forces on Iraqi territories, and we warn against the
continued aggressive behaviour by the Türkish army,
which could lead to a bad end amid overwhelming
popular anger from the south to the north of the Iraqi
Kurdistan region. We reiterate our condemnation of the
decision adopted by the Türkish Parliament in October
2021 to extend the presence of Türkish forces in Iraq
for another two years, which we stress will undermine
the security of all.
The Government of Iraq reaffirms its commitment
to resolving all accumulated disagreements through
diplomatic means, dialogue and mutual cooperation.
4/14

26/07/2022

Based on that and in accordance with Article 35 of
the Charter, we call on the Council to shoulder its
responsibilities in maintaining international peace and
security by adopting an urgently needed draft resolution
compelling Türkiye to withdraw its occupying military
forces from all of Iraqi territories under the Council’s
total supervision. If Türkiye refuses, then it must be
held accountable.
Türkiye must stop the Iraqi people’s suffering
by halting its continued violations of Iraqi airspace,
territorial integrity and sovereignty. Moreover, we
call on the Council to include this item on its agenda,
namely, “The situation concerning Iraq and Türkiye”
due to repeated Türkish violations of Iraqi territories
and airspace for several years now, which result
in defenceless Iraqi civilian casualties, as Türkiye
is illegally expanding its military presence on
Iraqi territories.
We are certain that, today and in the future, the
Türkish side will try to justify its military presence in
Iraq by presenting many illegal arguments. The Türkish
side will present unfounded reasons linked to an
internal Türkish problem with the Kurdistan Workers’
Party of Türkiye (PKK). Türkiye will claim that there is
an agreement with Iraq that would allow for a Türkish
military presence in Iraq so that it could resolve its
Türkish problem. Türkiye will also refer illegally once
again to Article 51 of the Charter to justify its actions,
which are in violation of Iraq’s sovereignty. The same
Article 51 compels Türkiye to inform the Security
Council of military violations carried out in Iraq.
Türkiye is failing to uphold Article 51, which means
that Türkiye is violating the Charter.
Due to this situation, we reaffirm, before the entire
international community, through the Security Council,
that there is no security agreement whatsoever between
Iraq and Türkiye that allows for an incursion into Iraq
by Türkish forces to chase the PKK. Nevertheless,
Türkiye is adamant that such an agreement exists. We
recall that the Türkish side is responsible for having
created the crisis as a result of a 2013 initiative between
Ankara and the PKK in which, in one of its paragraphs,
it calls on the militants of the PKK to withdraw from
Türkiye and move into Iraqi territory, while totally
disregarding our security concerns and our sovereign
right over our territories.
The Government of Iraq has emphasized that this
action poses a threat to peace and security in Iraq and
22-43843

26/07/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

S/PV.9100

the region. Furthermore, in a letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council in May 2013, the
former Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq informed
the Council on the matter. The letter was recorded as an
official document of the Council. At the time, we called
on the Council to stop such actions.

Thirdly, we call for this item, namely, “The situation
concerning Iraq and Türkiye”, to be included on the
Council’s agenda in the light of the repeated Türkish
violations of Iraq’s territories and airspace in the past
several years, which has claimed the lives of several
unarmed Iraqi victims.

In that context, the Government of Iraq rejects
Türkiye’s approach, which exports its domestic problems
to Iraq. Iraq must not pay the price for Türkiye’s
domestic problems. At the same time, my Government
reiterates that the federal security authorities are
responsible for border security. Those authorities
coordinate with security authorities and the Peshmerga
forces associated with the Government of the Kurdistan
region of Iraq in order to take the necessary measures
to combat armed groups and terrorist organizations.

Fourthly, the Türkish Government must compensate
for the losses incurred by unarmed civilians and by
economic activity and tourism in Iraq as a result of the
Türkish artillery shelling.

Article 7 of the Iraqi Constitution notes that the
State is committed to combating terrorism in all
forms and will protect its territories from being used
by terrorists in any ways. Iraq calls on the Council to
investigate that issue given its great importance. We
believe in the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, which reflect our shared
commitment to tolerance, peaceful coexistence and
good-neighbourliness. We must also join forces to
maintain international peace and security.
We hope that the Council is aware of the existing
threat and will shoulder its responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. In order to demonstrate
Iraq’s sincere willingness and good intentions, we call
on the Council to establish an international independent
panel of inquiry to investigate this act of aggression.
Iraq has a number of requests that it wishes to
address to the Council.
First, we request the Council to adopt a draft
resolution that compels Türkiye to withdraw its
military forces from all Iraqi territories, because they
maintain an illegitimate presence in Iraq that was not
requested and will destabilize the security situation and
lead to instability.
Secondly, this aggression must be strongly
condemned, and the perpetrators of this heinous act
must be held accountable, as it targeted civilians. It
is a threat to Iraq’s national security and to regional
and international peace and security. An international
independent panel of inquiry must be established to
investigate the aggression.

Iraq underlines its responsibility to support
regional and international security and stability in a
transparent manner and is fully prepared to work with
the United Nations and other States concerned to ensure
that elements of the PKK leave Iraqi territory, as their
presence destabilizes security and causes instability
in Iraq.
The people of Iraq are following today’s meeting
with great interest and considerable hope. They believe
that the United Nations and the Council are guarantors
of international peace and security. The people of Iraq
are confident that the Council will spare no effort to
safeguard and preserve peace and will work hard to
protect the rights of States that are under threat. The
people of Iraq hope that the Council will play a decisive
and effective role in finding solutions to prevent any
future repercussions of this crisis.
In conclusion, the Government of the Republic
of Iraq will spare no effort in contributing positively
to resolving conflicts in the region and promoting
understanding among neighbouring countries through
peaceful means. We categorically refuse to make Iraq
the stage for furthering the agenda and interests of
other countries.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We would like to once
again express our condolences to the people and the
Government of Iraq. Our hearts and prayers are with
the families of the victims. We share their sorrow and
wish the injured a swift recovery.
We would like to inform the Security Council
that, immediately after the attack, we were in touch
with the Iraqi Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, and a few hours later the Türkish Ministry
for Foreign Affairs issued a statement. We made it
clear that Türkiye is ready to take all steps to unveil

22-438435/14

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

the truth. In Ankara, Baghdad and Erbil, our officials
have conveyed the same message at various levels,
rejecting the allegations and expressing their support
for Iraqi authorities in their investigations. They also
recalled that it was not the first smear campaign against
my country.
On 22 August last year, two Iraqi tourists were
killed in the same area. Their car was attacked.
Immediately after the incident, there was a campaign
to blame my country for what had happened. However,
it was eventually revealed that the Kurdistan Workers’
Party (PKK) terrorist organization was responsible for
the attack.
The reactions of the Iraqi authorities to our calls for
cooperation vary according to their political affiliation.
Some were on the same page as we were — they wanted
to find out the truth. They noted that they believed in
the importance of bilateral relations between the two
countries; we wish to thank those Iraqi authorities
for their responsible approach to accountability.
However, other Iraqi officials chose escalation; instead
of diplomacy and cooperation, they chose to spread
harmful messages through the media, while provoking
the Iraqi public and utilizing that information to drive a
wedge between the Türkish and Iraqi people. Therefore,
we believe that today’s meeting is very important for
setting the record straight, not only with members of the
Council but also with our brothers and sisters in Iraq.
My country has always maintained its strong
support for Iraq’s sovereignty, territorial integrity,
stability and prosperity. Any claims to the contrary are
false and ill-intended. Let us make it very clear: the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq are breached
by terrorist organizations, not by Türkiye.
Exercising full control over territory, a monopoly
on the use of force, raising a flag and controlling
taxation are some of the functions of having and
exercising sovereignty. If those functions are not under
the control of the State, how can we talk about the
exercise of sovereignty?
As we speak, the flags of the PKK terrorist
organization are raised in certain parts of northern
Iraq — not the flags of the federal Government
or of the Kurdistan Regional Government. Who
has control over checkpoints in certain parts of
northern Iraq? The PKK terrorists — not the federal
Government or the Kurdistan Regional Government.
Who illegitimately taxes the local people? The PKK
6/14

26/07/2022

terrorist organization — not the local Government or
the Kurdistan Regional Government. Those are but a
few examples.
The truth is that the Iraqi Government cannot
exercise effective sovereignty over certain parts of
its territory in the north. We estimate that the PKK
controls an area of at least 10,000 square kilometres in
Iraq. Nearly 800 villages have been forcibly evacuated
by the PKK, and all of those spots have become safe
havens for the terrorists.
In Sinjar, for instance, the Iraqi Government has
no authority whatsoever throughout the entire city.
The Sinjar Agreement was signed in the presence of
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, yet it
is still not being implemented. Yazidis are not allowed
to return, and the PKK presence in Sinjar is still
being tolerated.
Makhmour camp is yet another example. That place
lost its refugee camp status long ago. The forces of the
Iraqi federal Government, the Peshmerga, and even
the civilian Iraqi authorities, are denied access to that
camp. It serves as a logistics hub and training ground
for the terrorist organization. In July 2019, a Türkish
diplomat was assassinated in Erbil by a regular visitor
to Makhmour camp. Despite our repeated requests, the
perpetrators of that attack have not been extradited
to Türkiye.
Over the past 40 years, the PKK has been
responsible for the deaths of more than 40,000 people
in my country. It is worth mentioning that the United
States, the United Kingdom, the European Union and
many other countries have designated the PKK as a
terrorist organization. Yet, here in this Chamber, just
a few minutes ago, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq, His Excellency Mr. Fuad Hussein, could not even
call the PKK what it is: a terrorist organization. We
reject and strongly condemn the representation of the
PKK as an innocent group, which is an affront to the
more than 40,000 people the PKK has killed and their
families. That is shameful. How many more people
have to die before Iraqi politicians can call the PKK
a terrorist organization? We would like all members
of the Council to note that point as an example of
the outrageous refusal of certain Iraqi politicians to
condemn terrorism.
There is also the allegation that the PKK has
increased its presence in Iraq since 2013. We completely
reject that baseless claim. The PKK has been present
22-43843

26/07/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

in Iraq since the 1980s. The reasons that the PKK has
found refuge in Iraq since the 1980s are well known to
everyone, including the Foreign Minister himself.
It is the obligation of the Iraqi authorities, under
both international law and article 7 of the Iraqi
Constitution, to stop the PKK from using the territory
of Iraq. Nevertheless, Iraq has so far proven to be either
unable or unwilling to fight the terrorists. If a country
cannot control its own territory, is unwilling to fight
against terrorists and cannot stop terrorists from using
its territory to kill the citizens of a neighbouring State,
then it is siding, either directly or indirectly, with the
terrorists. It is that simple. A State cannot castigate its
neighbour for using its right to self-defence.
In the first six months of this year, 339 attacks were
conducted by the PKK against my country. Over the
past five years, there have been nearly 1,500 attacks.
We cannot allow the territory along our border to
become a base to stage attacks against us. No member
of the Council would allow that. The Government of
Iraq would not allow that, nor should it.
In the absence of Iraq’s ability and willingness to
deal with the presence of terrorist organizations in its
own country, we are obliged to take the appropriate
measures, just as any member of the Council would
do. We will continue to exercise our inherent right to
self-defence as outlined in Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations, and we will act within the context
of responsibility attributed by the relevant Security
Council resolutions to Member States in the fight against
terrorism. In doing so, we will continue to prioritize
the protection of civilians, civilian infrastructure,
historical and cultural property and the environment.
Türkiye and Iraq will continue to be neighbours
and friends. We do not want to see an Iraq fragmented
over ethnic and sectarian lines. We strongly support the
strengthening of Iraq’s institutions and national identity.
We hope for the formation of a representative and
functioning Government with an effective economic
and reconstruction agenda. We want Iraq to be ruled
by politicians whose loyalty is to their own flag and to
their own people, not to personal interests, ambitions,
sectarian identities or outside Powers.
However,
as
recent
developments
have
demonstrated, there are efforts by some circles to unite
different political groups around anti-Türkiye rhetoric.
That is a very dangerous game to play. We want all of
our brothers and sisters in Iraq to know that we do not

S/PV.9100

want our bilateral relations to suffer as a result of the
domestic political calculations of certain groups in Iraq.
Today my country is even more committed to
working together with the people of Iraq for greater
peace and understanding. Our unwavering support to
our neighbours in their quest for stability and security
will never fade. The Iraqi people know very well what
it means to lose a loved one to terrorism. They fought
valiantly against Da’esh. The people of Iraq have always
shown solidarity with us in our fight against the PKK.
We want to see the same solidarity and responsible
behaviour from Iraqi officials. As much as we respect
the security of Iraq, we expect the same respect from
the Iraqi authorities. That must be a mutual effort. We
want Iraq to be ruled by responsible politicians who
are ready to fight against terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
We would like to express our condolences once
again to our brothers and sisters in Iraq. We grieve with
them for the senseless loss of civilian life.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Special Representative HennisPlasschaert for her briefing today on the horrific attack.
I would also like to welcome the presence of the Iraqi
Foreign Minister and the representative of Türkiye.
The United States strongly condemns the attack
on 20 July in Iraq’s Dohuk governorate, which claimed
the lives of nine Iraqi citizens, including children,
and injured many more. We extend our condolences
to the families of those killed and our sympathies to
those injured.
The killing of civilians is always unacceptable,
and all parties have an obligation under international
law, including under international humanitarian law,
to ensure the protection of civilians. To that end, we
look forward to receiving additional information and
greater clarity in relation to facts on the attack. The
greater fidelity we have as to exactly what happened,
the better chance we have of preventing future attacks
and civilian casualties.
In the meantime, we call on all parties to respect
Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and to refrain
from actions that imperil civilians, inflame tensions and
increase the risk of military conflict. Iraq and Iraqis
deserve a more secure, stable and prosperous future.

22-438437/14

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your swift response in convening
this urgent meeting following the recent events in the
Republic of Iraq. I would also like to thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert for her valuable briefing, and I
welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Fuad
Hussein, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Iraq, in today’s meeting.
My country supported the convening of today’s
urgent meeting in response to the request outlined in
the letter of the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Iraq,
dated 21 July, following the attack last Wednesday that
targeted the resort of Barakh in Dohuk governorate in
the Kurdistan region of Iraq. The United Arab Emirates
condemns in the strongest terms this heinous act, which
resulted in 9 civilian martyrs and more than 33 civilians
injured. We also extend our sincerest condolences and
sympathy to the Government and the people of the
Republic of Iraq, and to the families of the victims of
this horrific crime. We wish a speedy recovery to all
those injured.
The United Arab Emirates affirms its support for
conducting the necessary investigations into the Dohuk
attack and stands in solidarity with all measures taken
by Iraq to protect its sovereignty, security and stability.
Not only does this attack represent a flagrant violation
of the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, but it also constitutes a threat to Iraq’s security and
stability. This attack risks exacerbating the political and
security challenges facing Iraq at this critical juncture,
especially with nearly nine months having elapsed since
the holding of parliamentary elections without a new
Government being formed, and with terrorist groups,
including Da’esh, continuing to launch attacks targeting
civilians, security forces and vital infrastructure. My
country also has strongly condemned and denounced
last week’s terrorist attack that targeted a police station
in the Salah Al-Din governorate.
In conclusion, and in the light of the decisive stance
taken by the Security Council in its press statement
issued yesterday, 25 July, condemning the Dohuk
attack (SC/14980), we stress the need for all parties
to respect Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity
while refraining from any acts that may destabilize its
security and stability, regardless of the pretext.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank the presidency for
convening today’s important discussion today. I also
8/14

26/07/2022

thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her very useful briefing. I join others
in welcoming to the Security Council Chamber
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq and the
representative of Türkiye.
Ireland strongly condemns the 20 July deadly
artillery shelling in Dohuk, which tragically killed
nine civilians and injured many more. The Security
Council put on record its unequivocal condemnation of
this attack in its press statement published yesterday,
25 July (SC/14980).
We express our deepest condolences to the victims’
loved ones and wish a speedy recovery to those who
sustained injuries. We express our solidarity with the
people of Iraq and with the Federal and Kurdistan
Regional Governments at this time.
As the European Union expressed clearly in its
statement on the incident last week, attacks against
civilians are prohibited under international law. A
swift investigation is crucial in order to identify
those responsible and ensure accountability. We urge
all Member States to cooperate actively with the
Government of Iraq and all other relevant authorities in
support of these investigations.
The civilians killed in the attack in Dohuk add
to the alarmingly high number of civilian casualties
caused by the indiscriminate use of explosive weapons
in populated areas around the world. We call on all
States to support the Political Declaration on Explosive
Weapons in Populated Areas, which was recently
concluded in Geneva following a process led by Ireland.
Iraq has shown continued commitment to
enhancing regional dialogue over the past year. We call
on all actors to engage in constructive dialogue now,
and to refrain from any unilateral, provocative and
escalatory actions. We reiterate our full support for the
independence, sovereignty, unity, territorial integrity
and prosperity of Iraq, as well as its democratic process.
Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq for her detailed and
informative briefing.
I welcome the presence of the Iraqi Foreign
Minister and the representative of Türkiye at this
urgently convened meeting.
22-43843

26/07/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq remains firmly committed to the path out of
the crisis in order to achieve stability. We also note a
clear improvement in the humanitarian situation in the
country. Furthermore, the Iraqi Government remains
determined to maintain dialogue with the international
community and cooperate with the United Nations
on the ground, with a view to resolving the security
problems it faces.
Gabon also condemns in the strongest terms the
attack perpetrated on 20 July 2022 in the governorate
of Duhok in northern Iraq, which left 9 people dead
and 33 injured, including women and children.
This indiscriminate attack on innocent civilians
is unacceptable.
My country wishes to extend its sincere condolences
to the families of the victims and to the Iraqi people.
In addition to being cowardly and despicable, this
act is a flagrant violation of international law, under
which attacks should not be directed against civilians.
We therefore call on the Iraqi authorities to shed full
light on the circumstances of this attack and establish
responsibility so that the perpetrators can be brought
to justice.
Finally, we reiterate our solidarity with the families
of the victims and the Iraqi people as a whole.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her detailed
briefing. I welcome the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, His Excellency Mr. Fuad
Hussein, in today’s meeting. I also acknowledge the
presence of the representative of Türkiye in the meeting.
We strongly condemn the recent shelling in the
Zakho district of Dohuk governorate, in the Kurdistan
region of Iraq. On behalf of the Government and the
people of India, I express our deepest condolences to
the families that lost loved ones in the attack and wish
a speedy recovery to those injured.

S/PV.9100

Council on the attack in Dohuk governorate, in which
he asserted:
“Türkish forces committed an open and blatant
aggression against Iraqi territories, its sovereignty
and the lives and security of its citizens on
20 July 2022, when they targeted the resort in
Dohuk governorate in the Kurdistan region of
Iraq by artillery shelling, [which] resulted in the
martyrdom of 9 civilians and the injury of 33
unarmed civilians”.
Iraq’s territorial integrity and sovereignty must
be respected, and the relevant party needs to abide
by its obligations under international humanitarian
law and cooperate with the Government of Iraq
in the investigation into those attacks so as to
ensure accountability.
Peace, stability and security in that region is
of utmost importance to India. A strong, stable and
sovereign Iraq would lead to greater security and
stability in the region. We encourage all countries
in the region to work together towards that end. As a
long-standing friend of Iraq and its peoples, India will
remain supportive of all endeavours to deliver stability,
security and prosperity for the people of Iraq.
Let me conclude by reaffirming India’s steadfast
support for Iraq’s unity, sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity. We continue to reiterate that
the global order is anchored in international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of States.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this meeting, and I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the update.
We also welcome His Excellency the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq to this meeting and express our
deepest condolences to him, the families of those killed
and the people of Iraq.

We welcome the Security Council’s timely
condemnation of this dastardly attack. Such an
attack inside the territory of Iraq is a clear violation
of the country’s sovereignty. The attack on a civilian
location also shows blatant disregard for international
humanitarian law.

Norway joins others in strongly condemning
the attack in Dohuk governate, which killed and
injured civilians, including children. Intentionally
directing attacks against civilians is unacceptable and
illegal under international law. All civilians must be
protected. We call for a transparent investigation, and
accountability for the attack must be ensured.

The Council needs to address some of the concerns
outlined in the letter of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Iraq addressed to the President of the Security

Stability and security in Iraq and in the region are
essential. We encourage all parties in Iraq and in the
region to cease the use of violence; help de-escalate the

22-438439/14

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

situation; and promote development and security, based
on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): I welcome the
participation in this meeting of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq and the representative of Türkiye.
I also wish to express my gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the briefing
this afternoon.
The report of the tragic attack on a tourist resort
in Dohuk governorate, in the Kurdistan region of Iraq,
on 20 July, which resulted in the deaths of nine persons
and injury to 33 others, is deeply concerning. We join
other Council members in unequivocally condemning
that attack and convey our sincerest sympathies to the
people and the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan
region, especially the families of the victims. It is rather
unfortunate that innocent Iraqi citizens are once again
bearing the brunt of such attacks. Attacks directly
targeting civilian populations are not acceptable under
any circumstances.
In that context, and in keeping with the fundamental
principles of international law, we call on all actors to
continue to adhere to their international obligations,
as that remains essential in ensuring the protection of
civilian populations and infrastructure.
We note the uncertainty regarding the
circumstances of the attack, including its perpetrators.
It is imperative that those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law be held accountable if
we are to provide a measure of justice for the victims
and their families.
We therefore call on the international community to
support the efforts of the Iraqi Government for a thorough
investigation into the circumstances surrounding the
attack. Given that the security situation in Iraq remains
volatile, attacks of that nature only destabilize the
already turbulent security environment in the country.
Ghana would like to emphasize not only the potentially
destabilizing impact of such attacks on Iraq and the
Kurdistan region but also their ability to undermine
regional and international peace and security. In that
regard, we would urge the parties involved to exercise
restraint and to refrain from any actions that could
provoke retaliatory attacks, taking into account that
the foremost path to resolving differences is through
peaceful means.
10/14

26/07/2022

In concluding, Ghana would like to reiterate its
support for the security and stability of Iraq and the
need for all actors to fully and unconditionally respect
Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation is following with great concern
the recent events in the Kurdistan region of Iraq. Mexico
expresses its solidarity with the Government of Iraq in
connection with the attack perpetrated on 20 July in
Dohuk governorate, which caused the deaths of nine
civilians, wounded more than 30 and resulted in a great
deal of material damage. We condemn that attack in
the strongest terms and extend our condolences to the
families of the victims, and we wish the wounded a
quick recovery.
Any attack against civilians is a violation of
international law, especially international humanitarian
law. In that regard, Mexico calls for an expedited,
impartial investigation into that serious incident. We
call also for an end to any action that could escalate
tensions and destabilize the entire region. That
means also that counter-terrorism activities must
be undertaken in full accordance with international
law, including international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. It is urgent to opt for
confidence-building mechanisms among the States of
the region so as to avoid any impacts that would be
regional in scope.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I wish to begin by welcoming the presence
among us of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq,
and I also wish to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for her briefing.
France emphatically condemns the indiscriminate
strike carried out on 20 July, resulting in nine dead
and some 30 wounded, including children, in the
autonomous region of Kurdistan in Iraq. That attack
targeting civilians is unacceptable, and we stand in
solidarity with Iraq and the Iraqi people under these
exceedingly difficult circumstances. The Iraqi people
have suffered tremendously in previous decades, and
their aspiration to live in peace is more legitimate than
ever before.
We thank the Iraqi authorities for having
communicated the initial pieces of information about
the attack. There is a vital need to shed full light on
the circumstances of that tragedy to ensure that the
perpetrators are held fully accountable. We would recall
22-43843

26/07/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

the importance of cooperation between the federal
authorities and the autonomous region of Kurdistan on
matters of common interest, specifically on security.
France recalls its commitment to Iraq’s sovereignty
and to the stability of the autonomous region of
Kurdistan within it. We welcome the commitment
of the Prime Minister, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, to
regional security and stability, in the context of efforts
that led to the Baghdad conference.
We also recall the efforts of Iraq and its neighbours
to establish relations rooted in the principles of
good-neighbourly relations and non-interference.
We would call for de-escalation to avoid any further
destabilization, which would derail our joint efforts to
counter Da’esh in both Iraq and Syria.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert
for her briefing, and we welcome the participation of
His Excellency Fuad Hussein, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq, and the representative of Türkiye.
Kenya condemns the dreadful attack that took
place in the Dohuk governorate of Iraq on 20 July,
which claimed the lives of innocent civilians, including
children, and resulted in many injuries. We convey our
deepest condolences to the families of the victims and
the Government of Iraq, as well as the Iraqi Kurdistan
region, and wish the injured a speedy and full recovery.
We condemn the use of explosive devices, ballistic
missiles and artillery air strikes on civilians and
civilian objects, which is in violation of international
law and international humanitarian law.
As we have done in the past, we reiterate that Iraq
should be protected from becoming an international
arena for States and non-State actors to settle scores
to the detriment of the security, political stability and
socioeconomic progress of the country and its people.
The escalation of violence will only further undermine
peace and stability efforts on Iraqi territory, particularly
at a precarious time, when Iraq is still in the process of
forming its Government.
In addition, such attacks could weaken the capacity
of the State’s security agencies, thereby affording
terrorist groups the opportunity to scale up their
heinous terrorist attacks. In that regard, the region, and
neighbouring countries in particular, should support
Iraq in order to build its domestic resilience against
terrorist networks so that Iraq becomes a net exporter

S/PV.9100

of peace. We call on all actors to avoid any activities
that could undermine the security and stability of
the country, and we stress the need to uphold the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, in keeping
with the Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): First and foremost, I wish to welcome
Mr. Fuad Hussein, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Iraq, and we wish to thank Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing.
It is with alarm that we have been observing
developments in the friendly country of Iraq, where on
20 July eight people died and more than 20 civilians
were wounded as a result of the shelling of the
northern governorate of Dohuk. We extend our sincere
condolences to the loved ones of the victims and our
best wishes for a prompt recovery to those injured. We
trust that this incident will be thoroughly investigated.
We listened and took into account the position voiced
by the representative of Türkiye in that regard.
We reaffirm our principled and consistent support
for stability and security in the Republic of Iraq. We
wish to emphasize the importance of respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of this Arab
country. In that regard, we are concerned about the
possible negative consequences of this incident on the
internal domestic political situation in the country as a
result of attempts to drag it into a regional confrontation,
thereby undermining the efforts of the Iraqi authorities
to rebuild the country in the context of large-scale
challenges and threats, including terrorism. We have
consistently maintained that Iraq should not become a
stage for the settling of political scores.
We believe that there is no alternative to
strengthening regional security, including through the
establishment of good-neighbourly relations between
interested States. In that context, we highly value the
focus of Baghdad on the development of relations with
all its neighbours. There is an important need to seek
to ensure that we avoid the creation of an atmosphere
whereby confrontation is escalated among various
countries. We hope that the players outside the region
will facilitate the normalization process, rather than
foment further confrontation.
We believe that now, more than ever, there is
a need to pool efforts to seek consensual mutually
acceptable solutions geared towards reducing tensions

22-4384311/14

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

and addressing all pressing issues through political
and diplomatic means on the basis of international
law. That is the focus of the Russian blueprint for
ensuring collective security in the Persian Gulf region,
which provides for gradual progress towards ending
the conflict, the establishment of confidence-building
and oversight measures and, ultimately, the creation
of a integral mechanism for collective security and
cooperation in the region.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for her briefing and Foreign Minister Hussein
for joining today’s meeting.
The United Kingdom condemns the attack that
took place in Dohuk governorate on 20 July and would
like to express its deepest sympathy to the victims
and those affected. The United Kingdom deplores the
loss of civilian life, and we are concerned about the
impact the attack may have on the stability of Iraq. We
fully support the Iraqi authorities’ investigation into
the attack.
It is vital that all actors continue to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq. Dialogue
and cooperation remain essential to combat terrorism,
ensure regional security and protect civilians. We
reiterate the need for all actors to uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law in
order to maintain stability in Iraq and the region.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
once again reaffirm the United Kingdom’s steadfast
commitment to the security of Iraq and the wider region.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing
and welcome the Foreign Minister of Iraq to our
meeting today.
China strongly condemns the attack in Iraq’s Dohuk
governorate on 20 July. We deeply mourn the victims
and express our condolences to the Government of Iraq
and to the bereaved families. We wish a speedy recovery
to the wounded. We support the press statement issued
by the Security Council on the matter (SC/14980).
Iraq has set up a special committee to investigate
this attack. We call on all parties concerned to actively
cooperate with Iraq on this investigation in order
to find out the facts as soon as possible and ensure
accountability. The Security Council should continue
12/14

26/07/2022

to follow the progress of the investigation and provide
appropriate support in line with the requirements of the
Iraqi Government.
Iraq’s stands at a location of strategic importance.
The country has diverse ethnicities and religions. It
should become a booster for regional cooperation
instead of an arena for geopolitical competition.
Regrettably, foreign troops have frequently conducted
military operations in Iraqi territory without the
consent of the Government of Iraq, flagrantly violating
Iraq’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, gravely
endangering the lives of the Iraqi people and seriously
threatening regional stability. China hopes that the
relevant countries will fully respect the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq and remain committed
to resolving their own security concerns through
cooperation with the Iraqi Government.
Over the past three decades, the situation in Iraq
has seen ups and downs, and its people have endured
countless hardships. At present, the Iraqi people are
writing a new chapter in their national reconstruction,
developing good-neighbourly and friendly relations and
promoting regional dialogue and cooperation, thereby
increasingly becoming a contributor to reginal peace
and stability.
The international community should firmly stand
by Iraq and its people. For the sake of long-term
stability and security in Iraq, as well as the prosperity
and stability of the region, the international community
should continuously make positive contributions in
that regard.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General HennisPlasschaert for her factual briefing. We welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Fuad Hussein,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, and of the
delegation of Türkiye to this meeting.
We join other members in condemning in the
strongest terms the deadly attack on Dohuk. We express
our condolences to the families of the victims and wish
those injured a speedy recovery.
We deplore the loss of civilian lives, especially of
women and children. This is a violation of international
humanitarian law, and the perpetrators must be held
to account.
22-43843

26/07/2022

The situation concerning Iraq

In yesterday’s press statement (SC/14980), the
Security Council spoke with a unified voice on this
attack, in support of efforts to establish the facts.
I reiterate Albania’s principled support for
accountability for all violations of international law
against impunity and in order to deter further violations.
We listened carefully to the remarks of Minister
Hussein. We also take due note of the repeated
declarations from Türkiye, including at the highest
level and here today, that the attack was carried out
by terrorists and was aimed at harming ties between
Türkiye and Iraq, as has happened before. We believe
that an investigation will establish the facts and
look forward to its conclusions. We encourage both
countries to cooperate closely in order to establish the
facts. We believe that it is of primary importance not to
allow such acts to affect ties between two neighbouring
countries at a time when there is need for dialogue and
understanding and, on that basis, more cooperation.
Iraq and its people have incomparably suffered
from terrorism in the past. Furthermore, various
more recent attacks and acts of terrorism and violence
have attempted to derail the course of stabilization
and development in Iraq. We condemn them firmly.
Terrorism should have no place anywhere.
The holding of elections in October and the
certification of the results represent important steps
towards the consolidation of democracy in Iraq. We look
forward with hope to seeing the concrete materialization
of the will of the Iraqi people, as expressed by their
vote. We commend the patience that has been shown
by Iraqi political forces in engaging in dialogue in their
attempt to find a way out of the impasse. Democracy
requires time and may prove complex, but its results
are lasting.
Let me conclude by reaffirming our support for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I once again thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Hennis-Plasschaert for her
informative briefing.
First, let me express our deepest condolences to
the families and friends of the deceased and our hope
that those wounded during the incident will make a full
and speedy recovery. We welcome Minister Hussein

S/PV.9100

here today, and we would like to convey Brazil’s full
solidarity and support to the people and the Government
of Iraq. I also welcome the representative of Türkiye to
this meeting.
Over the past few decades, the Iraqi people have
shown courage, determination and resilience in their
struggle for a democratic, stable and sovereign country.
Iraq has also spearheaded the fight against terrorism and
has made grave sacrifices under extremely challenging
circumstances. The Security Council has recognized
those efforts and been consistent in its support for Iraq.
The United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is a
symbol of that commitment and fulfils a fundamental
role in that regard.
Iraqi efforts and sacrifices benefit the international
community as a whole, but especially Iraq’s neighbours,
for there can be no stability in the Middle East without a
safe and sovereign Iraq. There can be no justification for
violations of its sovereignty, be it by actors in the region
or outside it. We hope that thorough investigations can
come to a speedy conclusion and establish the facts
behind this tragedy.
Iraq should not be a battlefield, but a bridge
between countries, cultures and faiths. The Iraqi
Government has actively sought to perform that role,
fostering understanding and cooperation among its
neighbours and pursuing initiatives such as the historic
Baghdad Conference for Cooperation and Partnership,
held almost a year ago.
The protection of civilians is a fundamental
element of international law that must be observed
by all Member States. It is the ultimate objective of
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and international refugee law. Scenes like
those witnessed in Dohuk are unacceptable and must be
condemned unequivocally.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of Türkiye has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): I apologize for taking the
floor again, but I wanted to bring to the attention of
Security Council a new development.
It is with great sorrow that I inform the Security
Council of a recent development on the ground in

22-4384313/14

S/PV.9100

The situation concerning Iraq

Iraq. A few minutes ago, we received notice that four
mortars had been deployed near the Consulate General
of Türkiye in Mosul, Iraq. That is yet another flagrant
attack and yet another example of the lack of control by
the Iraqi authorities over their own territory. We once
again call on all Iraqi authorities to avoid escalatory
language and to focus on cooperation, cooperating
against all terrorist organizations. The initial reports
say that no one was hurt, but, as I said in my statement,
three years ago we lost a diplomat in Erbil. We hope that
our diplomatic representation is safe in Iraq, because
that is how we can achieve peace and better bilateral
relations — through diplomacy.
The President: The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Iraq has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
I now give him the floor.
Mr. Hussein (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would first
like to thank all the members of the Security Council
and the representatives of the States that participated
in this meeting for their great sense of solidarity
with the people of Iraq. We would also like to thank
them for their condolences and for the condemnation
of the military attack that targeted a resort village in
Dohuk governorate.

14/14

26/07/2022

As for the news that was just relayed by the
representative of Türkiye, if it is true, and we will
verify it, we condemn an attack perpetuated against the
Consulate of Türkiye. We condemn and denounce such
act. As a representative of the Iraqi Government and the
Foreign Minister of Iraq, we will investigate the matter.
It is our duty to protect diplomatic missions and
diplomats on Iraqi territories. We will investigate the
matter, but this indicates that attacks that took place in
the past elicit responses. We do not know who is behind
this attack, should it be true, but such attacks must stop.
The Türkish army must withdraw from Iraqi territories.
The United Nations and the relevant countries must
provide assistance and support to Iraq so that we can
work to ensure that the Türkish Kurdistan Workers’
Party troops withdraw from Iraqi territories
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.

22-43843
