THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1956th

MEETING:

,, f, ,,,.j ..

‘) ’

28 SEPTEMBER 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
, . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . a. .

1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . , . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . , , . . . , . . . . , , . . . , . . , . . , . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l956)

SIPV. 1956

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~pple~nrt~ts of the Ofjcicrl RCCWLIS of the Secrlrity Comcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Re.sohtiom
trnd
Devisions
oJ’ tlw Sawrity
Coutwil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1956th MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday, 28 September 1076, at 3 p.m.
~,.~,~;&nt: Mr. Mansur Rashid KIKHIA
Republic).

(Libyan Arab

on the understanding that they Will be invited to take
places at the Council table when it is their turn to
speak.

~,.~,ye/jt: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, ItaIy, Japan, Libyan
Arab RepuHic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
OfGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l956)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia

Adoption

of the agenda

The situation in Namibia
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken by the Council at its 1954th meeting,
1 invite the President and the other members of the
United Nations Council for Namibia to take places at
the Council table.

4. The PRESIDENT:
1 wish to inform the members
of the Council that 1 have received a letter dated
27 September from the representatives of Benin, the
Libyan Arab Republic and the United Republic of
Tanzania [S/12205]. The letter reads as follows:
“We have the honour to request that in the course
of the Council’s consideration of the question ‘The
situation in Namibia’, an invitation under rule 39 of
the provisional rules of procedure of the Council be
extended to Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO)
of Namibia.”
If 1 hear no objection, 1 shall take it that the Council
agrees to that request.

5. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to draw attention
to a number of recent documents that are relevant to
the present discussion. Documents S/I2185 and
S/i2201 contain communications dated 20 August and
14 September respectively from the Acting President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia. Documents S/12180 and S/12202 contain letters from the
representatives of South Africa dated 18 August
and 15 September. Document S/12188 contains a
letter dated 24 August from the representative of Sri
Lanka, transmitting the text of a resolution concerning
Namibia adopted by the Conference of Heads of Sti\te
or Government of Non-Aligned countries. Finally,
document S/12195 contains the text of a letter dated
30 August, transmitting a message to the Council
from the President of the Republic of Guihea.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Since the Council’s
last
consideration of this item, on 31 August [1954t/l
/~leetingl, letters have been addressed to the President
of the Security Council by the representatives of
Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius and Morocco in which they
bave requested to be invited to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote. Accordingly,
1 Propose, if 1 hear no objection, to invite these
representatives to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the provisions of
Article 3 1 of the Charter and ru]e 37 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

6. The first speaker is the representative of Zambia,
who wi]l speak in his capacity as the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.

3* I invite those representatives to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,

7. Mr. KAMANA (President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia): Mr. President, allow me to

13. What has been the attitude of South Africa?
The Pretoria régime has refusecl to listen to the voice
of reason and has persistently rejected the deman&
of the international COmmitY
to recognize the right
ofthe people of Namibia to self-determination,
freedom
and independence. Bu1 it bas gone even further. lt
has unleashed during this decade one of the most
vicious and repressive campaigns of State terrorism of
the Century. It has imposed on the Namibian people
its odious system of rrpa~hcid. It has displaced the
African population from the lands of their ancestors
SO that its supporters could more efficiently pIun&
the wealth of the Territory,
which was not theirs.
lt has not hesitated to murder unarmed men, women
and children if that was thought to serve their
purposes. AI1 protests of the international community
have been of no avail. While they felt secure behind
the "co~~~o~~ strniftriw"
of Portuguese colonialism,
they carried out their cruel policies without any
regard for the views of the majority of the members
of the international community.

express my appreciation for the opportunity given to
the delegation of the United Nations Council for
Namibia to address the Security Council during its
consideration of the situation in Namibia. It is, indeed,
a great pleasure and satisfaction for the delegation to
see you, the Ambassador of the Libyan Arab Republic,
presiding over the Council, as it once again considers
measures in support of Namibian self-determination
and independence. Your extraordinary talents and
your diplomatie ski11 Will certainly be invaluable in
the consideration of this important African problem.
Moreover, you represent a country which is in the
forefront of the struggle ofcolonial countries to achieve
self-determination
and independence.
8. We meet here today to consider what is clearly
a decisive moment in the destiny of Namibia. The
refusa] of South Africa to meet the demands and
conditions specified in Security Council resolution 385
(1976) constitutes a challenge to the United Nations
which must be met with the full weight of the authority
and prestige of this organization.

14. But history catches up even with the most
reactionary forces in human society. The collapse of
the colonial empire under the protection of which it
pursued its reckless policies has exposed the true
nature of the illegal South African administration in
Namibia. There are no longer any safe boundaries.
The sttuggle of the Namibian people gains in intensity
as more and more assistance is made available to
them.

9. Since 1967, the United Nations, by establishing the
Council for Namibia, has been irrevocably committed
to assisting the people of Namibia in achieving selfdetermination, freedom, and national independence in
a united Namibia.
10. During this last decade, the United Nations has
ceaselessly pursued, in accordance with the means
available to it, every initiative which could bring
closer the day on which the Namibian people Will
join the international community as citizens of a united
and independent Namibïa. The resolutions of the
General Assembly and of the Security Council have
systematically demanded South African withdrawal
from the Territory which it illegally occupies and
exploits. These resolutions have, furthermore, continually appealed to Member States to exercise whatever pressure was in their power to force South
Africa to abide by the decisions of the United
Nations. Throughout this decade, the issue of Namibia
has become the cause of Namibia.

1.5. In attempting to pursue its colonialist and racist
policies, South Africa has resorted to the increasing
militarization
of Namibia.
The concentration of
military power in Namibia has served to carry out
armed attacks against neighbouring countries with the
purpose of intimidating
African Governments and
peoples which support the cause of Namibian selfdetermination
and independence.
Such military
adventurism is self-defeating. Al1 African peoples are
totally committed td the final eradication of ail forms
of colonialism and racism from the African continent.
In this endeavour they are receiving the active and
increasing support of all the peace-Ioving peoples ofthe
world.

At the same time that the United Nations drew
Il.
the attention of the international community to the
illegal presence of South Africa in Namibia,
the
Namibian
people began their armed struggle for
national liberation. Since August 1966, the Namibian
people, led by their national liberation movement,
SWAPO, have increasingly raised the costs of South
African occupation of their Territory by their determination, courage and self-sacrifice.

16. The determination
of neighbouring countries to
support the right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination,
freedom and independence in a united
Namibia is transparently clear from alI recent statti
ments made by the leadership of those countries.
The joint communiqués
[s//.Eo/,
~7171’.ws
1 to /Ml
issued after the consultations
of the Mission t0
Africa of the United Nations Council for Namibia
with the authorities of Angola, Botswana and Zambia
also reaffirm their commitment
to an independent
Namibia
under the leadership
of the Namibian
people’s liberation movement, SWAPO. The Mission
of the Council to Latin America also receivecl the
full support of the Governments of Peru, Brazil and
Venezuela for the cause of an independent Namibia5

12. Throughout this decade, the liberation struggle
has tested the Will of the Namibian people to achieve
self-determination,
freedom and national independence. The efforts of the Namibian patriots have
received support and assistance from friendly countries, and the cause of Namibian independence has
gained increasingly in legitimacy thr0ugh the efforts
of the United Nations.
2

The manifestations of support which the Council
cbtained through its Visiting miSSiOnS are representative ofthe world-wide commitment
to the cause of the
Namibian peopie in their StrUgg1e for self-determinatien, freedom and independence.

South African Government has not met that deadline,
and there are no indications that it is willing to accept
the conditions laid down by the Council in resolution 385 (1976). It is thus clear that a decade of continous demands by the General Assembly and the
Council have had no effect but to whet South African
appetites for greater control over the Namibian people
and an increasingly ruthless exploitation of the natural
resources ‘of the Territory.

17, In January 1976 the Security Council unanimously
385 (1976), by which it once again
demanded South African withdrawal and specified the
conditions laid down for a peaceful transfer of power
t. the authentic representatives
of the Namibian
people. A deadline was set for 31 August of this year
in order to obtain a response from the South African
Government. What has been the response of South
Africa? Once again the Pretoria régime is making use
of misleading stratagems to disguise its intention of
perpetuating its colonial and racist control. It has
convened a so-called constitutional
conference where
hand-picked tribal elemenls and other supporters of
~rporfhrirl have the audacity to claim to be representatives of the Namibian people and prepare formulas
that, under a false independence,
would ensure the
consolidation of racist policies and the plunder of
Namibian resources by South Africa and its allies.
These manœuvres have been carried out with complete disregard of SWAPO, the authentic representative of the Namibian
people, recognized by the
Organization of African Unity, by the non-aligned
movement and by the United Nations.
adopted resolution

20. Are we to pursue this procedure much Ionger?
The resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, with the benefit of hindsight, appear
as not much more than pious appeals for compliance to
a régime which has continuously challenged the overwhelming majority of world opinion.
21. More and more, the Namibian people show their
determination to carry out the struggle for the liberation
of Namibia by all available means. More and more,
the thrust of the liberation struggle threatens to engulf
southern Africa in a confrontation with world-wide
implications. The Security Council must consider the
application of the mandatory sanctions which are
outlined in Chapter VII of the Charter as an alternative
to even more far-reaching implications of the liberation
struggle.
22. Any illusions about the outcome’of the liberation struggle in Namibia Will be paid for with the lives
of countless Namibian patriots and Will entail grave
implications for the peace and security of southern
Africa as a whole. Namibia Will be free. The Namibian
people Will fight until the final goals of national
liberation are attained. Let no one underestimate the
Will and determination of the Namibian people in their
struggle for self-determination,
freedom and independence.

18. The United Nations Council for Namibia has
solemnly condemned such vicious manœuvres in the
strongest possible terms. In a statement regarding the
so-called proposals of South Africa on the future of
Namibia [S/1218.5, trn/rc.~] the United Nations Council
for Namibia slrongly condemned the Iatest ill-advised
stratagem of the South African administration
in
Windheek as totally lacking in legitimacy, ambiguous
and equivocal. The statement further indicated that
the proposa1 of the so-called Constitutional Conference
did not even approach any of the requirements foi
genuine self-determination
and independence
laid
down by the United Nations. It stated that those
ProPosaIs made no mention of the illegitimate apnrtheid legislation. They merely sought to perpetuate
the homelands policies with all their deleterious effects
en the integrity and unity of the Namibian people.
Tbe statement pointed out that the proposals were
also silent about free elections under United Nations
supervision and control. There was no undertaking to
release political prisoners or to allow the return of
pclitical exiles. The date suggested, that is, 31 December 1978, constituted an unjustifiable prolongation of
the illegal South African occupation.
Finally, the
statement of the Council pointed out that the reference
t” “UnitY” was couched in ambiguous terms without
YJecific recognition of the territorial
integrity of
Namibia as a unitary State.

23. The aspirations of a people to be master of its
own destiny, recognized by the international community in the Charter of the United Nations, in the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, are a historical force
against which the mystifications of colonialism and
racism cannot prevail.
24. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Mauritius, who Will speak on behalf
of the Acting Chairman of the Organization of African
Unity. 1 accordingly invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
25. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): Mr. President, 1
thank you and, through you, the members of the
Security CounciI for allowing me to participate in this
meeting. 1 feel proud that we are meeting under the
presidency of a beloved African brother.

lg+ The Security Council established a deadline for
the gouth African Government to meet its conditions
for a Peaceful transfer of power in Namibia. The

26. At the outset 1 wish to reassure members of the
Council: 1 am not about to make a dramatic statement.
3

Nor shall 1 be imposing on them any Churchillian
style oratory for their entertainment-or
should 1 say
amusement. 1 shall not be quoting Shakespeare nor
shall 1 be quoting in extenso from previous statements or boring them by reciting already well-read
reports from the international press. As usual, 1 shall
speak seriously and with sincerity.

Mr. Vorster during the Zurich meetings. 1s there any
truth in the reports that Mr. Kissinger proposed the
creation of an army in Namibia which would be
created and trained from the beginning by United
States military personnel, equipped by the United
States and financed by the United States for at least
10 years following the departure of the South African
army? Al1 of this is, we understand, related to the
puppet Government led by Mr. Clemens Kapuuo, who,
were are told, is advised at the South Africans’
Turnhalle
Conference by highly paid American
lawyers, Mr. Stewart Schwarz and Mr. Arnold Burns.
Since Mr. Burns has himself stated that the South
African Government is paying the fees of a11the lawyers
except those representing Mr. Kapuuo, we may
wonder whether the United States Government is
directly or indirectly paying Burns and Schwarz, It
seems, in any case, that the greater part of the money
to pay for setting up a puppet government acceptable
to the South African régime is to corne from the
United States. We have received reports that the
United States Government proposed at Zurich to give
rapid and large-scale financial assistance to Namibia,
with the aim of transforming it into a highly capitalized economy within a short time after the installetion of a puppet Turnhalle Government. 1 invite the
United States delegation to comment.

27. Certain reports have reached me through various
channels. While 1 find these reports rather disturbing
from a purely African point of view, 1 prefer to seek
clarifications on them at this stage before 1 advise the
current Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
and before 1 make a substantive statement on the
question of Namibia.
28. My views on Namibia are well known internationally, and in particular at the United Nations. 1
shah not repeat them here, but 1 do recall them.
Some are to be found in my statements to the Security
Council on 30 September 1971 [1587th meeting],
28 November 1972 [167&h i?zeeting], 21 October 1974
[I 797th meeting]
and 27 January 1976 [1880th
meeting].
Others are to be found in the records of the
General Assembly.
29. Today 1 propose to raise some pertinent questions
to which 1 hope prompt answers Will be forthcoming-they
could be denials, confirmations
or
comments. The response cari only help this Council
to reach a just conclusion.

32. Yet another point which is reported to have been
made at Zurich is even more alarming for Africa,
namely, that the United States, in certain circumstances, would publicly guarantee South Africa’s own
frontiers in return for what has been described as a
manipulated solution to the Namibian and also the
Zimbabwean issues. If SO, this would, to my mind,
constitute great-Power intervention in African affairs,
which is completely intolerable, and we respectfully
request an explanation
from the United States
representative.

30. Southern Africa is becoming the target of greatly
increased intervention on the military, economic and
political levels, particularly on the part of those who,
we are told, are mediating impartially
between the
racist régimes and the Africans-both
of the countries
concerned and those elsewhere in Africa. 1s it true
that under the pretext of meeting with Mr. Vorster
in a neutral place the United States Secretary of
State, Mr. Kissinger, has managed to involve the
chief representative of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), General Alexander Haig, in the
so-called dialogue? If SO, it is not surprising that
Africans should be asking themselves, first, whether
a11 the NATO countries are in agreement with this
involvement
SO soon after the Foreign Ministers’
meeting in Oslo in May which decided that member
countries should not use NATO as a shield from
political fall-out from defence links with South Africa.
Secondly , we are asking about the real meaning of
Mr. Kissinger’s venture into the southern African,
issue, where the chief NATO representative is reported
to be secretly present a’t meetings with the Prime
Minister of South Africa at a time of acute interna1
unrest inside South Africa. In answer to our questions
we should like to have a response at this Council
meeting from each of the member countries of NATO,
and we invite the United States delegation to comment.

33. Standing behind the United States, as has been
widely reported, is the Government of the United
Kingdom. It is therefore imperative that we also
examine the motives behind that country’s interest in
a settlement, especially in Namibia. It seems to me
that the United Kingdom Government is totally committed to the interests of the Rio Tinto Zinc Company,
which has invested massively in the Rossing uranium
deposits in Namibia and is about to bring the mine
into production,
in partnership
with the South
African Government. 1 am informed that since 1970
the United Kingdom Government
has held major
purchasing contracts with Rossing for uranium,
thereby, in my opinion, and in the opinion of others,
mortgaging its foreign policy and even its own energy
policy to the South African occupation of Namibia,
or some puppet government which the South africans
would help to set up, now with the financial and
military support, as it would seem of the Uni,ted
States. 1 beg for a comment from the representativc of
the United Kingdom.

31. An even more serious issue has been raised with
regard to the promises made by Mr. Kissinger to
4

34. The Summit Meeting of the Organization
of
African Unity, held in Mauritius in July this year,
strong]y condemned nuclear collaboration
with South
of that
Africs, which includes the development
ccuntry’s uranium deposits both in the Republic
snd in Namibia. Such collaboration
is understood to
he a hostile act against a11of Africa, and the Organizatien of African Unity has called on the Government
of France to rescind its decision to sel1 nuclear
resctors to South Africa and on the other Western
countries, as well as Japan and Israel, to terminate a]]
nuclear collaboration with South Africa. We should
remember that, in addition to the United Kingdom,
France, Japan, the United States and the Federal
Republic of Germany are deeply involved in promoting
the exploitation of the Rossing uranium mine by their
active participation in its development
or their large
purchasing contracts for Namibian
uranium, I may
recall also in this connexion that the Grganization of
African Unity recommended
that its members take
strong measures against transnational
corporations
collaborating with South Africa in the nuc]ear and
military fields.

38. For 91 years the people of Namibia has been
subjected to one of the most blbodthirsty and barbarie
colonial régimes, to a shameless over-exploitation
of
its resources, to political oppression and a policy of
extermination.
39. For 91 years first the German colonial régime and
then the Pretoria racist régime have organized and
practised a systematic policy of intimidation
and
genocide against the Namibian people to perpetuate
their domination over that Territory. Can we forget that
already on 20 October 1904 the people of Namibia
was the victim of one of the first acts of genocide in
memory when 65,000 of its sons were coldly massacred
by the German colonial régime? Can we forget the
heinous massacres committed in cold blood by the
South African army, which savagely killed men,
women and children in the south of Namibia in
1922’? Can we forget the massacres of 1959 in Windhoek
and of 1968 in the African villages of the Caprivi
Strip?
40. But, despite these barbarie acts, the determination of the Namibian people to live free and happy
on its ancestral soi1 has never ceased to assert itself.
For 91 years the people of Namibia has been valiantly
resisting and struggling single-mindedly against first its
German oppressors and then its racist South African
oppressors.

35, 1 implore the representatives of the States 1 have
mentioned to clarify the position of their respective
Governments in clear, unambiguous terms at an early
stage of this debate, SO that African Members and
others may take the views of those representatives’
Governments into consideration
when making their
statements. 1 have no doubt that we shall be provided
with an opportunity to express our appreciation of
their co-operation.

41. However, we must recognize that it was not until
the birth of SWAPO that this struggle of the Namibian
people reached a truly decisive turning-point. Indeed,
since the birth of SWAPO the Namibian patriots, now
mobilized and organized, have dealt unceasing and
ever more lethal blows to the structure of South
African colonialism in Namibia. Today, under the
just guidance of SWAPO, the people have constantly
won victory after victory over their enemies, and
the feverish agitation which we see today in imperialist
circles is but the reflection of the striking victories
of the Namibian people and the imminent collapse
of the South African clique.

36, Mr. ALLADAYE
(Benin) (i/rtp~p~ctafio/t ./iû/??
f+e&): Mr. President, 1 am very pleased to convey
to you my delegation’s warm congratulations on your
assumption of the lofty responsibilities
of President of
the Council for the month of September. Your Young
and dynamic country, under the enlightened leadership of President Khadafi, our brother and friend,
valiantly conducts a resolutely anti-imperialist
policy
for the total liberation of the Libyan people from
shacklesof foreign domination. The positions taken by
the new Libya and the political,
diplomatie
and
material assistance it extends to a11 the peoples that
are still under colonial domination and occupation are
also praiseworthy.

42. The sacrifice to which the Namibian people has
consented is great; the sacrifice made by its men, its
women and its children, who have agreed to struggle
and to die for the freedom of their oppressed people,
is worthy of our respect. My delegation would like
here to pay a tribute to the Namibian men, women
and children who have died as martyrs to colonialist
atrocities. We should also like to pay a tribute to the
Angolan, Zambian and Mozambican peoples, who,
despite the reprisals of South African military forces,
have never ceased to support the Namibian cause,
a just cause which Will triumph, thanks to the sacrifices
of the Namibian people.

37. Mr. President, my country has followed with
great interest and satisfaction your unstinting and
excellent contribution to the work of thisCounci1 for
the period during which you have been representing
Yohrccuntry. Your subtle diplomatie skill, your devotich to the defence of just causes have proved of
valusble assistance in the search for solutions of the
numercus thorny problems that today confront the
international community.
I wished by these brief
ccmments to recall my delegation’s
satisfaction at
seeingYOUpresiding over the Council’s debate on the
imPcrtant question of the decolonization
of Namibia.

43. For decades the peoples of the world that prize
peace and justice have anxiously followed the distressing problem of Namibia and have supported the
Namibian people both materially and politically in its
5

struggle for its freedom,
pendence.

dignity

and national

47. As for the fascist, racist, puppet Vorster clique,
if it sincerely wants peace td be restored ‘in Namibia,
it Will have to withdraw its troops of aggression from
Namibia inmediately and without prior conditions; to
free a11 the Namibian patriots who are now political
prisoners; to undertake to respect the territorial
integrity of Namibia.

inde-

44. The General Assembly has adopted 103 resolutions on Namibia, the Security Council has adopted 16.
The International
Court of Justice has handed down
four advisory opinions and one judgement
on this
question. This means that this question has been of
constant concern to the international
community.
That is quite normal because, apart from its specifically inhuman nature, it is a permanent threat to
international
peace and security. The illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by South Africa,
in violation of the relevant provisions of the Charter,
in violation of the historic General Assembly resolution
15 14 (XV) on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, and above a11 in violation of
resolution 2145 (XXI), by which the General Assembly
terminated
South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia,
is an open act of aggression against the Namibian
people. The utilization by the South African Fascist
and racist régime of the Territory as a base for aggression against the neighbouring African States is also a
grave threat to peace and security in that region of the
world.

48. It is only on those conditions that the United
Nations Will be able to assume the responsibilities
entrusted to it by the international
community-that
is, to , organize free consultations
leading to the
establishment of democratic institutions in Namibia,
49. My delegation fears that if those conditions are
not fulfilled, the, Namibian people, under the direction
of SWAPO, Will have no recourse but to continue the
armed struggle as Iong as is necessary, in order to
gain its freedom and national independence, for everyone knows that the dignity and freedom of a people
are not negotiable.
50. These are the few comments my delegation
deemed it appropriate to make at this stage of the
discussion of the question of Namibia.
(Nwrpretntion
fiwn Fmch):
51. The PRESIDENT
1 sincere1.y thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Benin for the kind words he addressed to me. As
representative of Libya, 1 wish to assure him of the
warm friendship and indefectible
solidarity of my
country with his country. 1 cari assure him of our
determination
to continue our joint struggle to free
Africa.

45. Today people are busily running here and there,
bemoaning the unfortunate fate of the peoples of
Namibia and trying to find inspired solutions in order
to put an end to the shedding of blood in Namibia.
But whom would they deceive? From where does
South Africa derive its obstinacy, its arrogance and its
constant defiance of the international
community?
From whom does South Afiica receive the powerful
war material that it uses to massacre the peoples of
Namibia and to perpetrate acts of provocation and
aggression against the neighbouring African States?

[The specrker

continuai

in English.]

52. The next speaker is the representative of Malawi,
the current Chairman of the African Group of States
in the United Nations. 1 invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement,

46. Today the imperialist West is at bay, submerged
in the flames of revolutionary war, and it is attempting
by subtle delaying tactics to safeguard its trade
interests and to prevent the Namibian people from
enjoying the fruits of its struggle. If the imperialist
West sincerely wants peace to be restored to that
part of the world, without further pointless bloodshed,
we are certain that the peoples of southern Africa
are ready to study with it the conditions for that
restoration of peace. But, first and foremost, NATO
and the States members of that organization must stop
supplying war material to the Fascist and racist Vorster
régime; France must stop deliveririg nuclear reactors
to South Africa; the United Kingdom
must stop
supplying military electronic material to the Fascist and
racist Vorster régime; the Western Powers must stop
giving economic support to the Fascist and racist
Vorster régime. If the imperialist
West sincerely
wants peace to be restored to that part of the world,
it Will have to renounce once and for a11 its easilyseen-through plan to turn South. Africa into an imperialist base surrounded by buffer puppet States,
from which it could continue to keep a close watch
on the independent African States of the region.

Mr.
MUWAMBA
(Malawi):
Permit
me,
Mr. President, as the Chairman of the African Group
for the current, month, to convey to you and through
you to the members of the Council our sincere thanks
for affording us, as a group, the opportunity to participate in the resumed debate on Namibia. In addition,
this being the first time that I have addressed
the Council since your assumption of the presidency,
1 wish also to congratulate you on your assumption
of that high responsibility.
1 must hasten to decIare
my own and nïy Group’s interest in seeing you preside
over the Council and therefore to assure you of our
fullest support and co-operation during the remainder
of your term of office which, incidentally,
is fast
running out. But, knowing how you apply yourself to
the activities of this Organization,
it is our sincere
belief, that within the short space of time that remains
a lot may be accomplished.
53.

54. The African Group wishes to record its &nks
and indebtedness to your predecessor and to. the
6

Council for their noble efforts to give positive expression to paragraph 12 of resolution 385 (1976), which
called upon the Council

59. The African Group recalls that the South African
Government not only claims to be an African Government but also participated fully in the drafting of the
United Nations Charter, which, incidentally, forms the
basis of some 103 resolutions of the General Assembly
as well as 16 resolutions of the Security Council
adopted over the years on Namibia alone.

*ht0 remain seized of the matter and to meet on OI
hefore 31 August 1976 for the purpose of reviewing
South Africa’s compliance with the terms of this
resolution and, in the event of non-compliance
by
South Africa, for the purpose of considering the
appropriate measures to be taken under the
Charter.”

60. Because South Africa makes so much of its
historical origin and because it is a founding Member
of the United Nations, it behoves it to heed the myriad
international appeals that have been made to it year in
and year out to co-operate with the United Nations in
resolving the Namibian question, The African Group
is of the view that resolution 385 11976) provides an
excellent basis for South Africa to co-operate with the
international community and to cesse behaving as
though it were beleaguered.

fi5, The African Group notes with great satisfaction
thRtthe Council, supported by the entire international
community, has declined to recognize not only the socalled Windhoek consitutional
talks, but also the
recommendation that has emerged from that source to
the effect that Namibia be granted independence on
31 December 1978.

61. In the African Group we believe strongly that
Africa has great minera1 and human resources whose
exploitation
and development
are being impeded
by the present attitude of the South African Government. The African Group believes that the q.wrt/wid
policies of South Africa are divisive and that as a
result, they have undermined the development of a
cohesive African personality and leadership. Therefore
the release by South Africa with the minimum of
delay of the international Territory of Namibia in
keeping with resolution 385 (1976) would not only
facilitate free elections under United Nations control
and supervision but would also be indicative of its
willingness to accept the popular demand of the
international community in general and of the people
of Namibia in particular. No doubt this is what
Western democracy is all about-Western
democracy,
in which the Government of South Africa claims to
have been reared.

56, In this connexion the African Group was impressed by the Secretary-General’s
initial reaction to
the South African Government’s
communication,
when he said, “These propos&
fall far short of the
essential conditions
stipulated
by the United
Nations.“* We have .taken to heart his warning that
until South Africa abandoned its unilateral approach
and co-operated with the United Nations no solution
to the question of Namibia would be found.
57. During the past few weeks my colleagues and
I have had occasion to look at the massive documentation on the various arguments that have been presented
either before the Council or in other organs of the
United Nations, and the African Group has been
intrigued by the persistent international
acceptance
and recognition of the following facts: that Namibia
is an international possession; that South Africa’s
Mandate there was revoked several years ago and
thereforeits continued administration
of that Territory
is illegal; that South Africa’s use of the Territory as
a military base is both unwarranted and unlawful;
that its decision to extend to Na&bia
the upwtkeid
Policies of its own Government are not conducive to
Namibia’s progress to independence; and that South
Africa’s continued refusa] to hand over the Territory
to the United Nations has tremendously contributed to
South Africa’s present self-inflicted ostracism from
the international community and as a result it is being
treated as though it were an international
political
leper.

62. It Will be recalled that for more than a decade
now the African Group has always allied itself with the
international community in the task of attempting to
facilitate a peaceful transition to independence for the
international Territory of Namibia. In that practical
alliance the African Group has corne out in full support
of all United Nations resolutions on that Territory
which have had the effect of lessening tension in that
country. It Will further be recalled that each time
these resolutions have been adopted, they have had the
effect of reducing tension in the area because they have
tended to inspire the Namibians. These resolutions
have always called for, among other things-and
I quote from the statement made on behalf of the
Secretary-General on Namibia Day:

5*, South Africa has always claimed to be an African
countrY, and, as far as 1 am aware, nobody on the
surfaceof God’s earth bas denied that claim. UnfortunatelY, what the South African Government has done
and continues to do in Namibia is very un-African.
TherefOre the fight in Namibia, and even in South
Africa itself, is not a fight between black and white
but rather against the system of government which is
Ordained to frustrate the legitimate aspirations of the
majoritY of the population of both countries.

6,, ., the withdrawal of South Africa’s administration
from Namibia; an end to South Africa’s attempts to
compromise the unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia through devices such as the establishment
of homelands, the creation of the necessary political
conditions for the people of Namibia to exercise their
right to self-determination
and national indepen7

dence free of any constraint, and, to that end, the
abrogation
of a11 repressive and discriminatory
laws, the release of political prisoners and the right
of return of a11 political
exiles; constitutional
arrangements based on the freely expressed wishes
of the people of Namibia, including SWAPO, within
the framework of a single, undivided State; and
United Nations supervision of the implementation
of any constitutional
arrangements, including the
holding of elections.2”

67. Finally, permit me to record my Group’s abiding
faith in the Council’s ability to find an immediat&
solution aimed at making it possible for the peopl,
of Namibia, under their elected leadership, in free
elections controlled and supervised by this important
organ of the United Nations, to take their seat here io
the United Nations before the end of the thirty-first
regular session of the General Assembly.
68. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the ‘next
speaker, 1 should Iike, on behalf of the Council, t0
welcome the presence at the Council table today OF
the Foreign Ministers of Benin, Pakistan and the
United Republic of Tanzania.

63. These are conditions which have over the years
reflected the genuine aspirations of the people of
Namibia
and have been supported unconditionally
by the African Group. In view of their popularity and
general acceptance by the people for whom they are
intended, the South African Government should and
must be prevailed upon by the Council, even at this
late hour, to accept them and act accordingly in the
interest of international peace and stability. TO ignore
these popular demands and legitimate aspirations is
both undemocratic and inhuman.

69. The next speaker is Mr. Sam Nujoma, leader of
SWAPO, to whom the Council decided earlier at this
meeting to extend an invitation in accordance with
rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. 1 now
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
70. Mr. NUJOMA:
1 thank you, Mr. President, and
the other representatives around this table for allowing
our movement once again to participate in an crucial
debate about our country.

64. The African Group is of the view that fear of the
black majority by the South African Government has
no basis whatsoever. In fact, the South African
Government
should be the first to concede that the
blacks have been known, throughout the African continent, to be hospitable, tolerant and even docile.
It is that docility which the former colonial Powers
exploited to the full in their relations with colonial
Africa.

71. May 1, on behalf of the Central Committee of
SWAPO for Namibia, the People’s Liberation Army
of Namibia and our embattled people, join the United
Nations community in expressing heartfelt grief and
sincere condolences to the delegation of the People’s
Republic of China at the death of Chairman Mao
Tse-tung, whose service to China and humanity has
been, and Will eternally remain, illustrious and monumental. His revolutionary leadership and his teachings
rooted in the experience of the masses of his country
have become a mode1 that is being emulated by aIl
those engaged today in similar struggles, not least the
people of Namibia, under the leadership of their
vanguard SWAPO.

65. In regard to the Namibian saga, the international
community has never had occasion to recognize the
South African Government as a colonial Power despite
the fact that it was entrusted with the administration
of the Territory by the League of Nations. Therefore, South Africa’s refusa1 to move out of that Territory and eliminate the present political tension in the
area must have baffled even the few friends it may
have on the international scene.

72. The Security Council, which is charged with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security in the world, has been
reconvened today to consider and to translate into
practical, positive action the relevant provisions Of
resolution 385 (1976).

66. Sight should not be lost of the fact that the black
leaders who have championed the Namibian
cause
have gone to great pains in appealing to the South
African Government to respect the requirements for
Namibia’s
peaceful transition to independence and
self-determination.
These friendly appeals have also
fallen on deaf ears. Consequently,
those dedicated
leaders have now been forced tO back the armed
struggle spearheaded. by SWAPO, which appears to
be the only language that colonial Powers have
been known to understand and appreciate. But bloodshed could be avoided in Namibia if the South African
Government persuaded itself to work with the Council
and move rapidly towards implementation
of ail
measures which have been spelled out by the General
Assembly and the Council which are regarded as
imperative
for Namibia’s
peaceful transition
to
freedom and independence.

73. It is very ,clear to us, and it should be equally
clear to everybody, especially to the members of the
Council, that the illegal colonial régime which ocubies
our country by means of brute force has, once again,
flouted the clear and categorical demand of this Council. True to type, South Africa has defied the authority
of the Council, which had urged that régime to make
a solemn declaration committing itself to withdraw its
illegal administration
from our country SO that the
people of Namibia might accede to freedom and
national independence. This is the situation that !this
august body is faced with today.
8

74, The whole world is now watching your deliberatiens, and you are expected to take Stern and courageous steps to enforce your demand that South
Africa get out of Namibia. There is no other course.
S~A~O has said time and time again that the Vorster
+gime has no intention whatsoever of leaving Namibia,
&spite the clear and repeated demands of the United
Nations that it do SO. The occupation régime must be
told ,-,ow,in no uncertain terms, that the game is up.
NohodY cari still say at this jullcture
that the Pretoria
régimeneeds more time to comply with and accept the
clear demands of the people of Namibia and the
international community.
Let us all be sincere and
honest if we want together 10 bring about a genuine
independence thal Will provide liberation and bette!
opportunities for all the people of Namibia.

against our people since the adoption of resolution 385
(1976). The situation in Namibia has not changed fol
the better, but for the worse.
80. First, as a result of the expanding successes
of the military operations of the People’s Liberation
Army of Namibia and of the victories scored over the
enemy forces, as evidenced in the opening up of new
military operational zones in central Namibia, the
enemy bas resorted to a massive military build-up.
This military build-up has reached alarming proportions. For instance, the largest military base at
Grootfontein
in Namibia has been enlarged considerably. According to reliable sources, this base
contains more than 15 battalions in addition to air
force support units. This base is meant for the supply
of the entire northern half, as well as the central
region, of Namibia. Moreover, it receives direct
supplies from Pretoria by air, road and railway. Apart
from this enormous brise with varied facilities for
military aggression, there are several other bases at
Epupa, Ruacana, Ohopoho, Omahenene, Okalongo,
Oshakati,
Ondangwa, Onuno,
Enana, Nkongo,
Hauwanga, Kwangari, Runtu, Andara, Mbwabata,
Singalamwe and Katima Mulilo. These bases form a
northern belt stretching from the Atlantic along the
Angolan-Namibian
border to the Zambesi River. There
are also other major bases at Keetmanshoop in the
south, Walvis Bay in the west, Windhoek in the central
region, Gobabis in the east, and Tsumeb and Outjo
in the immediate north. Supporting these military
bases are training centres at Ogongo in the north,
Rooikop near Walvis Bay in the west, Windhoek the
capital, and at Okahandja in the central region. It is
significant to note here that Okahandja, which was the
site of a teacher’s training college until a few years
ago, has now been converted into a new military
training camp where a puppet army has been trained
as part of the Turnhalle tribal exercise to support the
continued illegal occupation of Namibia by racist
South Africa.

75. I submit here that from now on the Namibian
issue must be discussed in the Council only within
the context of Chapter VII of the Charter. Eveiything
elsebas been tried-not
once, but many times-and
wehave got nowhere.
76. SWAPO has prepared a special issue of the
NanGr Nc,ljs for this debate; we have made a copy
ofthat publication available to each one of the members
of the Council. That publication catalogues the acts of
political repression and other crimes perpetrated
against the Namibian
people by the hated illegal,
colonial administration in Namibia since January of this
year,
77. The same régime, which is brutalizing
and
murdering people in Namibia daily, has unleashed a
newwave of maiming and killing of school children,
youth and other innocent people in South Africa
SWAPO joins the whole peace-Ioving community of
theworld in condemning these dastardly acts. SWAPO
extendsthe comradely hand of solidarity and support
10the heroic militants of South Africa. Their cause,
likeours, isjust, and their victory, like ours, is certain.

81. The effect of this militarization of Namibia has
been turned to the country into a complete police state,
threatening and brutalizing the people of Namibia. A
state of emergency under the so-called RI7 proclamation has existed since 1972 in northern Namibia. This
repressive measure has, since April this year, been
reinforced by the proclamation of martial law ail over
the northern part of Namibia which could be applied
automatically to any other part of the country. Under
this martial law, ,a free-fire zone has been created
along the entire northern border of Namibia. Communities have been uprooted and taken to concentration camps, villages have been destroyed, crops have
been burned and livestock have been confiscated. Any
living being seen in this zone is liable to be shot and
killed.
These atrocities have been partly, but
eloquently, attested to by Mr. Bill Anderson, a formel
member of the South African armed forces.J

78. The Vorster régime cannot pretend to be sincere
and honest elsewhere when, in fact, it is not serious
atall on the question of Namibia, in which that régime
isdirectly involved as a colonial and illegal occupation
fOrce.South Africa must never be allowed to evade
theauthority and clear demands of the United Nations
regardin& Namibia. It was through the resolutions
anddecisions of the Security Council and the General
*ssembly, as well as the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 19713, that the legal
andadministrative responsibility of the United Nations
waSestablished. All States Members are therefore
bound to respect their own decisions in regard to
Namihia and to refrain from undertakings that may,
(lirectlY or indirectly, lend legitimacy and credibility
l” th$illegal colonial régime in Namibia.
79. TQ demonstrate the continued intransigence of
Ihe il1e&l occupationist régime, 1 should like to cite
‘Orne Of the recent repressive measures being used

82. In this regard 1 want 10 underscore two important
factors. The first one is that these developments
9

and atrocities
which 1 have just mentioned have
increased since the Council adopted resolution 385
(1976). The other factor is that all this is taking place
while the so-called true representatives of the people
of Namibia are meeting at Turnhalle tribal talks. They
have not voiced any protest or condemnation of those
brutal acts against the Namibian
people. On the
contrary, they have embraced all the schemes of the
occupation régime aimed at fragmenting our country
and destroying human life.

categorical in its demands for South Africa to commit
itself to withdraw and to end its illegal occupation
of Namibia. It is clear to the Council that South
Africa has totally defied this collective demand to bring
about a peaceful solution to the Namibian problem.
What is to be done now? In our view, the Council
must invoke the appropriate provisions of Chapter VII
of the Charter and impose sanctions against racist
South Africa.
87. Fourthly, despite continued provocation by the
Fascist Pretoria régime, SWAPO, being the sole and
authentic representative of the people of Namibia,
has always been ready to talk directly with the South
African racist régime, with a view to finding a peaceful
solution to the Namibian problem. However, I want
to state here, once more, that such talks must be
preceded by the acceptance by South Africa of the
following conditions: first, SWAPO has been and is
ready to talk directly with the illegal occupying régime
of South Africa regarding the modalities of transferring
power to the people of Namibia under the leadership
of SWAPO; secondly, SWAPO insists that any talks
between us and South Africa must be held under the
auspices of the United Nations; thirdly SWAPO
further insists that before any talks, all Namibian
political prisoners must be released; fourthly, SWAPO
demands a commitment by South Africa to withdraw
its armed forces from Namibia.

83. There is an added element to the militarization
of otir country, and that is that Namibia is being used
as a springboard to commit aggression against the
People’s Republic of Angola and the Republic of
Zambia. The recently enacted so-called security act,
which defines the whole area south of the equator as
the South African defence periphery, Will provide
further rationale for the Pretoria régime to commit
aggression beyond the immediate neighbouring countries. This clearly demonstrates the aggressive nature
of the fascist régime of South Africa, which is a
threat not only to the peace and security of the area
but to international peace and security.
84. Secondly,
in the Iight of the foregoitig submissions, 1 should iike to point out that the Turnhalle
tribal talks, which have been going on since 1 September 1975 in Windhoek, are a smokescreen hiding South
Africa’s real intentions, namely, to turn Namibia into
a confederation of tribal mini-States, controlled and
manipulated
by the South African racist régime for
the purpose of retaining and using Namibia as a buffer
between South Africa and independent Africa. The
elements that are gathered at these tribal talks are
nothing but hand-picked tribal chiefs, puppets and
quislings who are on the payroll of the racist régime.
They are being used as cannon fodder and as spokesmen for the Vorster régime, especially in the western
capital% For example, on 18 August last Vorster used
the Turnhalle crowd to announce the date of 3 1 December 1978 as the so-called independence
date to be
preceded by an “interim
government”.
Needless to
say, this crowd has no legitimacy, authority or power
to make this pronouncement.
In reality, it is South
Africa that is speaking through it in order to cause
confusion among our people and to placate international pressure and condemnation.

88. Finally, Mr. President, it is a happy coincidence
that you, an African son, should be presiding over
this crucial debate, Your country, the Libyan Arab
Republic, has .proved itself to be a refuge through its
generous, concrete assistance to all those who are
struggling for liberation, justice and national independence.
89. In conclusion, 1 should like to reiterate SWAPO’s
position that we are more than ever committed,
determined and ‘resolved to carry out the armed
Iiberation struggle wiïh intensity, to liberate every
inch of Namibia, including Walvis Bay.
90. The PRESIDENT:
1 should like to assure
Mr. Nujoma again of Libya’s indefatigable supportof his country and his nation in their legitimate fight
for liberation, independence and progress.

85. Let me state that SWAPO rejects and condemns
the Turnhalle tribal talks now and in any other circumstances. In this connexion, 1 should like to cal1 upon
ail those Namibians who bave allowed themselves to
be used by the enemy against the true aspirations and
legitimate interests of our people to disassociate themselves and renounce their treacherous activities against
the people of Namibia and identify themselves with
the future of Namibia by joining the liberation struggle
under the Ieadership of SWAPO.

91. No other representatives wish to speak. HO~ever, two representatives have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I now cal1 on the representative of the United States.
92. Mr. SCRANTON
(United States of America):
1 wish to speak briefly in exercise of the right of reply.
93. The United States delegation-and
1 am sure this
is true of ail the rest of us-deeply
welcomes the
high standard of the statements that have been made hy
the representatives of Zambia, Benin, Malawi and

86. Thirdiy,
resolution
385 (1976) unanimously
adopted by the Council last January, was clear and
10

SWAPO, and we are grnteful
CommentS.

to them

for theil

Of itS own substantial trade with the Republic of South
Africa.

94, As for the comments that were made by the
representative of Mauritius, 1 nlust say in candeur that
l do net think they are 011 such a level as to warrant
a civil reply. If he truly represents the Organization
of African Unity in these comments and in the
questions thal he has asked, I would refer him
directly and immediately
to the front-line Presidents
who have been directly involved in the negotiations
and who are fully informed. If they had such convictions as he infers are involved in these vital negotiatiens, I at least-and
1 think all of us-have more
respectfor them than to believe that they would continue the talks in such circumslances.

100. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of
Mauritius has asked to speak iti exercise of his right
of reply. 1 invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
101. Mr. RAMPHUL
(Mauritius): First 1 should .like
to express my sincere thanks to the representatives
of the United States and the United Kingdom, both
of whom have been most gracious in replying to some
of the questions 1 raised.
102. 1 wish to make it clear to Mr. Scranton, the
representative of the United States, that i did not
speak with any convictions, 1 did not make any statement, nor did 1 accuse any particular country. 1 asked
questions, 1 asked for clarifications, and 1 invited his
delegation to deny, to confirm or to comment, 1 have
not received any denial; 1 have not received any confirmation; 1 have received comments. 1 have been
referred to the Presidents of the front-line countries
in southern Africa. The questions 1 raised are pertinent,
1 maintain. Before speaking in the Council as the representative of the Chairman of the Organization of
African Unity, 1consulted my colteagues. We had been
briefed by the Foreign Ministers of the front-line
countries of southern Africa.

95. As for the motivations of the President of the
United States, Mr. Kissinger and others involved in
these negotiations, 1 cari attest to these personally:
they are the determination
to avoid a blood-bath and
human carnage in an area of the world that we all
prize and to bring about as rapidty as possible
majority rule in Rhodesia and Namibia, which is the
backbone of the United Nations viewpoint too. They
are in truth the same motivations
as any decent
human being would have in this effort and they are
completely in line with the United Nations resolutions
and the United Nations actions that have been taken
here.

103. 1 have not cast any doubt on the sincerity,
purpose or motivations of Mr. Kissinger. 1 have asked
for clarifications; 1 have asked for answers to questions
that have been raised, to points that have been made
and to reports that have been published, with the
knowledge of many people. All 1 asked was whether
there was any truth in those reports. 1 did it in a very
civil mariner.

96, The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of the
United Kingdom also asked 10 speak in exercise of the
right of reply.
97. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): 1 should like
to foltow the representative of the United States in
ptiying a tribute to the seriousness with which the
representatives of Zambia, Malawi and Benin and
the representative of SWAPO have approached the
debate this afternoon. 1 also listened with great
interestto the representative of Mauritius, as 1 do with
regularity. Speaking with his customary modesty, he
askedme, on behalf of the United Kingdom, to clarify
my Government’s policy towards Namibia. 1 shall do
$0in detail when I corne to speak later in this debate.
l might, however, be permitted one word of comment
on the quite extraordinary speech we heard from the
representative of Mauritius.

104. 1 should like to reassure the representative of
the United Kingdom, my comrade Ambassador Ivor
Richard, that 1 have cast no doubts, on the initiative
of the United Kingdom. 1 regret that he should find
that my questions were intentionally unhelpful. 1 cari
assure him that 1 have not been trying to be intentionally unhelpful to the United Kingdom. But 1 cari
assure him that 1 am in duty bound to say, with all
conviction and sincerity, that 1 was intentionally
helpful to the cause of Africa.
105. As to the comment he made regarding Mauritius’
trade with South Africa, 1 should have thought that
the boot was on the other foot. We export to South
Africa 20 million rupees’ worth of goods, and we are
bound, geographically situated as we are, to import
from them about 218 million rupees’ worth. 1 do net
think 1 need comment on that any further. Africa
knows about the situation and we have not yet received
any reproach from any single country of.Africa. It io
surprising that this reproach should have corne from
the United Kingdom.

98. The abject ofhis speech was-and indeed it could
bave had no other abject-to
cast doubts upon the
good faith and honesty of my country in the recent
initiatives taken by the United States and the United
Kingdom. It was designed to sabotage rather than to
build, to wreck rather than to create. It was intention+ unhetpful.and shoutd be treated as such.
g9* As to the specific question he asked me, the
United Kingdom bas made no secret of Rio Tinto’s
interestsin Rossing, just as Mauritius makes no secret
11

Norcs
’ Qfficitrl
Rw«rds
qf tir B Gemd
Assc~r~hly,
Tlrirty-fi,:vt
St~pplemwf
No. IA, p. 3.
z Statement
made at the 236th meeting
of the United
Council
for Namibia.
See A/AC. 131, SR.236, para. 7.

Scssim.
Nations

12
