United Nations

A/RES/60/227

General Assembly

Distr.: General
7 April 2006

Sixtieth session
Agenda item 54 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2005
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/60/490/Add.3)]

60/227. International migration and development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 58/208 of 23 December 2003 and 59/241 of
22 December 2004,
Recalling also its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003 on the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic and social fields,
Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome, 1
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 2
1.
Decides that the High-level Dialogue on International Migration and
Development will be held in New York on 14 and 15 September 2006, and also
decides that the High-level Dialogue will discuss the overall theme of the
multidimensional aspects of international migration and development in order to
identify appropriate ways and means to maximize its development benefits and
minimize its negative impacts;
Invites Member States to participate in the High-level Dialogue at the
2.
ministerial level or highest level possible;
3.
Decides that the Holy See, in its capacity as Observer State, and
Palestine, in its capacity as observer, shall participate in the High-level Dialogue;
4.
Invites those intergovernmental organizations and entities that have
observer status with the General Assembly to participate in the High-level Dialogue;
5.
Invites relevant United Nations agencies, funds and programmes, as well
as the International Organization for Migration, to contribute to the preparation of,
and participate in, the High-level Dialogue;
Decides that the participants in the High-level Dialogue will participate
6.
in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;

_______________
1
2

05-50122

See resolution 60/1.
A/60/205.

A/RES/60/227

7.
Also decides that the High-level Dialogue will consist of four plenary
meetings and four interactive round tables, within existing resources;
8.
Further decides that the President of the General Assembly, the President
of the Economic and Social Council and the Secretary-General will make
introductory statements at the opening of the High-level Dialogue;
Decides that the round tables will be open to all Member States, the
9.
Holy See, in its capacity as Observer State, and Palestine, in its capacity as
observer, and representatives of relevant entities of the United Nations system,
including its relevant special rapporteurs, and the International Organization for
Migration, as well as to other relevant regional and international intergovernmental
organizations that have observer status, and also decides that the round tables will
be organized as follows:
(a) The first set of two interactive round tables will be held concurrently in
the afternoon of the first day of the High-level Dialogue;
(b) The second set of two interactive round tables will be held concurrently
in the morning of the second day of the High-level Dialogue;
(c) Summaries of the deliberations of the four round-table sessions will be
presented orally by the chairpersons of the round-table sessions during the
concluding plenary meeting of the High-level Dialogue;
10. Also decides that the themes for each of the four round tables will be the
following:
(a) Round table 1 will focus on the effects of international migration on
economic and social development;
(b) Round table 2 will focus on measures to ensure respect for and protection
of the human rights of all migrants, and to prevent and combat smuggling of
migrants and trafficking in persons;
(c) Round table 3 will focus on the multidimensional aspects of international
migration and development, including remittances;
(d) Round table 4 will focus on promoting the building of partnerships and
capacity-building and the sharing of best practices at all levels, including the
bilateral and regional levels, for the benefit of countries and migrants alike;
11. Further decides to hold, within existing resources, one-day informal
interactive hearings in 2006 with representatives of non-governmental
organizations, civil society organizations and the private sector, to be presided over
by the President of the General Assembly, and requests the President of the
Assembly to prepare a summary of the hearings prior to the High-level Dialogue in
September 2006;
12. Decides that the President of the General Assembly will determine the
list of invited participants and the exact format and organization of the hearings, in
consultation with Member States and representatives of non-governmental
organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil
society organizations and the private sector;
13. Also decides that representatives of non-governmental organizations in
consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, civil society
organizations and the private sector, one from each grouping being selected during
the informal interactive hearings, may also participate in each of the round tables of
2

A/RES/60/227

the High-level Dialogue, and that the President of the General Assembly will
determine the list of such representatives, taking into account the principle of
equitable geographical representation, in consultation with Member States;
14. Further decides that arrangements concerning the participation of nongovernmental organizations, civil society and the private sector in the High-level
Dialogue will in no way create a precedent for other meetings of the General
Assembly;
15. Requests the Secretary-General, within existing resources, to prepare a
comprehensive overview of studies and analyses on the multidimensional aspects of
migration and development, including the effects of migration on economic and
social development in developed and developing countries, and on the effects of the
movements of highly skilled migrant workers and those with advanced education;
16. Invites the Secretary-General to address also in his comprehensive
overview in consultation with relevant United Nations organizations, short-term and
seasonal workers within the issue of labour movements;
17. Invites the regional commissions to contribute to and coordinate dialogue
at the regional level in preparation for the High-level Dialogue;
18. Invites the President of the General Assembly, within existing resources,
in consultation with Member States, and with the assistance of the Secretariat, to
organize prior to the High-level Dialogue up to two panel discussions with a focus
on its overall theme;
19. Notes that the Commission on Population and Development, the
Commission for Social Development and the Commission on the Status of Women
will have considered the issue of international migration within their respective
mandates by the time of the High-level Dialogue, and invites their inputs through
the Economic and Social Council;
20. Also notes that the Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families will have considered the issue of
protecting the rights of all migrant workers as a tool to enhance development, within
its mandate, by the time of the High-level Dialogue, and invites the SecretaryGeneral to make available for the High-level Dialogue the summary of the
discussion in the Committee;
21. Invites appropriate regional consultative processes and other major
initiatives undertaken by Member States in the field of international migration to
contribute to the High-level Dialogue;
22. Takes note of the report of the Global Commission on International
Migration, and notes its contribution to the debate on international migration and
development, and also takes note of the report as an input for consideration at the
High-level Dialogue;
23. Reiterates that the outcome of the High-level Dialogue will be a
Chairperson’s summary, which will be widely distributed to Member States,
observers, United Nations agencies and other appropriate organizations;
24. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a note on the organization of
work of the High-level Dialogue;
25. Recalls its request to the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-first session on the implementation of resolution
59/241;
3

A/RES/60/227

26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session the
sub-item entitled “International migration and development”.
69th plenary meeting
23 December 2005

4
