S/2019/616

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 August 2019
Original: English

Letter dated 30 July 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
In response to the request of the Security Council, in its resolution 2444 (2018),
asking me to conduct a technical assessment regarding the Somalia arms embargo,
with options and recommendations for improving implementation, an assessment
team was deployed to Mogadishu and Nairobi from 22 to 28 June 2019. The team, led
by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, comprised technical experts
from the United Nations Mine Action Service and the United Nations Institute for
Disarmament Research (UNIDIR).
The assessment team held consultations with the National Security Adviser to
the President of Somalia and his staff, including the National Focal Point for Weapons
and Ammunition Management; the Directors-General of the Ministries of Defence,
Internal Security and Justice and Judicial Affairs; and representatives of the Somali
National Army and the Somali Police Force. The Federal Government of Somalia also
enabled the assessment team to visit four armouries in Mogadishu: Villa Somalia;
Battalion 60 of the Somali National Army; the Somali Police Force headquarters; and
the Halane central armoury. The assessment team also met with representatives of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), including the United
Nations Mine Action Service, the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
the Panel of Experts on Somalia (which is based in Nairobi), as well as representatives
of the Governments of Belgium, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America, the European Union and the European
Union Training Mission in Somalia. The assessment team also consulted with the
Bonn International Centre for Conversion and the organization Confli ct Armament
Research.
Arms embargo and context
By resolution 733 (1992), the Security Council imposed a general and complete
arms embargo on Somalia, and by its resolution 1844 (2008) the Council decided to
monitor the implementation of targeted measures, in addition to an arms embargo, on
individuals and entities designated by the relevant sanctions committee. In subsequent
resolutions, most recently in its resolution 2444 (2018), the Council introduced
exemptions 1 and exceptions 2 to the territorial embargo and further refined its scope.
__________________

Exemptions are processed through the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution
751 (1992); they are for the Committee’s information or for its approval, or they require the
absence of a negative decision by the Committee in order for a particular arms embargo related activity to proceed.
2
Exceptions do not need to be submitted to the Committee.
1

19-12646 (E)

020819

*1912646*

S/2019/616

In its resolution 2093 (2013), the Council decided to partially lift the arms embargo
in relation to deliveries of weapons or military equipment or the provision of advice,
assistance or training intended solely for the development of the Sec urity Forces of
the Federal Government of Somalia, and to provide security for the Somali people. In
its resolution 2111 (2013), the Council introduced an exemption for the delivery to
the Federal Government of certain additional categories of items 3 not covered by the
partial lift. In the same resolution, another exemption was provided for supplies
intended to help to develop Somali sector institutions – those other than the security
forces of the Federal Government, as subsequently clarified 4 by the Committee. 5
In its engagement with the Federal Government of Somalia, the assessment team
received a strong commitment to complying with the arms embargo, including the
terms of its partial lifting. The Federal Government recognizes that effective
governance and accountability regarding arms and related materiel is not only an
international obligation aimed at limiting the possibility of diversion but also an
important national security-related responsibility. At the same time, the Federal
Government reiterated its position that the embargo hinders the fight against
Al-Shabaab by restricting the access of the Federal Government to heavy weapons.
The impact on Somalia of arms-smuggling activities in the region, in particular
arms trafficking from Yemen into Somalia, was also a concern raised by the Federal
Government of Somalia, and expressed also by the Security Council in its resolution
2444 (2018). The listing of arms traffickers by the Council or the Committee, as
subject to the targeted sanctions, could act as a deterrent against smuggling activities
and help improve implementation of the arms embargo. The Panel of Experts on
Somalia, in collaboration with the Panel of Experts on Yemen, is a source of
information to the Council on arms traffickers.
Since my previous assessment of the Somalia arms embargo, requested by the
Security Council in 2014 (S/2014/243), the Federal Government of Somalia has made
notable progress in its efforts to establish a national weapons and ammunition
management framework. In particular, in Mogadishu, the Federal Government has
made significant advancements in strengthening accountability of newly imported
materiel prior to distribution by implementing a system of marking and record keeping at the point of initial reception. However, challenges remain, in particular in
the areas of coordination and capacity. Further progress towards weapons and
ammunition management, and, more broadly, in security sector reform, is also
dependent on the implementation of the National Security Architecture and inclusive
political agreements, which will require political cooperation b etween the Federal
Government and the federal member states to resume. 6 Technical cooperation
between the Federal Government and the federal member states should be
__________________

Surface-to-air missiles, including: man-portable air defence systems; guns, howitzers and
cannons with a calibre greater than 12.7 mm; and ammunition and components specially
designed for those items, excluding shoulder-fired anti-tank rocket launchers; mortars with a
calibre greater than 82 mm; anti-tank guided weapons and ammunition and components specially
designed for those items; charges and devices intended for military use containing energetic
materials; mines and related materiel; and weapon sights with night -vision capability.
4
Paragraph 11 (a) of Security Council resolution 2111 (2013) contains a reference to supplies of
weapons or military equipment and technical assistance or training intended solely for the
purpose of helping to develop Somali sector institutions. Paragraph 28 of the Committee’s
Implementation Assistance No. 2, last updated on 8 May 2019, specifies Somali sector
institutions other than the Security Forces of the Federal Government of Somalia.
5
Renamed “the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992) concerning
Somalia” as at 14 November 2018.
6
In the National Security Architecture of Somalia, adopted in April 2017, the sizes, distributions
and compositions of regional and federal forces are defined, and command and control and
resourcing responsibilities are outlined.
3

2/13

19-12646

S/2019/616

strengthened to ensure the roll-out of weapons and ammunition management to the
federal member states.

Assessment of components of the arms embargo
Procedures related to the partial lifting of the arms embargo
The partial lifting of the arms embargo was followed by the establishment of a
set of procedures, advance delivery notification, 7 post-delivery confirmation 8 and
post-distribution notification, 9 to be followed by the Federal Government of Somalia
with specified content and within specified timelines, all of which are to be submitted
for the Committee’s information. Requests for items listed in the annex to Security
Council resolution 2111 (2013) were to be submitted in advance for the Committee’s
approval.
Advance delivery notification and post-delivery confirmation
In its resolution 2142 (2014), the Security Council decided that the primary
responsibility for making the advance delivery notification rested with the Federal
Government of Somalia, while the supplying Member State or States could make the
notification in place of the Federal Government, in consultation with the Federal
Government. The assessment team found that this requirement proved to be
challenging for the Federal Government to implement. While acknowledging internal
coordination issues as a contributing factor to missed or late notifications, the
Government noted that supplying Member States, when arranging deliveries, often
bypassed the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia, the designated focal
point for arms embargo issues, which prepares and submits the required notifications
to the Committee.
In addition to deliveries of weapons, ammunition or military equipment,
advance notification is also a requirement for the provision of advice, assistance or
training. Medical equipment and musical instruments have also been included in the
past as forms of assistance to the security forces of the Federal Government of
Somalia. A definition of “assistance”, with a narrower scope, could help to provide
clarity to the Federal Government and Member States on what does and does not need
to be included in advance notification, as well as ease the reporting burden.
In relation to the post-delivery confirmation, a review by the assessment team
of some of the documentation submitted to the Committee between 2017 and 2019
indicated gaps in timeliness and content, pointing to the desirability of providing
periodic feedback to the Government. The Office of the National Security Adviser of
Somalia expressed confidence about achieving full compliance with this requirement.

__________________

The Committee must be informed at least five working days in advance of the date of the
proposed delivery of weapons, ammunition or military equipment, as well as assistance, intended
for the development of the security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia.
8
No later than 30 days after the delivery of arms and ammunition, written confirmation o f the
completion of delivery, including the serial numbers for the arms and ammunition delivered,
shipping information, bills of lading, cargo manifests or packing lists, and the specific place of
storage, is to be provided by the Federal Government of Somalia.
9
Upon distribution of the imported arms and ammunition, information regarding the destination
unit is to be incorporated in the biannual reporting by the Federal Government of Somalia to the
Security Council on the structure, composition, strength and disposition of its security forces,
including the status of regional and militia forces.
7

19-12646

3/13

S/2019/616

Post-distribution notification
In its resolution 2444 (2018), the Security Council requested the Federal
Government of Somalia to incorporate the notification, previously to h ave been
submitted to the Committee within five days of distribution to the destination unit,
into its biannual reporting to the Council. This change in procedure makes an aspect
of the terms of the partial lifting of the arms embargo less onerous for the Federal
Government. Since the adoption of the resolution, the Federal Government has
submitted one report to the Council, dated 15 March 2019. The report did not contain
information on the distribution of acquired arms and ammunition, which should be
included in the next report, due by 15 September 2019. 10 The information contained
in the next report will enable a proper assessment of the effectiveness of the modified
procedure on distribution.
Annex to Security Council resolution 2111 (2013)
The Federal Government of Somalia informed the assessment team of its
requirement to acquire a higher calibre of weaponry to fight Al -Shabaab. While such
weaponry, listed in the annex to Security Council resolution 2111 (2013), is allowed
under the arms embargo, its import is subject to the Committee ’s advance approval.
The approval requirement, according to the Government, had dissuaded potential
suppliers. 11 International partners with whom the assessment team met did not
perceive the procedures related to the items listed in the annex to be an impediment.
The assessment team is aware of the lack of clarity in the annex to resolution
2111 (2013). While the annex covered the provision of explosives for military use, it,
and indeed other provisions of the relevant Council resolutions, wer e silent on the
question of explosives for commercial use and for improvised explosive device
disposal support for the Federal Government of Somalia. In April 2019, the
Committee determined, in connection with a specific shipment to Somalia, that a
certain type of commercial explosive meant exclusively for commercial use fell
outside the scope of the arms embargo and highlighted the need for appropriate
safeguards to be put in place to minimize the risk of diversion.
Exceptions for training
In 2013, a range of exceptions was also integrated into the arms embargo,
including supplies of weapons and military equipment and technical training and
assistance intended solely for the support of or use by the European Union Training
Mission in Somalia. 12 The Government of Turkey, an international partner that has
provided training to the security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia in
Mogadishu since 2017, 13 expressed its wish to the assessment team that its training

__________________

The destination unit for an import, in January 2019, of 1,000 AK -47s rifles and 2,000 AK-47
magazines was not included in the report of the Federal Government of Somalia dated 15 March
2019.
11
Since the partial lifting of the arms embargo, in 2013, four exemption requests submitted by
Member States pursuant to paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 2111 (2013), which
concerns the items listed in the annex thereto, have been approved by the Committee. One
exemption request was not approved.
12
Exceptions are also in place for support for AMISOM and its strategic partners.
13
Turkey has also provided training to the security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia in
various military institutions based in Turkey since 2013.
10

4/13

19-12646

S/2019/616

programme, the Turkish Task Force Command in Somalia, which is expected to
intensify its activities in the coming months, be covered by a similar exception. 14
Support for federal member states
In both Security Council resolution 2111 (2013) and the Committee’s
Implementation Assistance Notice No. 2, it is indicated that support (supplies of
weapons or military equipment and technical assistance or training) to develop Somali
sector institutions other than the security forces of the Federal Government of
Somalia, required notification to and the absence of a negative decision by the
Committee. 15 In its engagement with the Federal Government of Somalia, the
assessment team was made aware of concerns regarding support for the federal member
states of which the Committee had not been notified. In resolution 2444 (2018), the
Council stressed the obligations of Member States in relation to such notifications
and urged them to strictly follow the notification procedures for providing assistance
to develop Somali security sector institutions. There is, however, no elaboration by
the Council or its Committee of procedures 16 aimed at preventing the diversion of the
notified items.
Weapons and ammunition management
The Somalia arms embargo and the terms of its partial lifting encompass
weapons and ammunition management obligations applicable to the Federal
Government of Somalia. The consultations held with the Federal Government on
weapons and ammunition management were informed by and buil t on previous work
done by UNIDIR in this area. 17
National framework
The presidential decree of 18 September 2018 on the Control of Arms and
Ammunition of the National Army serves as the primary national policy on weapons
and ammunition management and is a significant step in enabling the distribution of
weapons to the federal member states in an accountable and transparent manner.
Through this decree, Halane has been designated the central armoury for the
registration of all newly imported weapons, and a series of nine standard operating
procedures 18 was put in place for all ministries engaged in security. The decree,
together with the standard operating procedures, provides the basis of a national
weapons and ammunition management framework in Somalia at this time. The
__________________

The Turkish Task Force Command in Somalia provides advisory, mentoring, training and
education activities to the Somali National Army, as well as infrastructure and logistic support. A
total of 88 military and 72 non-commissioned officers were expected to graduate from the Task
Force in July 2019. In addition to the training of the first light infantry battalion, com prising 450
soldiers, a programme for the training and equipping of three battalions per year, comprising 550
soldiers, has been developed.
15
Since the partial lifting of the arms embargo, in 2013, the Committee has received 11 notifications
under paragraph 11 (a) of Security Council resolution 2111 (2013) for support for Somali sector
institutions other than the security forces of the Federal Government of Somalia, one of which
was not successful.
16
For example, confirmation of delivery and information on distribution.
17
For more information, see United Nations Institute for Disarmame nt Research (UNIDIR),
“Towards a National Framework for Arms and Ammunition Management in the Federal Republic
of Somalia: A Narrative Report 2014–2017” (Geneva, 2017).
18
The standard operating procedures concern: general armoury procedures; armoury proc edures for
weapons; armoury procedures for ammunition and explosives; accounting of weapons,
ammunition and explosives; marking of weapons; destruction of weapons and ammunition;
transport of weapons and/or ammunition; reception and documentation procedure s at Halane
armoury; and management of captured weapons.
14

19-12646

5/13

S/2019/616

assessment team found that the implementation of the decree by relevant ministries
and security forces, which remain hampered by limited capacity in various areas,
technical, logistical and financial, remains a challenge for the Federal Government of
Somalia. Furthermore, the assessment also indicates that the standard operating
procedures could be extended to select operational issues that would describe the
control and reporting on the distribution of weapons to subordinate units, including
distribution down to the lowest level of individual soldiers and the return of receipts
up the chain of custody.
With regard to a legal framework governing civilian-owned firearms, the Office
of the National Security Adviser of Somalia drafted two acts in 2017 to regulate small
arms and light weapons and the modalities for weapons issued to private security
companies in Somalia. Both acts are currently in the national legislative process of
approval. Their timely adoption, and the subsequent outreach to and awareness raising of the population regarding these laws, will further advance the efforts of the
Federal Government of Somalia to govern arms and ammunition throughout the
country.
Coordination
The Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia is responsible for the
oversight of weapons and ammunition management, in addition to serving as the focal
point on arms embargo issues. In 2017, the Office of the National Security Adviser
formally appointed a weapons and ammunition management national focal point to
support the coordination and planning of weapons and ammunition management
throughout the national security forces and relevant ministries.
Between 2014 and 2017, the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia
convened, a meeting of the Arms and Ammunition Management Steering Committee,
on a quarterly basis, to facilitate national and international coordination, cooperation
and assistance regarding weapons and ammunition management at the strategic level.
Relevant national ministries, security forces and international partners regularly
participated in the Steering Committee during this period. 19 The Steering Committee
has not convened since the start of 2018, however, and it remains dormant. This has
resulted in lack of information-sharing among relevant national and international
partners working on weapons and ammunition management since.
In June 2019, the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia, in
cooperation with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the Regional
Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons in the Great Lakes Region, the Horn of
Africa and Bordering States, set out a road map to establish a formal national
coordinating mechanism on small arms and light weapons, which, once created, will
serve as the coordinating body among relevant ministries and security forces of the
Federal Government of Somalia on small arms and light weapons control in Somalia.
This is a noteworthy development. As set out in the road map, the Office of the
National Security Adviser intends to establish such a coordinating mechanism, with
the support of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the Regional
Centre on Small Arms and Light Weapons, by the end of 2019. It is also envisaged
that the national coordinating mechanism on small arms and light weapons will
support the coordination of implementation activities rele vant to the arms embargo.
__________________
19

6/13

As noted in my most recent assessment (S/2014/243), the Steering Committee was chaired by the
National Security Adviser and composed of representatives of the Ministries of National Security
and Defence, the Somali National Army, the Somali Police Force, the National Intelligence and
Security Agency, the Custodial Corps, UNSOM, the Mine Action Service, AMISOM, the
European Union, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and non-governmental implementing partners.
19-12646

S/2019/616

The Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia indicated that
strengthening weapons and ammunition management coordination beyond
Mogadishu remains a priority for the Federal Government of Somalia. In the context
of implementing the National Security Architecture agreed upon between the Federal
Government of Somalia and the federal member states in April 2017, as well as the
Transition Plan for the progressive transfer of security responsibilities from AMISOM
to the Somali security institutions, adequate coordination and planning will be
required to monitor how the security forces will be supplied and equipped with arms .
In this regard, training programmes on how those supplies would be managed and
accounted for throughout the chain of custody – that is, the distribution and
management of materiel from the point of initial reception and storage at the Halane
facility to the Somali National Army, the Somali Police Force and the Custodial Corps
headquarters, to sector-level headquarters to individual units at field levels – are
required.
In developing a strategic plan for weapons and ammunition management
activities, the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia is currently planning
to convene a conference on weapons and ammunition management in 2019, with a
view to developing a plan of action on weapons and ammunition management, in
cooperation with relevant international partners. The development of such a national
plan, with specific outputs and timelines, will support the c oordination of weapons
and ammunition management activities among relevant national institutions, security
forces and international partners.
Marking and record-keeping
As a prerequisite for establishing a verification mechanism for the distribution
of arms in Somalia, in 2014 the Security Council appealed to Member States to
support the efforts of the Federal Government of Somalia to start a weapons -marking
and record-keeping process (S/PRST/2014/9). Since then, notable progress has been
made by the Federal Government in the area of marking newly imported weapons.
According to the Federal Government, a total of 20,240 weapons have been marked
either through a fixed marking programme at Halane and at the Ministry of Internal
Security or through a Somali National Army mobile marking team in Mogadishu. The
assessment team was able to confirm that information on newly imported marked
weapons has been entered into logbooks at Halane. A written standard op erating
procedure on marking, drafted by the Federal Government, has been completed. The
Federal Government is seeking international support for the roll -out of the mobile
marking programme at the sector level.
The Federal Government of Somalia has begun to integrate arms registration
into the wider security sector biometric registration of the Somali National Army
during the second phase of the exercise, to be completed by the end of 2019, thereby
linking individual weapons (including through their seria l numbers) to individual
biometric files for soldiers.
With regard to record-keeping, the assessment team observed both progress
made and challenges in implementation. The storage facilities visited by the
assessment had logbooks in which records of weapons and ammunition held in those
storage sites were kept. The Federal Government of Somalia should strengthen its
record-keeping procedures, however, in particular to monitor the internal distribution
of weapons and ammunition from Halane to the various re ceiving units, down to the
company level. The absence of a national weapons registration system, including of
an electronic central national registry or database allowing for the recording and
tracking of all internal transfers of weapons to units and indi viduals, is one of the
most important steps in and a prerequisite for effective tracking and verification, and

19-12646

7/13

S/2019/616

it remains a gap in the management system. The process is expected to take some time
and requires adequate implementation support from relevant i nternational partners.
Stockpile management
During the assessment, the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia
indicated that the enhancement of physical security and stockpile management of
weapons and ammunition remained a priority with regard to weapons and ammunition
management. The storage site visits by the assessment team revealed several storage related challenges to the safe and secure storage of weapons and ammunition in
Mogadishu. Consultations with international stakeholders also indicated the need for
increased international assistance for strengthening storage capacity at the sector and
unit levels. This highlights the need to assess storage conditions and needs
comprehensively throughout Somalia.
Since 2014, progress made towards developing infrastructure required to safely
store weapons and ammunition has been modest. Larger and purpose -built storage in
Mogadishu, necessary for storing large amounts of ammunition with explosive
components outside populated areas, has yet to be implemented because of the
complex security situation. Funding has been insufficient to support the effort of the
Federal Government of Somalia in this regard.
Since 2014, the Halane central armoury has served as the main processing point
for the marking, recording, initial storage and distribution of imported weapons and
ammunition. Progress was made to improve the security of weapon stocks through
the construction of a second storehouse in Halane, where arms and ammunition could
be stored separately. The assessment revealed that further practical improvements
could be made at the Halane storage site to increase the safety and security of the
stocks.
The assessment team observed a pressing need for international assistance to
the Federal Government of Somalia in developing technical expertise and
infrastructure to manage ammunition for conventional weapons safely and securely.
This is particularly concerning, given that ammunition stocks with large amounts of
explosive content are being stored by the Federal Government of Somalia, in
populated areas. The threat of mortar attacks in Mogadishu also underlines the urgent
requirement to securely and safely store ammunition.
Captured weapons
In resolution 2444 (2018), the Security Council urged increased cooperation by
the Federal Government of Somalia, federal member states and AMISOM, as set out
in Council resolution 2182 (2014), to document and register military equipment
captured as part of offensive operations or in the course of carrying out their
mandates. Inspection of the items by the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea,
now succeeded by the Panel of Experts on Somalia, prior to redistribution or
destruction, was also requested by the Council in its resolution 2182 (2014). The
Federal Government has developed a dedicated standard operating procedure to
address this requirement. Such procedures should be further harmonized with
AMISOM in order to ensure the accuracy of the records, and this effort is now under
way. Moreover, either with the support of the Joint Verification Team or the Panel of
Experts, those items that have been captured and stored by the Federal Government
security forces could be physically inspected periodically and possibly traced.
During the assessment, the Federal Government of Somalia noted that, in
practice, the Somali National Army may integrate into its existing stocks weapons
captured during operations. In this regard, practices on documentation and
registration vary considerably throughout units. Furthermore, on the basis of
8/13

19-12646

S/2019/616

information regarding the lack of adequate storage facilities at the sector levels, the
assessment team observed that effective registration and safe and secure storage of
the captured materiel remain a challenge.
In the context of joint operations, AMISOM indicated its commitme nt to
cooperating closely with the Somali National Army on handover procedures and
documentation of captured materiel.
Monitoring and verification
The Panel of Experts is the designated monitoring mechanism on compliance with
the sanctions regime. Its mandate includes monitoring and investigating the
implementation of the arms embargo and reporting violations thereof. In addition to
these aspects, the mandate includes assisting in identifying areas in which the capacities
of States in the region can be strengthened to facilitate the implementation of the
sanctions measures. In its resolution 2142 (2014), the Council requested the Somalia
and Eritrea Monitoring Group, which preceded the Panel of Experts, to provide
feedback to the Federal Government of Somalia on its reporting to the Committee,
which served as a form of assistance to the Federal Government. The request could be
reiterated in the next Council resolution on the Somalia sanctions regime.
Following the recommendation made in the 2014 technical assessment, the
Federal Government of Somalia established a joint verification team in 2015. In
resolution 2317 (2016), the Security Council welcomed the efforts of the Federal
Government in establishing the Joint Verification Team, whose membership currently
includes the Federal Government and experts from the Conflict Armament Research
organization, tasked with conducting routine inspections of the stockpiles, inventory
records and supply chain of weapons of government security forces for the purpose
of mitigating the diversion of arms and ammunition to entities outside the security
services of the Federal Government. The Joint Verification Team submitted its first
report to the Committee in April 2018, and has since provided a midterm report in
March 2019.
The provision for a joint verification team is a unique provision to the arms
embargo. It enables the Federal Government of Somalia to take ownership of
accountability of its stocks, while it embeds an external verification mechanism by
including international experts as part of the team. The Joint Verification Team and
its reports can play an essential role in supporting the Security Council in its
assessment of the arms embargo as it serves as an avenue to periodically evaluate the
regulation and control of the Federal Government over its imports, marking,
registration, storage and distribution of arms and ammunition in the country.
Since its inception, the Joint Verification Team has conducted a total of 30 site
visits in Mogadishu, South-West State and Jubbaland, resulting in the verification of
more than 2,030 weapons and 500,000 rounds of ammunition throughout 16 Somali
Police Force, eight Somali National Army and three Custodial Corps units.
The monitoring and verification of weapons and ammunition flows, including
record-keeping and documented distribution to subunits and soldiers, still presents a
significant challenge in Somalia. A crucial challenge to the effective
operationalization of the Joint Verification Team remains the restricted access to
armouries, as each planned assessment still needs to be authorized by the relevant
Somali security force, and inspections were conducted where access was possible,
instead of following an all-inclusive plan established by the Federal Government. In
addition, verification could be performed only against the compiled lists from newly
imported and marked weapons, in the absence of a centr al national registry or
database that would list all the weapons assigned and distributed to a specific unit.
The Joint Verification Team mechanism has yet to reach its full potential.
19-12646

9/13

S/2019/616

Options and recommendations for improving the implementation of the
arms embargo
With respect to the notification obligations of the Federal Government of
Somalia, there is a need to strengthen internal coordination between the Office of the
National Security Adviser of Somalia and other ministries whose forces may receive
deliveries of materiel or assistance falling under the scope of the partial lifting of the
arms embargo. A reversal of the primary responsibility or the assignment of sole
responsibility to a supplying Member State in consultation with the Government for
advance delivery notification could be considered. Taking such a step would not
weaken the control measures implemented by the Security Council under the partial
lifting of the arms embargo or take away from the ownership of imports by the
Government, because the post-delivery confirmation and post-distribution
notification would still be in place under the responsibility of the Government.
Supplying States should coordinate closely with the Office of the National
Security Adviser of Somalia on all incoming transfers prior to their delivery to ensure
that the Office of the National Security Adviser has records of all materiel received
by the Federal Government of Somalia security forces and that weapons and
ammunition are accounted for prior to distribution to units.
The determination by the Committee on the status of explosives exclusively for
commercial use, including the creation of appropriate accompanying safeguards to
mitigate the risk of diversion, could be reflected in the next Security Council
resolution on the sanctions regime. In general, in order to provide for contingencies
in which an item or equipment not covered by an exemption would legitimately need
to be imported to Somalia, the Council may wish to consider incorporating a catch -all
exemption provision into the arms embargo measure. 20 Furthermore, a discussion on
updating training exceptions, such as in the case of the Turkish Task Force Command
in Somalia, deserves attention.
The Security Council may also wish to consider how best to elaborate further
on the obligations of Member States in relation to the provision of support to develop
Somali sector institutions other than the security forces of the Federal Government of
Somalia, with a view to putting in place appropriate safeguards to prevent diversion.
In addition, a more comprehensive Committee implementation assistance notice or
fact sheet bringing together all the key provisions of the arms embargo would assist
in increasing the understanding of the requirements and obligations in the Federal
Government of Somalia and the international community.
In resolution 2444 (2018), the Security Council reiterated its commitment to
monitoring and assessing improvements in order to review the arms embargo when
all conditions as set out in Council resolutions were met. A clear elaboration by the
Council of those required areas of improvement would provide clarity to the Federal
Government of Somalia on the steps that it needs to take in order to achieve the
adjustments to the arms embargo that it seeks. Maintaining, and even strengthening,
the measure against non-State actors is just as important.
It is also important that the Government establish priorities with respect to
weapons and ammunition management, through a national plan of action, from which
specific activities, timelines and resource mobilization for weapons and ammunition
management could be initiated. It will be important to review and assess gaps in existing
sets of standard operating procedures and develop new procedures, as appropriate.

__________________
20

10/13

See, for example, para. 9 (c) of Security Council resolution 1970 (2011) in connection with the
Libya sanctions regime.
19-12646

S/2019/616

The need to ensure ongoing and increased coordination among all the national
actors involved in weapons and ammunition management is essential. It is crucial to
establish a national coordinating mechanism for weapons and ammunition
management that can support national coordination of weapons and ammunition
management as well as international cooperation and assistance with international
partners on weapons and ammunition management measures, including the
implementation of the arms embargo. The Joint Action Plan of 4 July 2019 is a
welcome initiative to pave the way for a national commission on small arms and light
weapons, which would serve as the national coordination mechanism, and i t should
be supported by donors and international partners. As an interim measure, the work
of the Arms and Ammunition Management Steering Committee could be revitalized
in order to ensure transparent and coordinated oversight among national and
international actors on weapons and ammunition management activities.
Given the need to extend the progress made by the Federal Government of
Somalia on weapons and ammunition management outside Mogadishu, the Federal
Government should establish weapons and ammunition management focal points
embedded in the regional security office architecture, in order to facilitate weapons and
ammunition management implementation at the federal member states level, including
to facilitate the implementation of arms embargo provisions. Coupled with this, through
the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia, the Federal Government could
conduct outreach and consultations on weapons and ammunition management with
federal member states based on established weapons and ammunition management
policies and procedures. Such outreach activities could include: (a) enhancing
awareness-raising with regard to Security Council obligations and the relevant national
legal framework; (b) the roll-out of practical weapons and ammunition management
activities, such as marking, record-keeping, storage and verification programmes in
federal member states, in line with established standard operating procedures; and
(c) assessment of weapons and ammunition management needs and priorities by feder al
member states, from which assistance programmes could be considered by
international partners in consultation with the Federal Government.
At the technical level, it is important that the Federal Government of Somalia
establish effective issue and receipt procedures for all forces in Mogadishu and at
sector and unit levels, and establish, with the assistance of partners, a centralized
electronic database system for imports, stock records and issue and receipt,
administered by the Office of the National Security Adviser of Somalia.
As a matter of urgency, the Federal Government of Somalia should identify and
construct a new central storage site to store arms and ammunition safely and securely.
Partners in a position to do so are encouraged to provide a ssistance in this regard.
With respect to storage needs throughout Somalia, the Government should assess and
identify such needs for all forces, with inputs from the sector level, and subsequently
establish a plan to facilitate resource mobilization.
Given the particular need for the Federal Government of Somalia to address
gaps with respect to ammunition storage, Member States and other international
partners in the position to do so are encouraged to provide assistance by developing
the ammunition management capacity of the Federal Government. Partners providing
training and equipment should be encouraged to integrate dedicated training and/or
mentoring of personnel in ammunition management over the long term, and suppliers
of ammunition should consider providing assistance in the safe and secure storage of
the items, including through controlled issuance procedures and/or support for
infrastructure. Furthermore, purpose-built temporary or field ammunition stores with
adequate risk mitigation measures are required in Mogadishu and at the sector level
in order to ensure that distributed materiel can be stored at a safe distance from the
civilian population and secured to deter diversion to unauthorized recipients.
19-12646

11/13

S/2019/616

With respect to captured weapons, the standard operating procedure on
processing captured weapons should be disseminated and implemented by all security
forces. It is important that there be an agreement with AMISOM on a coordinated
approach to processing captured weapons, with access provided to the Joint
Verification Team and the Panel of Experts to documents and sites for the purposes
of inspection and tracing.
There is merit to considering an enhancement of the mandate of the Panel of
Experts to include the identification of assistance and capacity needs in implementing
the arms embargo and in providing feedback to the Federal Government of Somalia
on its notification and reporting obligations. Such an enhancement of the mandate,
without detriment to its core investigative aspects, would also serve to promote
engagement between the Panel and the Federal Government. The Federal Government
should continue to roll out the Joint Verification Team programme and expand its
locations. It is also important to build national capacity of the Joint Verifi cation Team
through training and assistance programmes, including logistical support for it.
Observations
I thank the Federal Government of Somalia for its strong collaboration and
active participation in this assessment, including for the full acces s granted to my
assessment team. Furthermore, I wish to express my gratitude to the United Nations
family in Somalia, AMISOM, the Member States and the international organizations
for their support for the assessment team.
I commend the progress made with regard to the implementation of the arms
embargo, as well as the biometric registration of the Somali National Army, as
important milestones in the institutionalization of the security forces. The second
phase of the reform of the Somali National Army should also be focused on the
improvement of weapons and ammunition management, including the registration of
weapons, accountability and distribution chains. However, while the Federal
Government of Somalia is facing challenges, continued progress towards security
reforms will require the necessary political agreements to be reached between the
Federal Government and federal member states to fully implement the National
Security Architecture and the Transition Plan. Hence, cooperation between the
Federal Government and the federal member states on the implementation of the
National Security Architecture and the Transition Plan will be key to securing
progress.
It is important that the international community support the implementation of
the recommendations of the assessment agreed upon by the Security Council and that
it continue its support for the security sector reform efforts. Efforts should also be
focused on achieving Somali responsibility for security, the most important of which
is the capacity-building of Somali counterparts. No less critical is the strengthening
of coordination and coherence among the international partners to guarantee the most
efficient and effective support for the Federal Government of Somalia in
implementing the arms embargo.
The Security Council and its Committee could also take stock of all elements of
the arms embargo, with a view to streamlining, clarifying and updating the related
provisions and procedures, which may promote a greater understanding of them, help
to ease the reporting burden on the Federal Government of Somalia and chart a way
forward for further adjustment to the measure, as sought by the Federal Government
following the partial lifting of the embargo in 2013.

12/13

19-12646

S/2019/616

The sanctions regime has played an important role in supportin g the
peacebuilding process in Somalia. Therefore, an arms embargo adjusted according to
the developments in the country can continue to make a positive contribution. The
Security Council and the sanctions Committee and its Panel of Experts, as well as
other international and regional partners, all have an important role to play in
supporting the Federal Government of Somalia on arms embargo issues. I call upon
the Federal Government to work closely with all of these actors in the implementation
of the arms embargo.

19-12646

13/13
