218

General Assembly-Forty-second Session

11. Considers that ali Member Sta tes must promote international co-operation on the basis of respect for the independence, sovercignty and territorial integrity of each
State, including the right of cvery people to choose freely
its own socio-economic and political system and to exercise full sovercignty over its wealth and natural resources,
subject to the principies referred to in article 1, paragraph 2, and article 25 of thc Intcrnational Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, with a view to solving international economic, social and humanitarian problems;
12. Expresses concern at the disparity existing between
established norms and principies and the actual situation
of ali human rights and fundamental freedoms in the
world;
13. Urges ali States to co-operate with the Commission
on Human Rights in thc promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms:
14. Reiterates the need to create, at the national and
international levels, conditions for the full promotion and
protection of the human rights of individuals and peoples:
15. Reaffirms once again that, in order to facilitate the
full enjoyment of ali human rights without diminishing
personal dignity, it is necessary to promote the rights to
education, work, health and proper nourishment through
the adoption of measures at the national leve!, including
those that provide for the participation ofworkers in management, as well as the adoption of measures at the international level. including the establishment of the new international economic ordcr;
16. Decides that the approach to future work within
the United Nations system on human rights matters
should also take into account the content of the Declaration on the Right to Development ancl the need for the implementation thereof:
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms"
93rd plenary meeting
7 Deccmber 1987
42/120.

New international humanitarian order

The General Assembly,
Recal/ing its rcsolutions 36/ 136 of 14 December 1981,
37/201 of 18 Decembcr 1982, 38/125 of 16 Decemhcr
1983 and 40/126 of 1.1 Dccemher 1985,
Recalling further thc rcports of the SecretaryGeneral, 136
Bearing in mind the comments communicated by Governments to the Secretary-General regarding a new international humanitarian order.
Recognizing the urgent need further to improve and
strengthen the international framcwork relating to
humanitarian issues while taking fully into account existing instruments and mechanisms,
Noting with concern that emergencies and disaster<;,
mostly man-madc, havc mcreased in frequency in recent
years, posing a growing challcnge to mcchanisms of international responses to t hem .

116 A/_17/145

A/1X/450. A 14() 14X ,rnd ,\t!d I and 2 ami •\/41 i.P::'

Aware that institutional arrangements and actions hy
governmental and non-governmental bodies require further strengthening, as well as adjustment to new realities.
in order to respond more effectively and speedily to contemporary humanitarian problems,
Noting the efforts ofthe Independent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues to promote public awareness of humanitarian issues, analyse relatively neglected
aspects and identify alternative approaches for resolving
humanitarian problems,
Notingfurtherthe establishment, outside the United Nations, of an Independent Bureau for Humanitarian Issues
to disseminate and follow up the work of the Independent
Commission,
Taking note of the report of the Independent Commission, as well as the sectoral reports on specific
humanitarian issues,
J _ Expresses its appreciation to the co-chairmen and
members of the lndependent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues for their humanitarian endeavours;
2_ Draws the attention of Governments and intergovernmental organizations, including those functioning at
the r_egional level, to the report of the Independent Comm1ss1011;
3. Requests the Independent Commission to transmit
its report to Member States and to the executive heads of
specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations system in order to enable them to consider its analyses and conclusions:
4. Invites ali non-governmental organizations concerned with the humanitarian issues examined by the Independent Commission to bear in mind the recommendations and suggestions made in its report in the context of
their policies and actions in the field;
S. Invites Governments to make available to the Secretary-General, on a voluntary basis, information and expertise on humanitarian issues of concern to them, in order to
identify opportunities for future action and to strengthen
international co-operation in the humanitarian field;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to remain in contact
with Governments, relevant specialized agencies and
programmes of the United Nations system, 11011governmental organizations concerned and the lndependent Bureau for Humanitarian Issues and to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, on the basis of
information made available to him, on the progress made
in the humanitarian field;
7. Decides to review at its forty-third session the question of a new international humanitarian order.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/121.

International co-operation in the humanitarian
field

The General Assembly,
Noting that one of the purposes of the United Nations,
set forth in its Charter, is to achieve international co
operation in solving international problems or a
humanitarian character,
Guidcd, in particular, by the determination expressed in
thc Charter, tl, reaffirm faith in the dignity and worth of
thc human per-,on.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Mindful of the significant contribution to international
co-operation in the humanitarian field made by organizations and agencies of the United Nations system,
Recognizing the positive role played by the lndependent
Commission on International Humanitarian Issues,
Recognizing, in this connection, the 1mportance of the
contribution of governmental and non-governmental organizations, including the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the League of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies,
Recognizing the significance of the existing workable
system to promote, facilitate and co-ordinate
humanitarian activities carried out by Governments, the
United Nations system and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations,
Mindful of the importance of promoting universal respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and of
international co-operation in the humanitarian field for
improving relations among States and peoples,
Stressing the need for the international community to
continue its efforts in the field of humanitarian activities
and to provide the resources to develop further activities
in the humanitarian field,
Conscious that people want to live in a better, ~afer and
more just world,
1. Encourages the international community to develop
further its co-operation in the field of international
humanitarian activities;
2. Calls upan ali States to co-operate for the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms and to work
together to promote international co-operation in order to
solve existing humanitarian problem-; of international
concern;
3. Encourages the international community to contribute substantially and regularly to international
humanitarian activities;
4. Considers that international co-operation in the
humanitarian field will facilitate better understanding,
mutual respect, confidence and tolerance among States
and peoples, thus contributing to a more just and nonviolent world;
5. Invites Governments, the United Nations system
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to develop international co-operation in the
humanitarian field on the basis of relevan! international
instruments;
6. Decides to consider the question of international cooperation in the humanitarian field under the item entitled
"New international humanitarian order"
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/122.

United Nations Voluntary Fund for Victims
of Torture

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 which states that no one shall be subjected to
torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 13 7
137 Resolution

3452 (XXX), annex.

219

Noting with satisfaction the entry into force on 26 June
1987 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
Recalling its resolution 36/151 of 16 December 1981, in
which it noted with deep concern that acts of torture took
place m various countries, recognized the need to provide
assistance to the victims of torture in a purely
humanitarian spirit and established the United Nations
Voluntary Fund for Victims of Torture,
Convinced that the struggle to eliminate torture includes
the provision of assistance in a humanitarian spirit to the
victims and members of their families,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 138
1. Expresses its gratitude and appreciation to the Governments, organizations and individuals that have already
contributed to the United Nations Voluntary Fund for
Victims of Torture;
2. Calls upan ali Governments, organizations and individuals in a position to do so to respond favourably to requests for initial as well as further contributions to the
Fund;
3. invites Governments to make contributions to the
Fund, if possible on a regular basis, in order to enable the
Fund to provide continuous support to projects that depend on recurrent grants;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Board ofTrustees of
the Fund for the work it has carried out;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General
for the support given to the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to make use of ali
existing possibilities, including the preparation, production and dissemination of information materials, to assist
the Board ofTrustees ofthe Fund in its efforts to make the
Fund and its humanitarian work better known and in its
appeal for contributions.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987

42/123.

Status of the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment

The General Assembly,
Recalling article 5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2 and article 7 of the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, 13 both of which provide that
no one shall be subjected to torture orto cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment,
Recalling also the Declaration on the Protection of Ali
Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment,
adopted by the General Assembly in its resolution
3452 (XXX) of 9 December 1975,
Recalling further its resolution 39/46 of 10 December
1984, by which it adopted and opened for signature, ratification and accession the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and called upon all Governments to consider
signing and ratifying the Convention as a matter of priority, as well as its resolutions 40/128 of 13 December
1985 and 41/134 of 4 December 1986,

118

A/42/701.
