S/PV.8220

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8220 th meeting

Tuesday, 3 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (S/2018/241)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-09307 (E)
*1809307*

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

the Peruvian presidency for having convened today’s
meeting on Haiti.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Security
Council, to pay tribute to His Excellency Ambassador
Karel Van Oosterom, Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, for his service as President of the Council
for the month of March. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Security Council in expressing deep appreciation
to Ambassador Van Oosterom and his delegation for the
great diplomatic skill with which they conducted the
Council’s business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (S/2018/241)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia and Haiti to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/241, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I should at the
outset like to express my gratitude to you, Sir, and
2/25

03/04/2018

I also take this opportunity to welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Haiti.
This is the first time that I have the honour
of addressing the Council on Haiti and our first
opportunity to discuss the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) since the
launch of its operations on 16 October 2017, as called
for in resolution 2350 (2017).
I visited Haiti on 14 and 15 March, and I am
pleased to inform the Council that the Mission is fully
operational and actively implementing its mandate. Its
civilian presence is concentrated in the metropolitan
area of Port-au-Prince, with multidisciplinary mobile
teams that monitor political and rule of law developments
and engage with local communities and stakeholders
on a regular basis across Haiti’s 10 departments. This
model of deployment is linked to the Mission’s light
and non-intrusive footprint, while creating a channel
of regular communication with the Haitian population
throughout the country.
(spoke in English)
At the same time, in order to maintain a close
relationship with the Haitian institutions it supports,
the Mission has co-located 135 individual police
officers with the Haitian National Police (HNP) in
Haiti’s 10 departments, and 23 Government-provided
corrections personnel in 9 of Haiti’s 18 prisons. The
presence of seven formed police units (FPUs) in 5 of the
10 regions ensures the provision of operational support
to the HNP and a security presence across the country.
The Mission works closely with the 19 United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes engaged in Haiti, as
well as with the Office of the Special Envoy for Haiti,
Ms. Josette Sheeran, to fulfil its mandate and enable
a seamless transition towards inclusive, sustainable
development through a coherent, comprehensive and
integrated approach, in line with the ongoing United
Nations reforms and the Secretary-General’s vision
on prevention.
MINUJUSTH’s main objective is to build on the
achievements of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti and is tied to the overarching goal of the
United Nations in consolidating stability and security
in the country to facilitate Haiti’s path to longer-term
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

development, of which a stronger rule of law and the
enjoyment of human rights remain critical foundations.
As the Council acknowledged when mandating
MINUJUSTH, the political and good offices role of
the Mission remain the cornerstone of our strategy to
achieve these objectives.
In the past months, MINUJUSTH, in partnership
with the United Nations country team, has implemented
targeted activities in support of its objectives, preparing
the ground for more systemic change. Operating within
an overall stable environment, notwithstanding the
withdrawal of United Nations military troops last year,
the Mission has been fully engaged in assisting the HNP
in implementing its 2017-2021 strategic development
plan, notably through its mentoring and advisory
programme for the HNP senior management. Likewise,
it has started supporting the two regulatory bodies of
the judiciary, the Superior Council of the Judiciary
and the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, in
strengthening accountability and oversight capacity
through assistance to their respective inspection units,
as well as to their joint technical vetting commissions.
Other key areas of support of the Mission
are dedicated to helping curb prolonged pretrial
detention and prison overcrowding, notably through
on-site monitoring of activities at the justice of the
peace tribunal of Port-au-Prince to ensure caseload
management procedures are applied and through
provision of assistance to the penal chain committee
of that court. Closely related to this assistance is the
Mission’s work with the Bar Association of Port-auPrince, funded through community violence-reduction
projects, to put in place two legal aid offices dedicated
to providing counsel to over 50 per cent of detainees in
pretrial detention at the national penitentiary, as well as
to newly detained defendants. Discussions are currently
ongoing to establish legal aid offices dedicated to
women and minors in detention.
The Mission’s human rights monitoring and
reporting provides early warning and structural
analysis to adjust and tailor its advocacy and
specialized support. Nevertheless, the weaknesses
of the rule of law institutions continue to generate
multiple human rights challenges and encourage a
culture of impunity. Therefore, priorities in this domain
include the need to strengthen national human rights
institutions — particularly the Office of the National
Human Rights Ombudsperson and the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Human Rights, as well as national

S/PV. 8220

human rights civil-society organizations, to ensure due
process and access to justice, enhance the protection of
women and children, and the fight against sexual and
gender-based violence.
As a peacekeeping operation, MINUJUSTH can
be effective only if it has a sound relationship with the
Government and the people of Haiti based on solidarity
and mutual trust. A frank, open and respectful dialogue
with key national stakeholders is necessary to allow
for positive collaboration at all levels in order to bring
about effective change. I am strongly encouraged by the
willingness and the continuing efforts demonstrated
by President Moïse and his Government to create a
climate for change, which I witnessed during my recent
visit to Haiti. I reiterate the support I expressed to the
President for his determination to improve the daily
lives of all Haitians, in particular through his Caravane
du changement programme.
While acknowledging that there could have been
a misunderstanding between MINUJUSTH and the
Government of Haiti, I am also encouraged by recent
indications of a closer, substantive convergence of
national and MINUJUSTH priorities. In this regard.
I welcome the most recent announcement of President
Moïse’s priorities on State reform and the maintenance
of political and social stability, which include the
strengthening of the justice system and the Haitian
National Police, the fight against impunity and
prolonged pretrial detention, combating and preventing
corruption, the establishment of the Permanent Electoral
Council, and the launching of a national dialogue, the
so-called États généraux sectoriels.
The 11 benchmarks presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/241) echo this vision and
include the areas of focus that MINUJUSTH supports
for closer, more fruitful and strategic collaboration with
national institutions and civil society. It is therefore
a unique opportunity for the Haitian Government,
MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country team and
the international community to jointly implement
common priorities indicated by resolution 2350 (2017)
and Haiti’s Vision 2030, in line with the Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Building on the SecretaryGeneral messages of solidarity and partnership with
Haiti, which I also conveyed to my Haitian interlocutors
in March, I would like to reiterate the readiness of the
United Nations to support the Government in devising
a clear road map for the achievement of its State

18-093073/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

reform agenda, taking into account the capacities of
MINUJUSTH on the ground.
Alongside these opportunities, we need to keep
in mind that challenges and risks remain, especially
as we prepare for a transition from peacekeeping to
development. Haiti has come a long way to achieve
the relative political and security stability it is now
enjoying, but persistent economic uncertainties, which
can result in social exclusion, particularly of youth and
the most vulnerable, may undermine this progress.
The work of the legislature has recently slowed down,
characterized by disagreements over procedural issues,
thereby affecting the pace of adoption of key legislation.
The anticipated holding of elections in the last quarter
of 2019 to possibly renew the legislature could lead
to a more polarized political landscape, creating an
environment less conducive to addressing systemic
challenges to the rule of law.
While achieving results should remain our
common priority, we have already started to prepare
for a transition to a non-peacekeeping presence, based
on lessons learned in Haiti and in other contexts. Under
the guidance of the Secretary-General’s Executive
Committee, the full United Nations system on the
ground and at Headquarters is engaged in a transition
strategy that will build on existing, United Nations-wide
instruments, such as the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework, as a tool for transition, including
on rule-of-law issues. The strategy will also seek to
anticipate and mitigate any gaps that may arise from
the withdrawal of the peacekeeping operation within
the time frame stipulated by the Security Council. We
look forward to a close collaboration with the Haitian
Government and other partners to ensure the success
of this transition, as we do for the implementation of
MINUJUSTH’s mandate.
The benchmarks for an exit strategy presented to
the Council weave together an ambitious but flexible
framework based on the criteria under which the
current United Nations configuration can confidently
be transformed into a non-peacekeeping presence in
the country. In the coming months, we will provide
the Security Council with qualitative and quantitative
assessments of progress and trends in these areas, in
close collaboration with Haitian institutions, in order
to allow members of the Council to take well-informed
decisions for the drawdown and eventual withdrawal
of MINUJUSTH. A broadly consulted and owned,
benchmarks-based exit, remains the right approach to
4/25

03/04/2018

preserving the stabilization and peacebuilding gains
achieved over a decade in Haiti. We are determined
to ensure, within the overall time frame already
indicated by the Council in its resolution 2350 (2017),
that MINUJUSTH be the last peacekeeping operation
deployed in Haiti.
The unanimous vote by the Security Council nearly
one year ago, on 13 April 2017, which established
MINUJUSTH (see S/PV.7924), was a vote of confidence
in Haiti, in recognition of the progress the country has
made. We have many reasons to be optimistic that this
path to progress is irreversible, while we — Haiti,
the United Nations and international and regional
partners — need to jointly continue investing in the
success of the country and United Nations engagement
in it. As was mentioned by the Secretary-General last
week in his statement on his Action for Peacekeeping
initiative (see S/PV.8218), the exercise of the Council’s
responsibility to support peacekeeping missions is a
critical component in this case as well, namely, for the
success of MINUJUSTH and the future of Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing today.
Last October, the transition from the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
to the more focused, police-only United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
marked a turning point for the country. The Haitians
themselves are truly taking the lead in providing their
own security and law enforcement. The transition from
MINUSTAH to MINUJUSTH set a strong example of
how United Nations peacekeeping operations can and
should change as the political and security situation on
the ground evolves. When peacekeeping works well,
we see countries develop their own capacities to protect
their citizens and we see countries re-establish domestic
political processes. We believe that MINUJUSTH
has the potential to do just that and will continue to
foster the independence and self-sufficiency of the
Haitian people.
We commend the important and necessary steps
that the Government has already taken to achieve longterm security and stability in Haiti. We are encouraged
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

by how far Haiti has come in growing the capacity of
the Haitian National Police (HNP) — an institution that
we will continue to prioritize and support as it takes the
lead in ensuring the country’s security. We believe that
MINUJUSTH’s various components, including formed
police units, individual police officers and corrections
officers, as well as civilian experts in the rule of law,
human rights, political affairs, gender, conduct and
discipline and other key areas, contribute significantly
to the rule of law and justice sector priorities that the
international community and the Government of Haiti
have identified. The United Nations mentoring and
advising of the HNP has been and will continue to be
a key factor in the HNP’s ability to ensure public order
and provide security for the Haitian people.
Looking to the future, Haiti’s security, political
and development agenda can be shaped only by
Haitians themselves. The Government of Haiti must
focus on strengthening its judicial system and human
rights institutions to help consolidate the long-term
stability and stabilization gains of the past few years.
We hope to see significant progress in many areas,
including addressing prolonged pretrial detention and
prison overcrowding, eliminating sexual and genderbased violence and achieving the full participation of
women in decision-making. It is critical that Haiti take
the opportunity to advance dialogue on the additional
measures required to strengthen its institutions, such
as adopting the draft penal and criminal procedural
codes and establishing the permanent electoral council,
so that those bodies can be around to serve the Haitian
people long after MINUJUSTH departs.
At the end of the day, Haiti bears the primary
responsibility for making that happen, and it can count
on support from the United Nations, of course from the
United States and from many others in the international
community. We welcome MINUJUSTH’s benchmarked
exit strategy and look forward to updates on timelines
for the transition of tasks and responsibilities to the
Haitian Government, in coordination with the United
Nations country team.
That said, crucial work remains in the time that
MINUJUSTH has left to execute its important tasks. We
stress the critical importance of filling the remainder of
the Mission’s staffing and vacant United Nations police
positions as soon as possible. The United States is a
long-standing friend and partner of Haiti. We remain
committed to working with the Haitian Government
to ensure the country’s long-term security, democratic

S/PV. 8220

development and economic growth. We look forward
to this new chapter of growth and independence in the
unfolding story of the Haitian people.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we thank the
Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his insightful briefing on the latest developments in
the Republic of Haiti with respect to the activities of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).
Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to the present
and future of the Republic of Haiti. The international
community must continue to work in unity, supporting
Haiti’s economic and social development in order to
enable it to face the remaining challenges, particularly
in the security sector and the rule of law. We believe
that such support should be provided in consultation
and close coordination with the Government of Haiti.
Similarly, we believe that the new mandate of
MINUJUSTH will be decisive, since, in the light of
the latest visit of the Security Council to the country,
the long-term needs to be met on the ground have been
identified. We must take into account the fact that there
is a two-year term to execute a series of essential tasks
and objectives in accordance with the 11 benchmarks
established for the Mission’s exit strategy. In that
regard, and in accordance with the latest report of the
Secretary-General, we encourage MINUJUSTH and its
partners to strengthen their link with the Government
of Haiti, in order to
“ensure a closer convergence of views and priorities
and to establish a joint programme of work that
will provide a road map for collaboration and joint
action” (S/2018/241, para. 54).
Progress on those benchmarks and their results must be
worked on pursuant to the mandate of MINUJUSTH in
the areas of the rule of law, security and human rights,
in accordance with resolution 2350 (2017).
We also highlight Haiti’s progress in implementing
its reform agenda so as to, inter alia, promote sustainable
development and fight corruption through its six
political priorities, which include the strengthening
and modernization of the justice sector, the adoption of
a legislative agenda focused on stimulating investment
and the improvement of social services, among others.
Furthermore, we welcome the appointment of the
Ombudsperson’s replacement and the future appointment

18-093075/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

of a focal point within the executive branch to facilitate
the implementation of the commitments undertaken
through international human rights mechanisms in
order to continue strengthening Haitian institutions.
We believe that it is essential to ensure the rule of law
and to lay the foundation for greater political and social
cohesion, as well as to address current socioeconomic
and development challenges.
Likewise, we commend the Republic of Haiti for
assuming the presidency of the Caribbean Community,
in addition to the initiative taken by the Heads of State
and Government of that organization to create an
intraregional workforce to combat the increase in crime
and violence in the region. We note the decrease of both
in Haiti and encourage them to continue along that path.
In that regard, we commend the efforts of MINUJUSTH
to improve the infrastructure and training of the
Haitian National Police through its mentoring and
advising programme, which seeks to transfer essential
skills to middle and senior management, as well as
its training programme, which will contribute to the
implementation of the 2017-2021 strategic development
plan for that institution. We also appreciate and support
the work carried out by the Mission in the area of
the rule of law and encourage it to pursue its work in
coordination with the Government of Haiti.
We appreciate the progress made in the fight against
cholera through the Secretary-General’s new approach.
The United Nations and its members have a collective
responsibility to ensure its full implementation. With
that in mind, we call on the international community to
work to meet its commitments and cooperate with the
Republic of Haiti to build solid sanitation and health
systems. Cholera remains a central problem that affects
not only sanitation and access to water, but all areas
of development and stability in Haiti. Fighting that
scourge is a priority, as highlighted during the Security
Council’s visit in 2017.
With regard to sexual abuse and exploitation,
we take note of the commitment of MINUJUSTH to
prevention activities, including training, facilitation of
information and counselling. We encourage the Mission
to pursue its efforts with respect to the principle of zero
tolerance for those responsible for sexual exploitation
and abuse, who, if found guilty, should be punished
accordingly. We reiterate our concern about the
issue of children who are left fatherless as a result of
sexual abuse.
6/25

03/04/2018

Finally, Bolivia recognizes the national ownership
and primary responsibility of the Government and
people of Haiti for all aspects of their country’s
development, and encourages MINUJUSTH to fulfil its
mandate with respect to the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Haiti.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke
in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your kind words for our presidency, which I will convey
with great pleasure to Ambassador Van Oosterom and
the entire team. Allow me in turn to congratulate you,
sir, on assuming the presidency for the month of April.
I wish you every success.
My thanks also go to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his briefing.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is following the
developments in Haiti with the greatest interest, as three
of our four constituent countries — Aruba, Curaçao and
Saint Martin — are located in the Caribbean. Today, I
would like to address the following three points: the
current situation, the role of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the
prospects for the future.
With regard to the current situation, in recent
years Haiti has embarked on an impressive journey
towards change. The country has made major progress
in stabilizing the political situation and security
conditions. With the support of the United Nations,
including through the global focal point for police,
justice and corrections, the Haitian National Police has
been professionalized and has recruited a considerable
number of women. The terrible epidemic of cholera that
ravaged the country for more than eight years finally
seems to be under control.
However, there are still challenges to overcome.
There are worrying reports about the length of pretrial
detention, the overcrowding of prisons and insufficient
access to justice. That can be resolved only by
adopting the relevant legislation and by enhancing the
effectiveness, transparency and accountability of the
security and rule of law institutions. The unacceptable
cases of human rights violations by the Haitian National
Police underscore the need to put in place strengthened
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

oversight and accountability mechanisms in the
public sector.
That brings me to my second point — the role
of the Mission. Haiti cannot meet such challenges
alone. MINUJUSTH was established to support the
Government and the people of Haiti in their efforts
to build a better future. However, only through close
cooperation will the Mission and the Haitian State
succeed in building and strengthening the country’s
public institutions. Priorities and efforts must be
matched. Through its good offices and its advocacy
role, the Mission is fundamental to ensuring political
ownership of the shared goals. In order to achieve
the ambitious goals of the Mission, it is necessary to
accelerate progress and to strengthen cooperation.
In that regard, it is essential to develop as soon
as possible, in close cooperation with the United
Nations country team, a comprehensive joint strategy
to lay the groundwork for the completion of the
peacekeeping phase. In that way, the progress made in
fulfilling the Mission’s mandate can be measured so
as to ensure a responsible withdrawal that meets the
conditions identified.
That brings me to my third point — the prospects
for the future. In the end, we have the same objective: to
make Haiti a prosperous and safe society. Strengthening
the rule of law is rightly the cornerstone of that
objective. The rule of law is the bedrock of any just,
prosperous and peaceful society, which is an element
of trust for both the population and the investors. We
encourage Haiti to seize this opportunity and to take
full advantage of its partnership with the Mission.
Such a partnership must be based on the credibility,
legitimacy and integrity of the United Nations presence
in Haiti. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General’s
policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse. We underscore the importance of the previous
mission, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, being held accountable for past acts.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s report
on the new strategy to fight cholera. We emphasize the
need for the effective implementation of the strategy.
We must turn the page on cholera.
I would like to conclude by expressing the wish
that 18 months from now, the parliamentary elections
will mark the beginning of a new era in Haiti. In the
meantime, let us use this time to build a strong and
sustainable foundation for political stability, security

S/PV. 8220

and inclusive development by promoting the meaningful
participation, involvement and representation of
women at all levels and to allow the people of Haiti,
with the steadfast support of the United Nations and
the international community, to take back the reins of
their future.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): In taking the floor on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea at this meeting on the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
allow me to address through you, Mr. President, our
most sincere congratulations to Peru on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of April. In wishing you resounding success, I affirm
the unfailing support of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea in the execution of your work.
We also congratulate the Kingdom of the Netherlands
on its excellent stewardship of the Council during the
month of March. Its presidency was characterized by
exceptional drive and welcome results.
We have followed with great attention the
presentation by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, who,
as usual, provided us with a clear, detailed and complete
briefing on MINUJUSTH, which not only highlighted
the political and economic aspects of the country but
also described the current humanitarian and security
situation in that brotherly country.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea follows closely
and regrets the various setbacks that the friendly
and brotherly people of Haiti have suffered, from the
blows of repeated natural disasters to the political
challenges have undermined the efforts of both the
Haitian Government and people and the development
partners for the country to set out on the path towards
sustainable development. We express our appreciation,
recognition and congratulations for the various
appropriate actions taken by the United Nations in Haiti,
including establishing the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti in June 2004, replacing the provisional
multinational force, and helping to establish a safe and
stable environment in Haiti, which involved its support
in many areas of the political and security spheres, as
recalled in the relevant Council resolutions, until its
replacement by the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti last year.
As a result of the aforementioned actions and of
the review by the Secretary-General, as requested in

18-093077/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

resolution 2350 (2017), the Government, the legislature,
the judiciary and the Haitian National Police have
actively worked with the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti to develop a strategy that sets
out 11 benchmarks that need to be met in Haiti by
the last quarter of 2019. We would like to express our
appreciation and congratulations to the Government
of Haiti for the strong political will and leadership
it demonstrated during that exercise, which at the
end of next year should lead to a transition whereby
the United Nations country team can fully assume
its role of supporting the development of Haiti. The
11 benchmarks to be met are very ambitious but
achievable if both the Mission and the international
community resolutely support the Government of Haiti
to attain them by making it possible at all times for the
Government to lead the process with the active support
and advice of the Mission.
In a process such as that on which Haiti has
embarked, it is necessary to take into consideration any
limitations that may impede such an undertaking. In
that regard, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea draws
the attention of the United Nations and the international
community to the cholera situation that persists in Haiti,
which is finally being controlled. The fight against the
pandemic to ensure that it does not recur must be a high
priority, since that situation affects not only health and
water resources but also the development and stability
of Haiti.
I would like to conclude this statement by supporting
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support and
by calling on all State institutions of Haiti — the
Government, Parliament, the judicial bodies and the
National Police — and civil society to work closely
together in cooperation with and support of President
Juvenal Moïse in his reform agenda to promote the
sustainable development of Haiti, for which respect
for the rule of law and human rights, good governance,
respect for State authority and the strengthening of the
legal and judicial institutions of Haiti are essential.

03/04/2018

under the leadership of President Jovenel Moïse is very
impressive. The spate of changes has had a positive
impact on the daily life of Haitians in various areas. It
is important for the Government to continue its efforts.
It is worth emphasizing that it has taken steps to reform
the criminal code and code of criminal procedure, fight
corruption in the civil service and strengthen the justice
sector. The improvement in the capacity of the Haitian
National Police is also remarkable.
Such efforts should lead to major political
stabilization and further strengthen the principles of
the rule of law, which is an indispensable element of
preserving sustainable development. Poland thanks
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) for its crucial role in assisting
the Haitian Government to strengthen rule-of-law
institutions, reinforce national police capacity and
engage in human rights monitoring.
The smooth transition from the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti during the first
six months looks very promising. Nonetheless, Haitian
institutions still need the support of the international
community. We welcome the contribution of
MINUJUSTH to improve public security by building
the capacity of the Haitian National Police in a wide
range of police activities, providing equipment and
operational support. To continue that progress, the
vacancy rate within the Mission should be lowered. We
call on the Secretariat to remove all remaining obstacles
to filling the remaining vacancies.

Let me also inform the Council that Poland
associates itself with the statement to be delivered later
today by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to laud the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Special Envoy for Haiti, Ms. Josette
Sheeran, to mobilize the private sector in the areas of
finance, health and technology in an effort to support
the Haitian Government and its people, contribute
to Haiti’s ambitious development goals and help
attract investment. Additional efforts to enhance
response capacity in investigating and preventing
sexual and gender-based violations and incidents are
necessary. Prison overcrowding raises serious human
rights concerns, as does the lack of progress on the
appointment of a senior governmental focal point
to chair the body responsible for the development of
national action plans on human rights. We call on the
Government to redouble its efforts in those areas.

Haiti is a land of great beauty and great suffering.
Despite obstacles, the progress made by Haitians

Like other States Members of the United Nations,
Haiti has the undeniable right to create and maintain

Mr. Radomski (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his
informative briefing.

8/25

18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

its national armed forces. Given budgetary limitations
and the pressing need to further develop the capabilities
of its national police force, we expect the Haitian
authorities to be judicious in choosing their next steps
on the path to sustainable growth, taking into account
the considerably reduced presence of the international
community on the island.
Poland welcomes the proposal of 11 ambitious
benchmarks for an exit strategy and transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti.
MINUJUSTH will be a crucial actor in that process,
helping the Government to meet the benchmarks by
providing all necessary expertise and assistance.
Furthermore, we should not limit the presence of the
United Nations in Haiti or withdraw it too early, bearing
in mind the fragility of the situation and the great deal
of work to be conducted by elected Haitian authorities.
While some see gaps, we see opportunities. We would
like to see a prosperous Haiti without a constant
peacekeeping presence. As the Haitian proverb says, a
borrowed drum never makes for good dancing.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Since this is our first
meeting this month, let me join others in congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency. I would
like to assure you of our full support as you carry out
your duties.
I would also like to commend Ambassador Van
Oosterom and his team on a successful presidency
last month.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/241) on the implementation of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH), based on resolution 2350 (2017).
We thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing on the most recent developments in Haiti and
the activities of MINUJUSTH over the past six months.
We take note of his recent visit to Haiti and discussions
held with Haitian authorities to address ways and means
to enhance cooperation and prepare for the transition to
a non-United Nations peacekeeping presence that would
continue to support Haiti’s peacebuilding endeavours.
In that regard, we welcome the development of an
exit strategy for MINUJUSTH, which was developed
over the past three months in close consultation with
Haitian stakeholders, outlining clear benchmarks for a
staggered withdrawal over a two-year time frame, based
on results achieved and the situation on the ground.
Accordingly, we support the renewal of the mandate

S/PV. 8220

of MINUJUSTH for one year. The establishment
of the Mission is indeed very important in order to
consolidate peace by strengthening justice and rule-oflaw institutions and supporting the institutional and
operational capacity of the Haitian National Police.
The renewal of its mandate will enable it to continue
assisting the Government to strengthen rule-oflaw institutions.
We appreciate the initiatives and efforts being
undertaken by the Mission to build the capacities of the
Haitian police in strategic and operational planning,
criminal intelligence, investigations, organized crime,
crime-scene management, recruitment, training,
gender mainstreaming, crowd control, information
technology, communication, logistics and infrastructure
maintenance. However, we note the challenges being
faced in the area of justice and corrections and the
efforts of MINUJUSTH to address them, as highlighted
in the report of the Secretary-General.
We welcome continuous progress in Haiti
towards consolidating its democracy and institutional
stability, as indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral. We also take note of the progress made in
the overall security situation in the country, which
remains relatively stable. Nonetheless, we understand
that Haiti continues to face enormous challenges and
vulnerabilities. Therefore, decisive steps must be taken
towards creating greater social and political cohesion
and reinforcing State institutions in order to sustain
the gains made in recent years. In that regard, we take
note of the various initiatives of the President of the
Republic of Haiti and hope that MINUJUSTH will
provide the necessary support by working closely with
the Government, civil society organizations and others.
The sustained and coordinated engagement
of all bilateral and international partners is very
critical to securing, sufficient and timely assistance
for the sustainable development of Haiti in a manner
that respects its sovereignty. We hope that the new
partnership established between Haiti and the United
Nations, with the establishment of MINUJUSTH,
will lay a solid foundation for long-term stability and
sustainable development in Haiti.
We welcome the approval by the Peacebuilding
Fund of a new $3-million conflict prevention and social
cohesion project to strengthen the role of the youth
by facilitating better participation of young women
and men in community affairs and peaceful conflict

18-093079/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

resolution. We also recognize regional and subregional
organizations, in particular the Organization of
American States, the Union of South American Nations
and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), for their
important role in the process of the stabilization and
reconstruction of Haiti. We note that Haiti has now
assumed the chairmanship of CARICOM and hosted a
summit meeting of the organization last month in Portau-Prince. Finally, we thank the police-contributing
countries of MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country
team and other international partners operating on the
ground for their continued support to Haiti.
I wish to conclude by reiterating our solidarity with
the brotherly people and Government of Haiti as they
continue striving to consolidate the progress made in
recent years and address the multiple challenges facing
their nation.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Мy delegation congratulates Peru on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of April and assures it of our full support. We
also commend the Kingdom of the Netherlands on its
presidency for the month of March and on its outstanding
conduct of the work of the Security Council.
Мy delegation thanks the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
for his informative briefing on recent developments in
the Republic of Haiti, as well as on the activities of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).
The establishment of MINUJUSTH on 16 October
2017 was an important part of the transition towards
a United Nations presence in Haiti that is not a
peacekeeping operations, as provided for by Council
resolution 2350 (2017). Echoing the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/241), my delegation welcomes the
political, security and socioeconomic progress made in
Haiti over the past year.
At the political level, my delegation appreciates
the efforts undertaken by the Haitian authorities to
strengthen the country’s institutions, in particular
the judiciary and the Haitian National Police. It also
welcomes the measures aimed at strengthening the rule
of law and the promotion and defence of human rights.
My country remains convinced that these measures
will certainly contribute to Haiti’s progress on the path
of development, as envisaged in the United Nations
Sustainable Development Framework 2017-2021. To
10/25

03/04/2018

that end, it welcomes the visit made by Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, which reaffirmed the United Nations strategic
partnership with Haiti in the context of support for
the Haitian authorities in the area of sustaining peace
and peacebuilding.
Côte d’Ivoire is convinced that the presence of
MINUJUSTH is a real opportunity to consolidate the
achievements and support the efforts of the Haitian
Government to achieve the objectives of development
and stability, with a view to the bringing the current
peacekeeping operation to an end. In that regard, it
welcomes the visit of Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
to Haiti from 5 to 9 February, which gave her the
opportunity to discuss issues relating to the gradual
assumption of responsibility by the Haitian authorities
in the field of justice and the rule of law, with a view to
a successful withdrawal of the United Nations Mission.
In that connection, my delegation supports the decision
to establish in the near future, in collaboration with the
Haitian Government, a mechanism to monitor progress
in achieving the objectives of the crisis exit strategy,
with a timetable and agreed indicators.
On the security front, the progress made in
professionalizing the Haitian National Police must not
make us lose sight of the fact that the overall situation
in the country remains precarious. Côte d’Ivoire also
encourages the Haitian authorities to pursue their
efforts in the fight against corruption, in the protection
and promotion of women’s rights, as well as in the
improvement of temporary detention procedures and
the living conditions of the prison population.
On the socioeconomic front, my country remains
concerned about the country’s persistent vulnerability
and the deplorable living conditions of vulnerable
populations. In the light of the people’s limited access
to drinking water and poor sanitation, my country calls
on the international community to support the work of
the Haitian authorities in order to promptly respond to
the expectations of the populations in need.
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress made in the
fight against cholera and supports the new strategy
put in place by the Secretary-General to eradicate
this pandemic. In that regard, my country welcomes
the commitment of the United Nations, alongside the
Government and people of Haiti, to consolidating the
progress made and to find satisfactory responses to
ongoing challenges. We therefore urge the international
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

community to support the economic and social
development under way in Haiti.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the
work of the United Nations country team in Haiti and
MINUJUSTH, and encourages the Security Council to
provide them with the necessary means to ensure the
success of the Mission within the framework of the
renewal of the mandate of MINUJUSТН. I would also
like to reaffirm the readiness of my country — which,
thanks to the support of the United Nations, has emerged
from a decade of crisis — to contribute, alongside the
other members of the Security Council, to bolstering
stability, economic growth and social development
in Haiti.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate your friendly
country, Mr. President, o assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month. We assure you that the State
of Kuwait will support you throughout your presidency
term. We are fully confident that your wisdom and
experience will help guide the work of the Council
during this month. I would also like to thank all the
members of the delegation of the Netherlands for the
excellent and successful work done with professionalism
and transparency during the month of March.
As part of today’s debate, I thank Mr. Lacroix for
his briefing on the developments in Haiti and the role of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
in accordance with its mandate.
I should like to address three aspects related
to our today’s topic: politics, security and the
humanitarian dimension.
First, on the political aspect, I commend the work
of President Moïse as he consults with the Haitian
Parliament on a legislative agenda that would establish
a permanent electoral council and a constitutional
council, in addition to finalizing appointments in the
Supreme Court. We look forward to the enactment
without delay of key legislation, including the penal
code and the code of criminal procedure. We call upon
the relevant authorities in Haiti to participate actively
in consultations in order to positively impact the
justice system.
Secondly, on the security aspect, we note that
security affects all other areas in Haiti. We therefore
welcome the marked improvement in security as crime
rates have gone down in Haiti. Nevertheless, we call

S/PV. 8220

upon the national authorities to maximize the benefit
of United Nations experience in the area of justice
so as to improve the capacity and efficiency of the
Haitian National Police. That would consolidate the
gains achieved in the security sector and promote
rule of law institutions, end impunity and prevent
corruption. We commend the President’s two initiatives
in that connection.
Thirdly, on the humanitarian aspect, we are
concerned about reports of violations of human rights.
We hope that the Haitian national authorities will
prosecute the perpetrators whether they are members
of the National Police or not. That will ensure
accountability and justice. In that context, we welcome
the results of the United Nations plan for combating
cholera, since the weekly infections have been reduced
by more than 99 per cent. I would also like to commend
the efforts of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), which is working
to support and consolidate the gains that have already
been made, in addition to strengthening stability and
achieving long-term sustainable development in Haiti
by supporting the Government’s efforts to promote the
rule of law.
In conclusion, based on the what I have said here,
I would like to express our support for the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal that MINUJUSTH’s mandate
be extended to reflect the timeline defined by the
benchmarked exit strategy. We support the report’s
contention that achieving the 11 benchmarks identified
will facilitate the transition to a non-peacekeeping
United Nations presence in Haiti. That would lead
in the long term to fostering political, security and
development stability in Haiti and will help to implement
the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, especially
Goal 16, which is aimed at promoting peaceful and
inclusive societies for sustainable development through
providing access to justice for all.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate, and I also thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for his briefing. China would like to
congratulate Peru on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for April. Your delegation can count
on our support in its work. We are also grateful to the
Netherlands for the enormous amount of work it did
during its presidency in March.

18-0930711/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

At the moment, Haiti is largely stable. Its security
situation is steadily improving, and the Haitian
National Police (HNP) is gradually assuming the
responsibility for keeping the country safe, secure,
and stable. China looks forward to seeing Haiti’s
various internal stakeholders maintaining the positive
development momentum by intensifying their efforts
to develop the economy, improve people’s livelihoods,
comprehensively implement the HNP’s strategic
development plan and create conditions conducive to
improving the country’s situation once and for all.
We are keen to see the international community,
including the other countries in the region, continue
to help improve the situation in Haiti, provide more
development and humanitarian assistance and support
Haiti in cementing peace and stability and implementing
the Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We commend the efforts
of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and Special Representative Susan
Page to ensure the new Mission’s smooth deployment
and functioning. We hope to see the Secretariat and
MINUJUSTH improving their communication with
the Haitian Government, helping it to build a stronger
HNP and supporting it in assuming responsibility for
maintaining national security and stability in earnest.
Much has been achieved in the United Nations
support for Haiti’s response to the cholera epidemic.
China has contributed to the United Nations Haiti
Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund through the
China-United Nations Peace and Development Fund.
We call on the international community to respond
positively to the new United Nations cholera response
initiative and to help Haiti wipe out the epidemic once
and for all. China stands ready to do its part, together
with other members of the Council, to help Haiti achieve
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on your
presidency, and thanking the Netherlands for theirs. I
also thank the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing.
It was very good to have news of his visit in March
and to see the degree to which the Security Council’s
mandate is being actively implemented.
The United Kingdom welcomes the continued
progress in Haiti. We are particularly interested in the
development of the Haitian National Police, the penal
chain committee initiative and the efforts to strengthen
12/25

03/04/2018

the rule of law, and, like other speakers, we applaud the
new United Nations approach to cholera. It is very good
to see the dedication and support that the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
has given the Government of Haiti in carrying out its
tasks. We are very interested in the way in which the
Government is establishing a solid and sustainable
foundation for Haiti’s long-term political stability,
security and development. As the Under-SecretaryGeneral just said, this is a real vote of confidence in
the country. It is good to hear that the Mission for
Justice Support is actively implementing its mandate,
and we now look to it to deliver a smooth transition
to a non-peacekeeping United Nations presence. In
particular, we support the Mission’s intention to hand
over responsibility for ensuring the rule of law, human
rights and security sector reform to the United Nations
country team and the Government of Haiti by October
2019. We want to ensure that the transition is a success.
To that end, the United Kingdom urges the Government
and the United Nations to take the following three steps.
First, the Government should take ownership
of the delivery of critical reforms that will have a
lasting impact on security and development. I want to
particularly highlight the importance of protecting the
independence of the police, enacting new legislation to
empower the judiciary, ensuring that human rights are
protected by strong State institutions and empowering
women to be political leaders.
Secondly, we look to the United Nations to be a
well-integrated organization on the ground that can
ensure an effective transition by implementing the joint
work plan. In particular, there should be a strong focus
on collaboration between the country team and the
Mission; support from the Peacebuilding Fund, as other
colleagues have mentioned; flexible and coordinated
partnerships between mobile teams and the country
team; and close cooperation with other international
and bilateral partners. I also join others in hoping to see
an overall focus on the progress that can be made with
the Sustainable Development Goals. The SecretaryGeneral’s report for May is eagerly awaited. We hope it
will outline the progress needed to deliver an integrated
and sustainable transition in the next 18 months.
Thirdly, the two-year exit strategy should demonstrate
clear progress against the benchmarks that the
Secretary-General has set. The plan for transferring
responsibilities from the Mission to the country team
is a complex one, and it makes the transition even more
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

S/PV. 8220

complex than it inherently is. We hope that the Mission,
in consultation with the Government, will be able to
develop the necessary indicators. Using clear and
realistic milestones will enable us to track progress.
While we note that many colleagues and the UnderSecretary-General spoke about the fragility of the
transition, we believe that if we have such milestones
and benchmarks, they will reduce the risk associated
with the exit strategy. In particular, the exit strategy
should also be clearly aligned with the United Nations
Development Assistance Framework 2017-2021.

the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti.

In conclusion, it is critical that the Mission and the
Government work together in a spirit of solidarity and
mutual respect and trust. Where the United Kingdom
can help, the Council can count on it to do so. At this
point, I would like to mention the sad history of sexual
exploitation and abuse that Haiti has witnessed and to
say that we will work with the Secretary-General to
ensure the implementation of the zero-tolerance policy
throughout the whole of the United Nations.

The first point I wish to address is the strengthening
and the role of the Haitian National Police. The stability
of the country depends on its ability to train and field
police personnel able to contribute to building social
peace. It is their presence on the ground that often helps
to ease tensions, as we have seen with the significant
decrease in crime. In order to maintain this positive
trend, MINUJUSTH must enjoy the means to support
the Police Force in optimal conditions during its
operations on the Haitian territory, including with the
support of air and medical capabilities.

The time remaining to meet the transition target
of October 2019 is now limited. We hope to see the
adoption of a clear transition plan that will set out how
we will move from peacekeeping to development. What
Mr. Lacroix said in that regard was very encouraging.
However, we do urge the Secretary-General to be
realistic and clear with regard to the division of
responsibilities across the United Nations system. It is
ultimately the Government of Haiti’s leadership that
will make the transition a success but, as other speakers
have noted, where we are now presents us with an
enormous opportunity for achieving a successful
outcome not just for the Government of Haiti but for
the entire United Nations family and for peacekeeping
in general.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to warmly congratulate the delegation
of the Netherlands on its presidency of the Security
Council last month and, on behalf of France, offer our
full support for the Peruvian presidency.
I thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his very enlightening briefing on the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
France aligns itself with the statements to be
made by the observer of the European Union and by

Following the remarkable work done by the women
and men of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, at great risk to their lives — as was the case in
the 2010 earthquake — MINUJUSTH took up the effort
by focusing on three tasks: strengthening the Haitian
National Police and the rule of law, and monitoring
the human rights situation. I should like to come back
to these three axes of MINUJUSTH’s work during
my statement.

This international support, however, represents
only a transition towards full ownership by the Haitian
authorities of the maintenance of public order. Indeed,
all the efforts of the United Nations Mission are now
focused on developing a National Police that will
be increasingly capable of independently fulfilling
its missions without international support, from
decision-making to the deployment of police officers on
the ground. It is therefore up to the Haitian Government
to ensure the successful training of more than 15,000
police officers in order to guarantee order and justice.
The second part of the MINUJUSTH mandate is
the strengthening of the rule of law on which social,
economic and political stability is based. We commend
the drafting and adopting of legislative texts jointly
carried out by the Haitian Government and Parliament
in 2017. France will pay particular attention to the next
steps, in particular the enacting of a penal code and
a code of criminal procedure, which will be criticial
before the MINUJUSTH mandate comes to an end.
As with the Haitian National Police, the successes
achieved through international support, including
the good offices of the Special Representative, now
depend on the resolve of the Haitian authorities to
take ownership of the work done so far. This political
commitment is crucial in the fight against the scourge

18-0930713/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

of corruption, which weakens democracy. We welcome
the announcements issued by the Haitian Government,
especially with respect to corruption, and encourage it
to take all measures necessary to strengthen the rule
of law, which is a prerequisite for the development of
the country.
I will end on the issue of human rights, which
are the keystone of the maintenance of peace and
international security in Haiti. All the objectives that
the international community has set for itself in that
country — strengthening the Haitian National Police,
strengthening the rule of law and the sustainable
development of the country — depend above all on an
active and ambitious human rights policy.
France calls for the careful monitoring of this
significant issue in the implementation of the mandate of
MINUJUSTH, always bearing in mind the objective of
the assumption of ownership by the Haitian authorities
and civil society, which is the sole guarantor of the
progress that can be accomplished in all aspects of
human rights. I will cite but a few: the improvement of
the penitentiary system, the defence of women’s rights,
and respect for the rights of Haitian citizens vis-à-vis
the State. The United Nations also has a full role to play
and will have to continue to pay close attention to the
fight against sexual abuse in particular.
In conclusion, we call for the renewal of the mandate
of MINUJUSTH before embarking on a transition to a
new form of the United Nations presence in Haiti. The
United Nations and France continue and will continue
to stand alongside the Haitian people, whose courage in
the face of adversity deserves our greatest admiration.
We recall in that regard the suffering endured as a
result of the tragic cholera epidemic, which is now on
the verge of eradication. Given the successes observed
in recent years in many areas, a stable Haiti firmly on
the path of development must be our shared ambition.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me join others
in congratulating you, Sir, and your team on assuming
the Council presidency and in thanking our Dutch
colleagues for their outstanding work in the month
of March.
I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his briefing.

Jean-Pierre

I associate myself with the statement that will
be made by the observer of the European Union later
this morning.
14/25

03/04/2018

Sweden commends Haiti for the achievements it
has made in the consolidation of democracy, stability
and peace. Progress is now needed on the priorities
that President Moïse and his Government have set out,
including the rule of law, respect for human rights,
improved socioeconomic development, infrastructure,
resilience and security. These are priorities with
which the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) is also
aligned. The Government must now spare no effort in
delivering on its commitments, with the support of the
international community.
The benchmarks presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2018/241) will help support these
efforts by linking progress in the core areas of the
Mission’s mandate with other key preconditions for
stability in the country. As the Council has stated before,
it is important to ensure a clear end state for the Mission
to work towards. Adequate planning is needed for a
future hand-over to the United Nations country team in
the spirit of sustaining peace. As more and more tasks
are given to the United Nations country team, donors
must step up to ensure that the United Nations agencies
have adequate resources and capacity to effectively
support the peacebuilding process in Haiti.
It is important that MINUJUSTH continue to
integrate gender throughout its work, including
measures to increase women’s security and
participation, as well as to ensure protection against
sexual and gender-based violence. Integrating gender
is also key to gender-budgeting and to ensure adequate
information-gathering, monitoring and reporting.
MINUJUSTH was created as a rule-of-law mission,
and, as with other United Nations missions, it is vital to
have an integrated rule-of-law approach that encompasses
the whole justice chain, from police and corrections to
prosecution and courts. In this vein, Sweden continues
to contribute both police and corrections personnel
to MINUJUSTH. The Mission’s police component’s
mentorship and advice to its counterparts in the Haitian
National Police are a part of the transition strategy, and
we are encouraged by the work being undertaken in
that area. We know from experience that policing and
other rule-of-law institutions play an important role in
providing a bridge between security and development
in transition processes.
MINUJUSTH is the only current United Nations
peacekeeping mission that consists solely of civilian and
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

police components. We should draw on this experience
when looking at the drawdown and transition of
other United Nations peace operations. This is in line
with the Council’s ambition to take more phased and
layered approaches to transitions and drawdowns in
peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the efforts described in the report
to strengthen protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse. We need to continue to ensure that alleged
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse are reported and
investigated, and that all necessary steps are taken to
apply disciplinary measures and/or undertake criminal
prosecutions to hold perpetrators accountable.
We were happy to co-sponsor the General Assembly
resolution 72/260 in support of the Secretary-General’s
new approach to eradicating cholera and building
resilience in Haiti. We have supported the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund and encourage others to contribute to it in a
collective effort to bring an end to cholera in Haiti.
In conclusion, much has been achieved by the
Haitian people in recent years. The establishment
of MINUJUSTH provides an opportunity for a
reinvigorated partnership with Haiti towards longerterm stability and sustainable development. We will
remain a committed partner for Haiti as it continues its
efforts to consolidate democracy, stability and peace.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for presenting the report of the SecretaryGeneral after the transformation of the Organization’s
presence in Haiti into the United Nations Mission for
Justice Support in Haiti. We consider the assessments
made following his own recent visit to Haiti, from 14 to
15 March, especially useful.
Since the middle of October of last year, when the
Mission began its work in its new format, we have seen
some unquestionably encouraging progress. We welcome
the efforts of Haiti’s leadership to ensure stability
and establish effective Government administration
systems that rely on its own strengths. In that regard,
we are closely monitoring the implementation
of President Jovenel Moïse’s Caravan of Change
initiative. Coordinated and collaborative work on the
part of the legislative, executive and judicial branches
of power will be crucial to overcoming the country’s
internal problems and laying a firm foundation for

S/PV. 8220

sustainable economic development. We note Haiti’s
increased participation in the work of international
and regional organizations. In January it took on
the rotating chairship of the Caribbean Community
and joined the Community of Latin American and
Caribbean States Quartet. The gradual, step-by-step
progress has enabled the Council to begin to carefully
consider the Secretary-General’s preliminary proposal
for establishing benchmarks for the Mission’s exit
preparedness and handing over its functions directly
to the Government and the United Nations country
team. In that regard, as with any other peacekeeping
operation, it is important at every stage to take into
account not only the views of the host Government but
also the principle of national ownership.
However, there is still a great deal of work to do,
both for the country’s authorities, which are being
called on to become more self-reliant and independent
of international support every day, as well as for the
United Nations staff whose job is to provide them with
the maximum support. That thorough, painstaking
support is vital to the Government, which, taking the
Haitian people’s views into consideration, must strive
to identify its priorities and tasks on the security,
politics, development and peacebuilding fronts. We
should add that it is just as important to ensure that all
national stakeholders understand the concept of shared
responsibility for sustaining peace.
The ongoing serious humanitarian situation is still
very worrying, since Haiti is still grappling with the
effects of Hurricane Matthew. Also, despite the fact
that people who were obliged to move to neighbouring
States are now returning to Haiti is a very good sign,
their growing numbers represent a special responsibility
for the leadership of a country where 1 million people
still need humanitarian aid.
We are pleased with the Secretary-General’s
information on the gradual improvement in the security
situation and the falling crime statistics, including for
sexual offences. We hope that the strengthening of
the National Haitian Police’s numbers to reach a total
of 15,300 personnel, 9 per cent of whom are women,
will help to achieve even greater progress. Against
that background, the reports by representatives of
Haitian civil society of sexual crimes committed
by representatives of foreign non-governmental
organizations are extremely worrying, and in the
context of the ongoing efforts within the United Nations
to combat such shocking offences, we urge the Mission

18-0930715/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

not to ignore such scandalous examples. These are very
grave crimes that tarnish the image of international
support generally. Any such reports should be
investigated and those found to be responsible should
not escape the punishment they deserve.
The Council will soon have to agree on the draft
resolution that will extend the Mission’s mandate for
a year. In accordance with its mandate, the Mission
will continue to assist the host country in ensuring
the rule of law and strengthening the capacity of its
law-enforcement bodies. The Council must be certain
that adequate account is taken of the realities of
the country’s situation, including with regard to the
Mission’s structure, something that the SecretaryGeneral also brings up in his report.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm our support to
the Government and the people of Haiti, who have to
overcome the destructive legacies of natural disasters
as well as their domestic problems on their road to
stability and prosperity. In order to ensure that they can
recover more quickly, they need a strong State and a
cohesive society through whose joint efforts they can
build and strengthen Haiti’s potential.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join our colleagues
in congratulating your delegation, Mr. President, on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month, and would like to assure you of our full
support. We also commend the delegation of the
Netherlands for its excellent work in leading us during
the month of March. I thank Under-Secretary-General
Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing and recent visit
to Haiti.
At the outset, we would like to congratulate the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH) and its leadership on its smooth
transition and its launch of a number of important
projects and initiatives in close cooperation with the
Government and civil society of Haiti. Kazakhstan
also commends the efforts that President Moïse and
his Government have made over the past year to
promote stability, security, economic development and
social change in their country. We especially welcome
their initiative to begin a political dialogue with all
the key national sectors aimed at determining and
defining negotiated plans for the country’s sustainable
development over the next 25 years. It is also worthy of
note that a review process will be launched to assess
Haiti’s development aid cooperation mechanism with
16/25

03/04/2018

the international community, with a view to shifting
from external assistance to external investment.
While we recognize the significant progress that
has been made in improving the political and security
environments, some key issues in a number of priority
areas have yet to be addressed, including the establishment
of a Permanent Electoral Council, improvements in the
justice sector, prison overcrowding, prolonged pretrial
detentions and the overall humanitarian situation. In
that regard, Kazakhstan fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s call for MINUJUSTH and its partners to
establish a joint programme of work and undertake
joint actions addressing such major issues as reforming
the justice system, enhancing human rights, reforming
the police and prison systems and ensuring the rule of
law in Haiti. Promoting political engagement will also
be crucial, in view of the forthcoming elections.
With a view to consolidating stability and
security, MINUJUSTH should maintain its focus on
building the capacity of the Haitian National Police
and undertaking serious efforts to combat impunity,
ensuring the judiciary’s independence and establishing
a transparent and efficient corrections system. We
urge the Government of Haiti to make sure that the
Haitian National Police’s strategic development plan
is implemented efficiently and in a timely manner,
with the help of the international community in raising
professional training and experience.
We should now focus on ensuring that the
benchmarked exit strategy is formulated and
implemented in a coordinated manner. It will be
essential to maintain an ongoing dialogue with all
stakeholders, particularly the Haitian Government,
in order to achieve our common goals and a smooth
transition to a non-peacekeeping United Nations
presence in Haiti. In this context, it will be critical for
MINUJUSTH and the United Nations country team to
work in coordination with the United Nations system as
a whole, ensuring that the Organization delivers with
greater efficiency, transparency and accountability as
one United Nations, breaking down silos to achieve
optimal results for sustainable development in Haiti.
The effective involvement of the international
community and regional partners should also have
a positive impact on our joint efforts. Haiti’s current
chairship of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
presents a great opportunity for mobilizing
international partnerships to address the most pressing
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

problems facing the country and the region. In the
past three years Kazakhstan has supported two joint
development projects with CARICOM. We also
provided humanitarian aid after last year’s devastating
hurricanes, in addition to supporting Haiti bilaterally.
While we recognize that the fight against cholera
has made significant gains, the issue should remain a
high priority for the entire United Nations community.
In that regard, we welcomed Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed and Special Envoy Josette
Sheeran’s visit to co-chair a high-level cholera meeting
with the Haitian Government aimed at achieving zero
transmissions of the disease in Haiti.
In conclusion, we would like to express our full
support for the Secretary-General’s recommendation
to extend MINUJUSTH’s mandate. Kazakhstan will
continue to firmly support Haiti’s efforts to achieve
peace, progress and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I would now like
to make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
I would first like to thank the delegations that have
wished us well for Peru’s assumption of the presidency
for the month of April. We also thank Mr. Lacroix for
his briefing and welcome the presence here today of
Ambassador Régis.
Peru is committed to sustaining peace in our
brother country of Haiti. As a troop-contributing
country we sent some 6,000 troops there over the 13
years of existence of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti, which worked to maintain stability
in the country, and we associate ourselves with the
statement that the representative of Canada will make
today on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti. Peru
has been closely following the positive developments of
recent years and the role played by the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH)
in strengthening the national institutions that are
called on to ensure access to justice, the rule of law
and the safeguarding of human rights, and in enabling
an orderly and viable transition to sustainable peace
in Haiti.
We would like to highlight three elements that we
consider essential in renewing MINUJUSTH’s mandate.
The first is the importance of continuing to support
efforts to build institutions capable of protecting human
rights and ensuring access to justice in Haiti. We believe

S/PV. 8220

that this is a fundamental element of MINUJUSTH’s
mandate that cuts across all of its the activities. Such
activities must rely on specific approaches to protecting
women’s and children’s rights and fighting corruption
and impunity. The latter includes ensuring due process,
dealing with legal proceedings expeditiously and
providing adequate prison conditions.
The second is the importance of coordinating
efforts effectively to ensure an orderly and feasible
transition to sustainable peace and development in
Haiti. That means strengthening the United Nations
presence in the country in supporting national efforts
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, as well
as promoting partnerships with various stakeholders,
including international financial institutions, regional
and subregional organizations, the private sector and
civil society. We should also foster greater participation
by women and young people in building a viable future.
The third is the urgency of combating cholera. We
welcome the significant efforts that Secretary-General
António Guterres has made in that area and stress
how important it is that the international community
increase its support for such efforts.
In the light of all of these issues, Peru supports the
renewal and extension of the mandate of MINUJUSTH
for an additional year, with a view to moving forward
with a transition process based on the conditions on
the ground and ensuring stability and economic and
social progress.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council
I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.
Mr. Régis (Haiti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the President for inviting
the Government of the Republic of Haiti to present
its views and observations on the first report of the
Secretary-General, dated 20 March 2018 (S/2018/241),
on the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
On 15 October 2017, we turned a page. After
taking stock of the 13 years of its presence in Haiti,
with its successes but also its dark times, the Security
Council decided to end the mandate of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
in the light of the major advances made in the three
key areas of security and stability, building the rule of
law and promoting human rights. In fact, MINUJUSTH

18-0930717/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

was established to address a situation that in no way
corresponded to the one that existed in 2004 and which
the Council considered a threat to international peace
in the region. A new order of things has emerged in
Haiti today.
The Government of Haiti is pleased that the
Secretary-General has underscored the positive
developments in the country over the past 14 months,
rightly highlighting the progress made by President
Jovenel Moïse in implementing his programme of
reform for promoting sustainable development. Haiti
is at peace today. In the wake of the democratic 2017
elections, institutional stability and the rule of law
have been restored and the democratic achievements
consolidated. The institutions provided for in the
Constitution are functioning normally. The process of
establishing a Permanent Electoral Council is moving
forward. Human rights are respected and guaranteed.
This is the new reality for a country that, while it is
facing major challenges, nonetheless is enjoying a
secure and stable environment, as anyone can see.
In this context of stability and renewed political
certainty, significant results have already been achieved
in various key areas, including the improvement of the
security environment, progress in good governance,
respect for the rule of law and the relaunching of the
development process. Among the indicators of progress
that the Secretary-General mentions in his report, I
am pleased to note the sharp decline in violent crime,
which has fallen by almost 50 per cent compared
to the same period last year; the strengthened fight
against corruption in the Administration, including
in the PetroCaribe Fund matter, which has been
officially referred to the Superior Court of Audits and
Administrative Disputes by Parliament, in accordance
with the Constitution and for the purposes of the law;
the priority given by the Government and the Parliament
to institutional reforms aimed at strengthening the
rule of law and, in particular, modernizing the justice
sector, including the prison system. In that regard, the
adoption of a new criminal code and code of criminal
procedure is high on the legislative agenda. Other
indicators of progress worthy of our attention today
are the ongoing establishment or re-establishment of
key institutions provided for by the Constitution; the
appointment of a national Ombudsperson, through the
process provided for by the new Constitution; and the
increased professionalization of and capacity-building
in the Haitian National Police.
18/25

03/04/2018

Furthermore, with regard to structural reforms, the
initiative of the États généraux sectoriels launched by
the Head of State aims to promote inclusive political
dialogue at the national level with a view to carrying
out the necessary social contract renewal and the
recovery of the Haitian economy, in tandem with the
strategy of the Caravane du changement initiative, the
results of which aim to open up regions, increase the
participation of rural populations in changing their
destiny and future and promote local development
based on national production.
The Government is aware that there remains work
to do. It intends to continue along the path of reform.
It took note of the observations made in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, as well as the conclusions and the
recommendations. It is sensitive to issues relating
to access to justice, the strengthening of the judicial
system and the lack of respect for human rights, of which
prolonged pretrial detention and prison overcrowding
are deplorable manifestations. Answers are being
given. Those problems are the result of decades of
neglect, structural handicaps and bottlenecks that local
Governments are striving to gradually, consistently and
methodically correct. It will, in any case, take time to
complete, which calls for ongoing and persevering action
over the long-term. In that sense, the Government of the
Republic of Haiti believes that a technical assistance
mission to strengthen justice would therefore represent
an alternative that is more in line with the evolution of
the situation on the ground.
The Government noted the concerns raised in
relation to the isolated cases of human rights abuses
perpetrated by law enforcement officials. The rule of
law is not divided. The two incidents mentioned in
the report — like all incidents attributable to State
bodies — are receiving the most serious attention
from the competent authorities. Once responsibility
is established, justice will take its course. Pending
the outcome of the judicial process, the public
officials concerned are subject to the relevant
administrative penalties.
In accordance with the commitments undertaken
by the Republic of Haiti within the framework of
international and regional treaties to which it is party,
the Haitian Government is making every effort to
ensure full respect for fundamental rights and freedoms
by all State institutions, without exception. The
appointment, last October, of the Ombudsman was part
of the commitment to make the promotion, protection
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

and defence of human rights a reality. It goes without
saying that the plan of action of that structure includes
the implementation of the various recommendations
made by the relevant United Nations bodies, including
the Human Rights Council.
The Government greatly welcomes the major
advances made in recent months, in particular the
implementation of a legal provision requiring it to
financially contribute to the institutionalization of
political life in the country by granting a financial
sum to legally recognized political parties that
have a certain number of elected representatives in
Parliament and local authorities. That measure, which
has been acknowledged by the stakeholders and to
which most of the political groups have subscribed,
aims to provide them with the necessary resources for
their modernization.
The stabilization achievements of recent
months must, of course, be consolidated within the
framework of broader cooperation, more in line with
today’s realities and the real needs of the country. In
that regard, the Government wishes to reiterate the
importance and value it attaches to the mandate that
the Council has entrusted to MINUJUSTH, namely, to
assist the Government of Haiti to consolidate rule-oflaw institutions, support and build the capacity of the
Haitian National Police and monitor the human rights
situation.
MINUJUSTH, as we understand it and as its
parameters have been clearly defined, has a different
perspective from the previous stabilization-focused
mission. Above all, it is intended to be a mechanism
to complement and consolidate the gains already
achieved. Its time frame therefore can only be limited.
Consequently, the Government is taking into account
the withdrawal strategy proposed by the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with the timetable to be
established by both parties, based on agreed milestones
and benchmarks. Similarly, as the Government has
stated, it supports an evolution of the Mission towards
a United Nations presence within a capacity-building
framework as part of peacekeeping.
As resolution 2350 (2017) sets forth, MINUJUSTH
is essentially intended to provide technical assistance
to strengthen Haitian institutions that guarantee the
rule of law — primarily the justice system — it being
understood that national institutions have primary
responsibility for development and all aspects of

S/PV. 8220

governance, security, justice, the protection of human
rights and the fight against corruption in all its forms
and in all components of society.
In that spirit, the Haitian Government wishes to see
continued cooperation between Haiti and the United
Nations, within the framework of a strong partnership
that truly promotes new progress in all sectors of the
rule of law, as well as the promotion of all human
rights — civilian, political, economic, social and
cultural — while making a powerful contribution to
reaching the country’s sustainable development goals.
None of that will be possible without scrupulous respect
for each other’s obligations and without a genuine spirit
of solidarity, mutual respect and trust, as the SecretaryGeneral has rightly stressed in his report.
The sustainability of peace and sustainable
development go hand in hand. Therefore, for lasting
stability in Haiti, it is essential to simultaneously
advance the consolidation of the rule of law, the
promotion of human rights, reconstruction and the
social and economic development of the country. The
Government of the Republic of Haiti is channelling
all its resources and energy into addressing urgent
humanitarian challenges and addressing the underlying
problems of extreme poverty and insecurity. As always,
it welcomes all support from its technical and financial
partners, as called for in the 2005 Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness and the 2008 Accra Agenda for
Action. That is why the Government reiterates its
hope for support from the international community to
promote the conditions for vigorous growth, poverty
reduction and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals by 2030.
The Government enthusiastically welcomed
the Secretary-General’s initiative on the Haiti
transformation retreat. It fervently hopes that this
promising initiative will bear the expected fruits,
and that it will pave the way for new prospects for
development financing in Haiti, especially of the
essential infrastructure that is so needed.
I cannot fail to mention the cholera epidemic, the
terrible consequences of which everyone knows and
which continues to rage despite the significant recent
progress in preventing and combating that scourge. My
delegation hopes in particular that the new initiative of
the Secretary-General will finally enable the new twopronged United Nations approach to cholera in Haiti
to be realized. Let us recall that to date, the United

18-0930719/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund has raised only a little more than $7 million, which
is clearly well below the $400 million required. The
Haitian Government calls for a burst of goodwill and
the exploration of innovative and predictable funding
to establish the Fund, as planned, so that the victims,
their relatives and their beneficiaries can receive just
compensation, which is their due, and the healthcare, drinking-water and sanitation infrastructure,
acknowledged as essential to the complete elimination
of cholera and other water-borne diseases, can
be established.
In conclusion, I wish to assure the members of
the Council of the full readiness of the Head of State,
Mr. Jovenel Moïse, the Prime Minister, Mr. Jack Guy
Lafontant, and the Government of Haiti to deepen the
dialogue and to strengthen the many cooperation links
with the Security Council, the Secretariat and all United
Nations bodies with a view to making further progress
in ensuring the rule of law, strengthening justice and
promoting human rights, which are at the heart of the
mandate of MINUJUSTH. The Haitian authorities will
continue to work consistently and decisively to ensure
that the diversified cooperation, to which they attach
the highest priority, delivers on its promises and fully
meets the national aspirations of the Haitian people and
the shared expectations.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vale De Almeida (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its 28 member States. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/241), and
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing. I also
welcome the presence of our colleague the Permanent
Representative of Haiti at this meeting.
The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia
and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
On 13 April 2017, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2350 (2017), which ended the mandate of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
on 15 October 2017. The resolution sets out the legal
20/25

03/04/2018

framework for the transition to the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
whose primary objective is strengthening the rule of
law and the Haitian National Police, as well as the
promotion and protection of human rights.
The long cycle of institutional instability that
characterized the electoral process in Haiti in 2015 and
2016 finally ended with the election of President Moïse
and a new Parliament. As a long-standing supporter of
the Haitian people, the European Union welcomes the
country’s return to constitutional normalcy despite the
significant challenges facing it. In our view, that is a
condition sine qua non for Haiti to be able to deal with
the many political, economic, social and environmental
challenges that it faces.
However, while a return to constitutional order
is necessary condition, it is not enough to ensure the
democratic stability and sustainable development that
the country needs. The root causes of the instability
persist. In our view, bold reforms of the Constitution, the
electoral system and the judiciary are therefore urgent
in order to restore the trust of the Haitian people in their
democracy and their political system. It is particularly
important to ensure true access for all to fair, equitable
and effective justice. Signs of a willingness to reform
are evident. We must now realize them and seize the
historic opportunity provided by this period of relative
stability and democratic legitimacy.
As in recent years, the efforts of all actors to
ensure the stability and security of citizens will remain
necessary to the process of democratic consolidation.
As MINUJUSTH notes in the section entitled
“Benchmarks for an exit strategy” (see S/2018/241,
annex), consensus-based and profound reform of the
electoral system would be key to preventing new crises
and to regaining the trust of the population.
The European Union remains a committed and
faithful partner of the Republic of Haiti. We are
resolved to support the country in this sensitive phase,
including in the necessary reform process that I have
just mentioned, in consultation with all the other
partners. The European Union appreciates and supports
the work of MINUJUSTH focusing on the development
of the Haitian National Police, the justice sector and
the rule of law and on the promotion and protection of
human rights.
Despite an improvement in the security situation
thanks to the political stability over the past year, the
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

European Union believes that the structural causes
of instability in Haiti still need to be addressed and
that the security situation remains very fragile. We
therefore believe that it is essential to complete the
task of strengthening and professionalizing the Haitian
National Police, to focus on the need for judicial and
prison reform and, finally, to strengthen respect for
human rights.
In that context, the ongoing implementation of
the mandate of MINUJUSTH over a period of time
sufficient for the transition of responsibilities to the
country team to be completed and to deal with all those
challenges seems to us essential. That time is necessary
to make adequate progress in order to ensure genuine
continuity following the withdrawal of the United
Nations mission, as well as the irreversibility of the
reforms carried out.
In conclusion, allow me to express the EU’s positive
assessment of the contribution of MINUJUSTH in
terms of security, conflict prevention and strengthening
democracy and the rule of law in Haiti. That contribution
is attributable to its entire staff, its commitment and its
skills, for which we warmly thank them all.
However, we already need to think about the
future. In that regard, the modalities for the transition
of MINUJUSTH are in our view fundamental. Special
attention to respect for human rights in security work,
as well as access to impartial justice for all, will be
particularly necessary. It is essential that the Haitian
National Police and judicial system be effectively
prepared to assume in the future all the tasks currently
undertaken by the United Nations Mission.
Together with the United Nations and the
international community, the European Union will
support the Haitian authorities so that they can
strengthen their commitment and their efforts to ensure
a better future of peace, democracy, stability and wellbeing for all Haitian people.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
which includes Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
France, Guatemala, Peru, the United States of America,
Uruguay and my country, Canada.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today’s important debate on the first day

S/PV. 8220

of your presidency to discuss the first six months of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH). We welcome the Secretary-General’s
most recent report (S/2018/241). The Group would also
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
insightful and comprehensive briefing.
(spoke in French)
I would like to thank my colleague Ambassador
Denis Régis for his relevant and very useful comments
on behalf of the Haitian Government.
(spoke in English)
The Group of Friends reaffirms its solidarity with,
and commitment to, the people and the Government
of Haiti in their pursuit of stability, socioeconomic
development and democratic consolidation. Haiti
continues to face multiple challenges that require
the implementation of structural reforms. Progress
remains essential in many areas, including on human
rights, such as prolonged pre-trial detention and prison
overcrowding, sexual and gender-based violence,
greater participation of women in decision-making
processes, reform and strengthening of the justice
sector and enhancement of social services. While
much still remains to be done, nevertheless the
Group acknowledges and welcomes the important
and necessary steps that the Haitian Government has
already taken to achieve greater security, stability and
prosperity in Haiti.
The Group of Friends would like to stress
the importance of strengthening the fight against
corruption, putting an end to impunity and ensuring
accountability in Haiti. Strengthening the rule of law
and democratic institutions is key to achieving longterm stability and prosperity in Haiti. In that regard,
the Group of Friends welcomes the commitment of the
United Nations to support the consolidation of previous
gains and peacebuilding goals, which is creating space
for the promotion of greater stability and sustainable
development in Haiti.
The Group of Friends recognizes the important
work undertaken by MINUJUSTH since its creation,
including assisting the Government of Haiti in further
developing the Haitian National Police, strengthening
rule-of-law institutions and engaging in human rights
monitoring, reporting and analysis. To succeed in the
long term, that work must continue in close coordination
with the Government and through national ownership.

18-0930721/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

03/04/2018

The Group of Friends also encourages continued close
collaboration between MINUJUSTH and the United
Nations country team.

Sir, for convening today’s debate. We also thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his briefing
earlier today.

From my own personal observations on the ground
in Haiti, I would like to underscore that it is important
for MINUJUSTH to focus on strengthening the legal
infrastructure, as was stated by my colleague who
spoke on behalf of the European Union, so as to create
the right conditions for attracting investment to the
country. Haiti is in dire need of investment to boost
economic development. We know that investment will
be made only if the rule of law is improved. Given the
vital importance of the work it undertakes, the Group of
Friends encourages and recommends that the Security
Council support the extension of the mandate of the
Mission for another year at the same level of resources,
notably for its police component and with the intention
to review the need for renewal as necessary.

Argentina aligns itself with the statement made by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti and would like to add the following
brief remarks.

We take note of the draft resolution’s request
to further refine the benchmarked exit strategy for
MINUJUSTH. The Group looks forward to hearing
more about the progress achieved in the related
benchmarks. We would like to stress the importance of
continued and close coordination and consultation with
the Government of Haiti on those efforts. We underline
the importance of carefully reviewing conditions on the
ground and the importance of adjusting the Mission’s
presence accordingly to preserve the progress that Haiti
has achieved in collaboration with the United Nations
and the international community.
Finally, the Group of Friends of Haiti would like
to draw attention to the progress that has been made in
reducing the number of cases of cholera transmission
and cholera-related fatalities in Haiti. Although
promising, we encourage all Member States to continue
to support the efforts of the United Nations to combat
cholera in Haiti. The Group of Friends wishes to thank
the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Josette Sheeran,
for her continued efforts to mobilize support for this
vital aspect of United Nations engagement in Haiti.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Argentina.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, let me congratulate the delegation of the
Netherlands on the way in which it guided the work of
the Security Council in March. We very much welcome
the fact that Peru is presiding over the work of the
Council, and we wish it every success. We thank you,
22/25

Argentina welcomes the most recent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/241), which refers in
particular to the development of a benchmarked exit
strategy. Since the inception of the United Nations
Mission for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH),
we have stressed the fact that, above and beyond
pre-set deadlines, the transition of the Mission to a
United Nations presence of another kind must be based
on the gradual fulfilment of its mandate in response
to the situation on the ground. That would prevent
the Mission’s premature withdrawal, which could
jeopardize all efforts made in the past 14 years. We also
understand that the Mission should review the transition
process in close cooperation with the Government of
Haiti, while respecting its principles and priorities
and taking into consideration the principle of national
responsibility in the peacebuilding process.
Argentina underscores the fact that, when
developing exit strategy benchmarks, it is important to
harmonize the Mission’s initiatives with the relevant
elements of the United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2017-2021, while taking into account Haiti’s
efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, in particular Sustainable Development
Goal 16.
Argentina highlights the progress made in
implementing the Mission’s important mandate,
including assisting Haiti consolidating rule-oflaw institutions, strengthening and fostering the
professional development of the Haitian National
Police and promoting and protecting human rights in
the country, in spite of myriad ongoing challenges. In
that regard, we underscore the efforts made by Haitian
authorities, together with MINUJUSTH, to achieve
lasting stability and improve the country’s future.
For example, considerable progress has been made in
the fight against cholera, which should continue with
the aim of eradicating the disease. We thank Special
Envoy Josette Sheeran for marshalling the resources
necessary, in particular through the Haiti Cholera
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund, to which our
country contributed.
In addition to continuing its bilateral cooperation,
Argentina will continue to provide trained police
personnel to the Mission, to the extent possible and
based on specific requirements stipulated in the
Secretary-General’s transition strategy and the strategic
development plan of the Haitian National Police for
2017-2021. We take note of the re-establishment of the
country’s armed formed forces in line with the sovereign
decisions taken by the Haitian Government on securityand defence-related issues. We are confident that it
will not jeopardize the effective implementation of the
strategic development plan of the National Police.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Argentina’s
commitment to the Haitian people and to acknowledge
the work of the police and civilian personnel of
MINUJUSTH in fulfilment of its noble mission
of assisting Haiti on its path to sustainable peace
and development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Chile.
Ms. Domínguez Álvarez (Chile) (spoke in
Spanish): We commend the Netherlands on its
presidency in the month of March and wish our
neighbour Peru every success this month. We also wish
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing,
and Ambassador Denis Régis for his statement.
Chile aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, and would like to make the following
additional observations.
The United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the United Nations country
team in Haiti play a fundamental supporting role in
Haiti with regard to its socioeconomic development, the
strengthening of its institutions and respect for human
rights. In that regard, we welcome the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation for the Security Council
to broaden MINUJUSTH’s mandate to reflect the
timetable set by the gradual exit strategy that is clear
and adapted to the realities on the ground. We cannot
afford to lose what we have gained over the past 14
years on the path to stability and development.
We stress that conditions on the ground, coordination
among all actors and, especially, the priorities of the

S/PV. 8220

Haitian Government must always be taken into account.
That is particularly important if the United Nations
is to successfully finalize its transition to a presence
that will continue to support the Government’s efforts
towards peacekeeping and peacebuilding without a
peacekeeping mission. We recognize that the Mission
will be able to consolidate its gains over the past 14
years only with the close collaboration of all national
actors and the active commitment of the international
community. As a police-contributing country, we will
continue working with the Organization to provide
MINUJUSTH with adequate human resources to ensure
the fulfilment of its important mandate.
Chile welcomes the significant reduction of cholera
transmission and deaths in Haiti. We also recognize
the progress made in the implementation of the United
Nations new approach to cholera in Haiti through the
recent selection of projects to be financed by the United
Nations Haiti Cholera Response Multi-Partner Trust
Fund, in line with tracks 1 and 2 of the new approach.
We particularly welcome the consultative process with
civil society, local leaders and cholera victims that was
carried out to identify some of these projects with a
view to improving the lives of victims and reducing
the transmission of cholera to zero. We reiterate our
support for the Special Envoy for Haiti, Ms. Josette
Sheeran, in her important task of implementing the new
strategy, and we call upon the international community
and other actors to contribute to the Fund and other
projects that support its strategy. Chile supplemented
its contribution to the Trust Fund in February 2017
through its financial support of other water and
sanitation projects, in keeping with track 1 of the new
approach, and we hope to continue supporting such
projects as long as necessary.
While the humanitarian situation in Haiti has
improved significantly, we also note that there have also
been various setbacks due to the increased intensity
and frequency of natural disasters in the region. The
context makes it even more important to address the
underlying causes of vulnerability and to bolster the
resilience of the country through preparation before
disasters and rapid recovery after them.
In that connection, we welcome the 2017-2021
humanitarian response plan of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), as
the plan has integrated a broader perspective of the
needs of the country with a view to breaking the cycle
of humanitarian crises, while promoting investment

18-0930723/25

S/PV.8220

The question concerning Haiti

03/04/2018

in advance and the humanitarian development nexus.
We urge all Member States to support OCHA and the
United Nations country team in the implementation of
the humanitarian response plan, including contributing
to the four areas of cooperation that OCHA has
identified as the most beneficial to the consolidation of
development in Haiti.

We note in particular the coordination between civilian
and military personnel on the ground, community
outreach strategies as confidence-building measures
and the important role of women in all areas of the
stabilization process. During these 13 years, Brazil had
the honour to lead MINUSTAH and to contribute more
than 30,000 troops to the Mission.

Chile hopes it can continue to contribute bilaterally,
inter alia, to the management of natural disasters, the
building of earthquake-resistant construction and the
strengthening of the judicial system through the training
of firefighters, community emergency response teams
and judges, in line with Haiti’s priorities.

As highlighted by the Secretary-General’s report,
the decline in homicide rates over the past few years
has been maintained, with a decrease in the number
of such crimes in the last quarter, as compared to the
same period last year. However, it should be noted
that, compared to the previous quarter, the number of
homicides has increased, which serves as a reminder
that the security situation is still precarious. In that
regard, we recall the contributions for the stabilization
of Haiti made by the implementation of quick-impact
projects and community violence-reduction projects.
We believe that such initiatives, which were successfully
put in practice by MINUSTAH, should continue during
MINUJUSTH’s mandate.

In conclusion, we reiterate Chile’s commitment to
Haiti and its people, while reaffirming the importance
of continuing to stand with this beautiful and sisterly
nation, which is responsible for its own development.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and thank you for convening this
important debate.
We associate ourselves with the statement delivered
by the Permanent Representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/241), which covers the initial six months of the
operations of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH).
We note with satisfaction that the transition from
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and M1NUJUSTH was carried out
without negatively impacting the security situation,
which attests to the orderly and gradual withdrawal of
the military component of the former Mission and to
the carefully executed transfer of responsibility to the
Haitian National Police, supported by the remaining
formed police units. It also attests to the success of
MINUSTAH, which, for 13 years, helped Haitians
to ensure a stable and secure environment, rebuild
the country after natural disasters and prepare for
the future.
MINUSTAH demonstrated the potential of
innovative approaches that could serve as a model for
future peacekeeping operations elsewhere in the world.
24/25

We take note of the two-year exit strategy proposed
by the Secretary-General for the transition to a
non-peacekeeping United Nations presence in Haiti,
as well as its 11 benchmarks, and we welcome the fact
that the benchmarks were adopted in close consultation
with the Government of Haiti. We believe that such
consultation should continue during the implementation
and review of the exit strategy. In that regard, we
encourage both MINUJUSTH and the Government of
Haiti to use the window of opportunity provided by
the remaining duration of the Mission’s mandate to put
in practice ambitious reforms in the field of the rule
of law. That would allow the country to consolidate
stability gains achieved over the past 14 years and lay
the groundwork for sustainable and inclusive long-term
socioeconomic development.
In conclusion, we would like to encourage the
extension of the MINUJUSTH mandate for another
year and the maintenance of its budgetary and police
components. We would prefer, however, that the
references to Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations in the mandate be circumscribed to operational
activities of the police component of the Mission.
While recalling the need to plan carefully the practical
steps for the implementation of the exit strategy, we
believe that the Council should continuously assess the
situation on the ground and revise its plans, if need be.
18-09307

03/04/2018

The question concerning Haiti

Brazil is firmly committed to its long-term
engagement and solidarity with Haiti. Our peacekeepers
have left, but our engagement remains steady, as
evidenced by the growing portfolio of bilateral technical
cooperation projects.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Mr. Carlier González (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): First of all, let me congratulate the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for its successful presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March and to convey
to you, Sir, my delegation’s sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish you every success in your functions.
We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/241) on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), and in particular
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for his briefing marking the Mission’s first six months
of operations.
Colombia aligns itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti.
We are pleased to note that Haiti has continued to
move forward in consolidating the country’s democracy
and stability. We note with satisfaction that the transition
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
to MINUJUSTH has gone smoothly, and that the
MINUJUSTH is fully operational. That shows that it
is possible to depend upon operations that fulfil the
roles for which they were established. As a friendly
country whose historical ties with Haiti have linked our
two countries since the birth of our nation, Colombia
believes that it is important to stress the fact that there
can be no real stability or sustainable development in
Haiti without strengthening democratic institutions.
We underscore that the Mission’s primary goal
is to help the Haitian Government in strengthening
the rule of law, the judicial system and the Haitian

S/PV. 8220

National Police, as well as ​human rights. All of that will
contribute to achieving the sustainable development
agenda in Haiti. As the police force and the judiciary
go hand in hand, it is necessary to bolster the capacity
of both sectors so as to strengthen the rule of law
and deal with urgent problems in Haiti. We concur
with the Secretary-General’s report that the entire
judicial system, including the prison system, requires
meaningful reforms, and it is in such areas that it is
especially important to concentrate efforts, with the
political will demonstrated by the Government of
President Moïse and the support of MINUJUSTH and
of the entire international community.
Greater efforts and resources must be accorded
to strengthening and training the Haitian National
Police so that it can be fully committed to providing
national security. In all such endeavours, we reiterate
the importance of gender mainstreaming in the work
of the Mission in a cross-cutting manner. We note
with satisfaction that, as was mentioned earlier, such a
spirit was illustrated by the gender makeup of the first
class of court clerks and police officers. Colombia will
continue to contribute its police, including in training
female police officers, as we have done since 2006.
The draft resolution that will extend the mandate
of the Mission for one year includes a clear way for
assessing progress made on the ground. Colombia
welcomes the flexibility shown by the Council to
evaluate the Mission’s mandate in accordance with
the specific needs of the Haitian Government and the
general situation of the country.
In conclusion, as of now, Haiti is on board with
the United Nations to rethink formulating its primary
goals to maintain international peace and security that,
we believe, with the Secretary-General’s proposal for
reform, takes us a step closer in the right direction. The
Haitian people and the Council can always count on the
support of my country.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

18-0930725/25
