S/2014/739

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 October 2014
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
The members of the Security Council reaffirmed their commitment to
enhancing the efficiency and transparency of the Council ’s work, and to
implementing all previously agreed documents, including the pro visional rules of
procedure and the note by the President of the Council ( S/2010/507), and have
agreed on the following:
(1) The speaking order for meetings of the Security Council as a general
practice is established by a draw. In certain cases, the speaking order is established
by the use of a sign-up sheet;
(2) The President of the Security Council as a general practice makes his or
her national statement last of all Council members. In certain cases, he or she may
make a single statement comprising introductory remarks and his or her national
statement before the other members take the floor.
The President is encouraged to inform the other members in advance of
his or her wish to do so in order to ensure that there are no objections;
(3) In certain cases, the President of the Security Council may adjust the list
of speakers and inscribe first the delegation(s) responsible for the drafting process in
order to allow it or them to make an introductory or explanatory presentation. In
cases when an unscheduled or emergency meeting is convened, the President may
also adjust the list so that the delegation having requested the meeting can speak
before the other Council members in order to present the reasons for convening the
meeting;
(4) The President of the Security Council may inscribe first the Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies of the Council when presenting to the Council their work or
reporting on outstanding issues within their mandate;
(5) Members of the Security Council can trade slots in the list of speakers. It
is recommended that delegations involved inform the Secretariat as to what was
agreed.
Members of the Security Council are encouraged to inform the
Secretariat of such changes as soon as possible, especially if the meeting has
already started, in order to allow the interpreters to be ready to interpret from
the language which will be used;
(6) When high-level officials are representing Security Council members at a
meeting, the list of speakers will be entitled “The list of speakers, after the draw and
14-62719 (E)

161014

*1462719*

S/2014/739

adjusted for protocol”. For each category of high-level officials, the speakers will be
listed within that category according to the order of the draw. The speakers within
each category will speak after those in a category of higher-level officials and
before those in a category of lower-level officials.
If, after the list of speakers has been circulated, there is a change in the
level of a delegation’s representative, that representative’s speaking order will
be readjusted according to protocol and his or her place within categories of
same-level officials will be determined according to the order of the original
draw;
(7) The permanent representative of a Security Council member who also
holds a post at the Cabinet or ministerial level within his or her Government, will
speak by order of the draw, without adjustment for protocol.
For meetings announced as high-level in advance, where higher-level
officials are representing other Security Council members, a permanent
representative serving at the Cabinet or ministerial level may request an
adjustment by protocol of his or her place on the list of speakers. The
delegation concerned is encouraged to inform the Secretariat and the other
Council members in advance of its request to have that representative’s
speaking order adjusted by protocol. After being informed of such a request,
the Secretariat will add, beside the name of the representative on the list of
speakers, that he or she is speaking as a member of his or her Cabinet. When a
permanent representative at the Cabinet or ministerial level has spoken in that
capacity at a formal meeting, it will be noted in appendix IV to the annual
report of the Council.
For meetings not announced as high-level in advance, visiting higherlevel officials may be accorded a speaking slot before permanent
representatives as a matter of courtesy where there is no objection by members
of the Security Council.

2/2

14-62719
