V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

85

Establishment of a network for the
exl'hange of tel'hnological information

Taking into account resolution 87 (IV) of 30
May 1976 of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development117 concerning strengthening the technological capacity of developing countries,
Bearing in mind its resolution 3507 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on institutional arrangements in the
field of the transfer of technology, particularly paragraphs 2, 5 and 6 thereof,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution 1902
(LVII) of 1 August 1974 on the role of an international technological information system in the transfer
and assessment of technology and in the indigenous
growth of appropriate technologies in developing countries,
Acknowledging that the Economic and Social Councial, in its decision 171 (LXI) of 4 August 1976,
noted with satisfaction the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the establishment of a network for the exchange of technological information, 118 as a first step
in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 3 507 ( XXX) , and decided to transmit the report
to the Assembly for consideration at its thirty-first session,
I. Reaffirms the importance of wider dissemination
of scientific and technological information for the purpose of allowing developing countries access to research findings which are of interest to them as well
as project experience of other developing countries,
thus permitting the selection of technologies essential
for their industrial growth and promoting the development of their own technological capacity;
2. Compliments the Secretary-General on the report
transmitted by the Economic and Social Council and
requests that he convey the thanks of the General
Assembly to members of the Inter-Agency Task Force
on Information Exchange and the Transfer of Technology who have undertaken to prepare the plan for the establishment of a network for the exchange of technological information;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the report and
its conclusions, 119 especially as they relate to the importance of establishing a network useful to all countries, in particular developing countries;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization, in consultation with the
regional commissions and other appropriate organizations, to intensify their efforts, in their respective fields,
to assist in the establishment in developing countries
of centres for the transfer and development of technology at the national, subregional and regional levels,
in order to provide fundamental elements for the adequate functioning of an international network for the
exchange of technological information, through corresponding national, subregional and regional systems
of information;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General and the
Interagency Task Force to continue their work in accordance with paragraph 6 of General Assembly resolution 3507 (XXX). including the preparation and
publication of the pilot directory of United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,

117 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Dcl'elop111ent, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.II.D.10),
part one, sect. A.
11 R E/5839.
1111 Ibid., sect. IV.

31/182.

Preparations for a new international
development strategy

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development
Strategy for the Second United Nations Development
Decade and 3517 (XXX) of 15 December 1975 on
the mid-term review and appraisal of progress in the
implementation of the Strategy,
Gravely concerned that international economic relations face severe problems and that the economic disparities between the developed and the developing countries have further widened,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
( S-VI) of 1 May 197 4 containing the Declaration
and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling the results achieved at a number of major
United Nations conferences held during the Second
United Nations Development Decade on world economic and social problems,
Conscious of the need to introduce profound changes
in economic relations between the developed and developing countries,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Committee for Development Planning as well
as the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination and
other organs and organizations concerned of the United
Nations system, to collect data and information that
are relevant to the formulation of a new international
development strategy, taking fully into account the
above-mentioned resolutions on the establishment of
a new international economic order and the other
above-mentioned resolutions;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report on
the information requested above to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session, through the Economic and Social Council at its resumed sixty-third
session, and decides to consider at that time appropriate action for the preparations for a new international development strategy;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that research studies and reports in the field of development and economic co-operation, including those that
may be necessary for a new international development
strategy, are in accordance with the objectives of the
above-mentioned resolutions;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General to utilize
all appropriate research institutions and expertise, especially those of the developing countries, in the preparation of the above-mentioned studies and reports.
l 06th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/183.
