S/2014/773

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 October 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested that I report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK
and developments related thereto, from 16 July to 15 October 2014.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. UNMIK continues its regular
engagement with Belgrade and Pristina, all communities in Kosovo and regional
and international actors. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform their roles within the
framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continues to be present in Kosovo, in line with
the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November 2008
(S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with UNMIK.

II. Political developments
3.
The main political developments relate to the failure to establish a new
Assembly of Kosovo, following parliamentary elections held on 8 June 2014. By the
close of the reporting period, a troubling political deadlock persisted among the
leading parties. The constitutive session of the newly elected Assembly was opened
on 17 July, with all 120 elected members present, under the chairmanship of the
eldest member of the Assembly (also a member of the Democratic Party of Kosovo).
The session was suspended after the quorum was lost as a result of a walkout by a
bloc of three opposition parties — Democratic League of Kosovo, Alliance for the
Future of Kosovo and Initiative for Kosovo — who were not allowed to nominate a
candidate for President of the Assembly. The members of that bloc returned
thereafter and, in the absence of any members of the Democratic Party of Kosovo,
elected their candidate for the President of the Assembly. This latter action was
challenged by the Democratic Party of Kosovo before the Constitutional Court of
Kosovo, on 18 July. On 22 July, the Court suspended the election of the President of

14-63300 (E)

031114

*1463300*

S/2014/773

the Assembly, carried out by the three-party bloc, and ordered the Assembly to
refrain from further action until the Court could rule on several issues.
4.
On 22 August, the Constitutional Court announced that it had reached a
majority decision, finding, inter alia, that the election of the President of the
Assembly on 17 July had been unconstitutional and that the constitutive session of
the Assembly remained actively in process. The Court also confirmed the right of
the Democratic Party of Kosovo, which enjoyed relative majority as a pre-election
bloc, to nominate a candidate for President of the Assembly and stressed “the right
and duty of all Members of [the] Assembly to find a way to elect the President and
Deputy Presidents of the Assembly in accordance with the constitutional provisions
in conjunction with the relevant Rules of Procedure of the Assembly and to make
the Assembly functional.
5.
A series of intensive consultations ensued among political parties and leaders,
some of them held under the auspices of the President of Kosovo. On 9 September,
the three-party bloc signed an agreement with another opposition party,
Vetëvendosje (Self-determination Movement) on the formation of a future coalition
government. Following the announcement of the agreement, the main Kosovo Serb
political party stated that it would not support or join a government which would
include Vetëvendosje.
6.
The constitutive session of the Assembly resumed on 18 September and was
once more suspended by the Chairperson when the candidate proposed by the
Democratic Party of Kosovo for the position of President did not receive a majority
of votes.
7.
A further continuation, scheduled for 2 October, was subsequently postponed
by the Chairperson, ostensibly to allow time for additional consultation.
Representatives from Democratic League of Kosovo, Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo, Initiative for Kosovo and Vetëvendosje objected to this decision and
submitted a request to the Secretariat of the Assembly for the session to be resumed
on 9 October. In the absence of a positive response, on 9 October, Democratic
League of Kosovo, Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, Initiative for Kosovo and
Vetëvendosje held an unofficial session in the Assembly chamber, which was
attended neither by the Democratic Party of Kosovo, nor by most of the minority
representatives, including Kosovo Serb representatives. Prior to that session, the
President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, had held seven rounds of inconclusive
meetings with representatives of both sides, stressing the urgency of resolving the
impasse. The situation between the four-party bloc and the Democratic Party of
Kosovo, however, remained fundamentally polarized.
8.
In Belgrade, this period was focused on Serbian institutional reform issues and
steps towards integration in the European Union. Serbia has completed screening of
half of the negotiation chapters in the framework of the process for accession to the
European Union, although it has yet to formally open them. Belgrade has publicly
expressed concern that the political stalemate in Pristina, if prolonged, might also
cause delays in the implementation of standing agreements and adversely affect
Serbia’s negotiations with the European Union on topics linked to the European
Union-facilitated dialogue. In its 2014 progress report for Serbia, the European
Commission, while acknowledging the achievements of the dialogue to date,
stressed that progress had slowed and that new momentum was needed in order to
tackle key outstanding issues and to open a new phase in the ongoing normalization

2/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

of relations. It stressed that progress in that area remained essential for advancing
the European future of both sides. On 8 October, the European Commission also
issued its 2014 progress report for Kosovo. The report welcomed the demonstrated
ability of the authorities of Kosovo to engage productively in negotiations with the
European Union on a stabilization and association agreement, but also stressed the
need for strong political will and leadership to address issues in many sectors of
governance, especially, but not limited to, the rule of law (see also sect. V of the
present report).
9.
Despite the lack of high-level European Union-facilitated dialogue meetings,
technical talks have continued to make some progress through working level
meetings. On 4 September, in Brussels, further technical agreements were reached
under the framework of the agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points, which includes the precise location of the six official crossing points, the
layout of their new facilities and their support requirements.
10. From 15 to 17 September, technical talks also continued in Brussels in the
fields of telecommunications and energy. On the latter, representatives from Pristina
and Belgrade agreed to a new action plan on arrangements regarding energy, which
includes specific modalities between the inter-transmission systems operators, and
addresses various issues relating to regional energy transmission and service
provision, including for northern Kosovo. Meetings were also held to advance
implementation of the agreement on freedom of movement reached in July 2011.
The meetings resulted in an agreement to extend arrangements on the use of Kosovo
identification documents to Nikola Tesla International Airport in Belgrade, as well
as to five additional crossing points.

III. Northern Kosovo
11. In northern Kosovo, the resolution of many practical issues surrounding
municipal governance depends upon further European Union-facilitated
negotiations, which are expected to resume once a newly established government is
in place in Pristina. Nevertheless, some further progress has been achieved in the
harmonization of public budgets and the integration of former Serbian Ministry of
Interior police as members of the Kosovo police. The Regional Kosovo Police
Directorate in North Mitrovica has appointed deputy station commanders in the
Zvečan/Zveçan, Zubin Potok and North Mitrovica police stations. OSCE provided
supplementary orientation training on, inter alia, the legal framework of Kosovo for
recently integrated officers.
12. Issues of residential construction in the ethnically mixed area of Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani in North Mitrovica continued to be a source of potential conflicts. The
terms of a previously agreed moratorium on construction activities have largely been
respected, however, which has helped to allay tensions and allow adequate space for
mutually agreed solutions. Local discussions also continued to address the legal
aspects involved in order to pave the way for a more formal and comprehensive
memorandum of understanding among the municipalities of South and North
Mitrovica and Kosovo’s Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning, including on
the issue of the Austerlitz bridge, which separates North and South Mitrovica.
13. The four Serb-majority municipalities in northern Kosovo also engaged with
central authorities in Pristina in the preparation process for municipal budgets. This

14-63300

3/18

S/2014/773

process also involved consultation with Belgrade, which will continue to provide
funding for certain services, as foreseen in preceding agreements. As part of the
preparation of municipal budgets for 2015, further practical steps have been taken
towards the rationalization of public expenditures in North Mitrovica. As a result of
the continued existence of two authorities in the North Mitrovica municipality, the
Mitrovica North Administrative Office and the elected Mayor of North Mitrovica,
two separate but mutually coordinated draft budgets were submitted to the
Municipal Assembly. Discussions on the future community/association of Serb
municipalities, to address other core issues relating to future administrative and
financial arrangements in the relevant municipalities, envisaged under the 19 April
2013 agreement, have yet to resume. Tentative agreement on the integration of the
judiciary in northern Kosovo is also yet to be finalized, pending the resumption of
the European Union-facilitated dialogue at the political level.
14. On 25 July, an EULEX pre-trial judge at the Basic Court of Mitrovica issued
arrest warrants for the elected Mayor of Zubin Potok, as well as his predecessor
under the Serbian-managed system, pursuant to investigations conducted by the
Kosovo police. The warrants and subsequent questioning of family members of the
suspects resulted in protests from the local Kosovo Serb population and officials, as
well as friction with the EULEX mission. Prior to the issuance of the warrants, on
21 July, in response to an attempt by the Kosovo police to deliver summonses to the
two mayors, approximately 2,000 Kosovo Serbs in the area of Zubin Potok staged a
protest against EULEX activities in the area, blocking the main road. The situation
was resolved peacefully following discussions in early September involving the
mayors of the northern municipalities, the Special Representative of the European
Union and the Acting Head of EULEX. In a separate development, on 1 August,
EULEX announced the handover of responsibility for securing the Mitrovica Basic
Court to the Kosovo police.
15. The Government of Serbia, through the Director of its Office for Kosovo and
Metohija, Marko Djurić, continued to engage with local communities and officials
on the ground and encourage support for the ongoing implementation of the
19 April 2013 agreement.

IV. Security
16. There were a number of serious security incidents relating to illegal logging
activities, including near the administrative boundary line. On 27 August, in an
exchange of fire with the Serbian Gendarmerie, a Kosovo Albanian was wounded
near the village of Orlovac in Serbia’s Kuršumlija municipality. On 28 August, a
group of illegal loggers attempted to recover equipment and vehicles that had been
seized by the Serbian police during the operation on 27 August. Another exchange
of fire ensued, in which a Serbian Gendarmerie officer and a Kosovo Albanian were
fatally wounded. In the village of Lëvoshë/Ljevoša, Pejë/Peć municipality, illegal
logging was reported close to or on a property belonging to minority community
members. In mid-October, the Kosovo police, supported by EULEX and KFOR,
launched measures to counter illegal logging in the Leposaviq/Leposavič
municipality. Kosovo police also regularly intercepted and confiscated illegal timber
shipments throughout Kosovo.

4/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

17. In the wake of reports regarding the participation of some Kosovo Albanians in
fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq, Kosovo police conducted a series of
operations to detain individuals suspected of supporting terrorist groups. In a Kosovowide operation on 11 August, Kosovo police arrested 40 suspected former combatants
and supporters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Nusra Front. On
17 September, 15 further arrests were made, including of the Imam of the Grand
Mosque in Pristina and several other religious figures. Two imams in South Mitrovica
were detained and subsequently released on 25 September. Despite a call via social
media for protests against these arrests, other local imams opposed public protest
actions by their communities. The Kosovo Islamic community denounced participation
by Kosovo Albanians in foreign conflicts. A draft law, approved by the Kosovo
authorities on 5 February 2014, prohibiting the participation of Kosovars in armed
conflicts outside of Kosovo, awaits debate and adoption by the Assembly of Kosovo.
18. Security threats hampered the visits by internally displaced persons from Serbia
for the celebration of the Orthodox feast of Assumption Day on 28 August in the
Suharekë/Suva Reka and Gjakovë/Đakovica municipalities. The Minister of
Communities and Returns promptly condemned these threats. Kosovo police escorted
buses with pilgrims to alternative locations (Sveti Vrač in Zoqiste/Zočište and Visoki
Dečani), where celebrations proceeded without incident.
19. Security incidents affecting Kosovo’s non-majority communities, including
returnees, continued to occur at a rate comparable to the preceding reporting
periods, although their number noticeably increased in the Pejë/Peć region, in the
western part of Kosovo. On 14 October, following the suspension of a football
match in Belgrade between Serbia and Albania, several hundred supporters of the
two sides started to gather at the northern and southern ends of the Mitrovica bridge.
A timely intervention by Kosovo police and EULEX helped to avert a likely
escalation and violence.

V. Rule of law
20. UNMIK continued to monitor activities and exercise some responsibilities in
the area of the rule of law. This included facilitation of requests for mutual legal
assistance from non-recognizing countries as well as the provision of documentcertification services, with 564 such documents processed during the reporting
period. UNMIK also continued to facilitate communications between the Kosovo
authorities and the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its
member States, receiving 15 requests for international wanted notices and
processing two INTERPOL red notices.
21. On 11 August, an international prosecutor from the Special Prosecution Office
of Kosovo filed indictments against Oliver Ivanović, the leader of a Kosovo Serb
political party in northern Kosovo, and four other Kosovo Serbs. Ivanović has been
charged with incitement to commit war crimes in 1999. He is also accused, together
with a second defendant, of incitement to commit the crimes of aggravated murder
and attempted aggravated murder in February 2000. The other three defendants are
accused of the crimes of aggravated murder and attempted aggravated murder in
February 2000.
22. On 31 August, President Jahjaga confirmed the continued mandate of the three
international judges in the Kosovo Constitutional Court, in accordance with her

14-63300

5/18

S/2014/773

exchange of letters with the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, which was endorsed by the Assembly of Kosovo on
23 April 2014.
23. On 18 September, the Kleçkë/Klečka war crimes trial was suspended
following a motion by the defence to disqualify all three judges, including two
EULEX judges, in the light of the new law on EULEX jurisdiction, which requires
that the majority of the panel consist of local judges, except under specific
conditions. On 30 September, the President of the Court of Appeals disqualified
both EULEX panel members, on the grounds of perceived partiality.
24. On 8 October, OSCE released a new biannual report on the activities of the
courts of first instance in Kosovo, for the period from 1 January to 30 June 2014.
The report assesses the compliance of the courts with international fair trial
standards. On the basis of the cases monitored, the report highlights several
significant compliance gaps, including: deficient translation in 61 per cent of cases
involving non-majority community members; 63 per cent of decisions found to be
not fully reasoned, and only 24 per cent of main trials having been recorded as
required by law. On the positive side, the report noted that 74 per cent of hearings
were productive.
25. The European Commission’s 2014 progress report for Kosovo noted some
progress in the judicial sector with regard to Kosovo’s efforts to prioritize cases
involving organized crime and corruption over others and to further improve the
legislative framework. The report also noted the continued cooperation of
authorities in Kosovo with EULEX and improvement in the investigative capacity
of the Kosovo police. However, the report equally expressed the Commission’s
serious concerns regarding the independence, accountability and impartiality of the
Kosovo judiciary. It emphasized the need for more transparent, merit-based
recruitment and evaluation of judges and prosecutors, as well as better
accountability mechanisms that would comply with European Union standards.
Efficiency was also identified as a major concern, in the light of the substantial
backlog of unprocessed cases, and the absence of a clear model for prioritization.
The report also called for more tangible results in fighting organized crime,
corruption, money-laundering and terrorist financing.
26. The main trial in war crime cases against former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army from the “Drenica Group” continued before the panel of EULEX
judges at the Basic Court of Mitrovica. The Drenica Group 1 and Drenica Group 2
trials are also ongoing, involving 15 defendants, and resumed with testimonies of
protected witnesses.
27. UNMIK continued to support and encourage progress on the issue of missing
persons. As of the end of September, a total of 1,690 persons remained listed as
missing from the Kosovo conflict. On 13 October, the repatriation of remains
recovered at a mass grave site in Rudnica, southern Serbia, was completed. The
Department of Forensic Medicine of EULEX received the remains of the last
12 Kosovo Albanians found at that site from the Serbian authorities, while the
remains of three Kosovo Serbs were transferred to the Serbian authorities. In total,
Kosovo received the remains of 52 missing persons, recovered from the Rudnica
site, of whom 48 are awaiting DNA identification at the Pristina morgue, while four
were handed over to their families and buried.

6/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

28. On 16 October, the Interministerial Working Group on Dealing with the Past
and Reconciliation met for the first time in almost 10 months. The meeting followed
the approval by the Kosovo government of the amendment to the decision
establishing the Working Group, its rules of procedure and workplan. During the
meeting, four sub-working groups were established to assist in the design and
adoption of a comprehensive strategy on transitional justice, in line with the four
pillars, focusing on: institutional reform, the right to justice, the right to the truth
and the right to repatriations.

VI. Returns and communities
29. UNMIK continued to monitor Kosovo’s minorities through field visits and
discussions with relevant stakeholders, including on issues affecting the Kosovo
Serb community and the Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities.
UNMIK also continued to cooperate with its international partners on the ground,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Danish Refugee
Council and OSCE.
30. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
registered 177 individual voluntary returnees to Kosovo during July, August and
September 2014, 45 of whom were Kosovo Serbs, 115 Kosovo Roma, Kosovo
Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptians, 3 Kosovo Gorani, 1 Montenegrin and 13 Kosovo
Albanians. On 4 September, a meeting of the Task Force on Durable Solutions for
Internally Displaced Persons and Refugees was held in Pristina. The meeting,
co-chaired by the Ministry of Communities and Returns and UNHCR, brought
together key stakeholders to discuss durable solutions for displaced persons within
and outside of Kosovo.
31. Based on a survey conducted by UNHCR in 2013, as of the end of September,
the total number of internally displaced persons residing within Kosovo was 17,227,
the majority of whom are Kosovo Serbs. 597 internally displaced persons within
Kosovo are still housed in 36 collective centres in Kosovo. UNHCR continued to
provide support to individual community members in obtaining personal
documentation and resolving civil status issues.
32. The Serbian leadership has continuously expressed its concern at the pace of
progress in voluntary returns to Kosovo. In an effort to amplify its efforts in this
direction, the Serbian Government’s Office for Kosovo and Metohija has launched a
new consultative body, including the United Nations and other international and
regional organizations, as well as the Kosovo Minister of Communities and Returns.
The first meeting of the group was held in Belgrade on 13 October. The body is
intended to promote discussion with the full range of stakeholders on improving
outcomes for internally displaced persons from and within Kosovo.
33. In September, a biometric team of the Civil Registration Agency of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Kosovo delivered 260 birth records and 44 identity
cards to Kosovo Roma, Kosovo Ashkali and Kosovo Egyptian internally displaced
persons in Podgorica, Montenegro. The provision of documentation will enable
displaced persons to apply for permanent status in Montenegro.
34. There were signs of possible improvement in the access for minority
communities to employment opportunities in Kosovo’s public institutions. The

14-63300

7/18

S/2014/773

number of minority community members applying for the Kosovo police has
increased, though relatively few of them have so far passed the required
examinations. At the same time, there continue to be delays in the processing of
applications, in many cases owing to the current non-acceptance of certificates and
diplomas issued by educational institutions following the Serbian curriculum.
35. In August, the Ministry of Communities and Returns launched a Kosovo-wide
needs assessment to determine which subsidized transportation routes (primarily
serving isolated communities) would be discontinued. As a result of the assessment,
the Ministry of Infrastructure extended 13 humanitarian bus lines for another year
and closed two such lines.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
36. The Implementation and Monitoring Council resumed its activities during the
period under review. The Council recommended, inter alia, preserving the site of the
unfinished Orthodox Church of Christ the Saviour on the campus of Pristina
University. The site was cleaned and secured by the Ministry of Environment and
Spatial Planning and handed over to the Serbian Orthodox Church in late
September. There has been no progress on the establishment of the council for
protection of the historic village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika Hoča during the reporting
period.
37. On 12 October, the Abbot of Visoki Dečani Monastery reported to KFOR and
Kosovo police that offensive graffiti had been painted on several buildings in the
vicinity of the Monastery. The Kosovo police station commander, relevant police
units, KFOR and the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
attended the scene. The graffiti read: “Islamic State”, “ISIS”, “Caliphate is coming”,
“UÇK” (the Albanian language acronym for the Kosovo Liberation Army) and
“AKSH” (the Albanian language acronym for the Albanian National Army). During
the ensuing investigation, Kosovo police detained three Kosovo Albanian youths for
shouting “UÇK” outside the fence of the Monastery. The following day, similar
provocative messages were sprayed on two service entrances to the Monastery.
These incidents were promptly and strongly condemned by President Jahjaga and
other Pristina central authorities, as well as by the Serbian Government.
38. Inadequate responses to illegal construction in the special protective zone in
the Deçan/Dečani municipality remained a matter of wide concern. Enforcement of
a demolition order from 3 July for two illegal constructions within the special
protective zone is still pending. On 17 September, the Implementation and
Monitoring Council discussed the matter further and recommended, with consent
from the Serbian Orthodox Church, that one of the structures be allowed to remain,
provided no additional construction takes place. On 9 October, the Municipality of
Deçan/Dečani requested support from KFOR for dismantling the other structure. In
early October, another illegal construction (a small warehouse) also appeared in the
special protective zone.
39. In the Pejë/Peć municipality, the cordial and cooperative relationship between
representatives of the Serbian Orthodox Church and local authorities has continued.
On 18 September, the construction of two river dams near the Pejë/Peć Patriarchate
was completed. The project was funded by the Pejë/Peć municipality and will
complement the electricity needs of the Pejë/Peć Patriarchate. A new access road to

8/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

Dević Monastery, which was funded by the European Union, was inaugurated on
23 September.
40. In total, 18 criminal incidents occurred at religious sites in Kosovo, including
11 at Orthodox sites, 6 at Islamic sites and 1 at a Catholic site. Five of the incidents
were assessed as being economically motivated.

VIII. Human rights
41. In July, the Office of Good Governance in the Office of the Prime Minister
presented its annual progress report on the implementation of the Kosovo strategy
and action plan for the rights of children. The report notes that 13.2 per cent of the
total budget for Kosovo in 2013 was allocated for services benefiting children.
Despite an increase in the public expenses allocated to education services in 2013,
to 5 per cent, the amount was still considered insufficient to guarantee the provision
of inclusive education of good quality for all children in Kosovo. According to the
report, a number of other factors have hampered the fulfilment of the objective of
achieving quality and inclusive education, including a lack of institutional
accountability, insufficient implementation of education-related legislation and a
lack of capacity in municipalities and schools.
42. On 30 September, the United Nations Development Programme released the
2014 Human Development Report for Kosovo, on the theme “Migration as a force
for development”. The report examined the impact of various forms of migration on
participation in public life in Kosovo and noted that, according to opinion surveys,
approximately half of young people plan to migrate. It also analysed the factors
contributing to the willingness of Kosovo residents and members of the Kosovo
diaspora to engage in political and social processes in Kosovo. The report concluded
that migration and remittances were not sufficient to encourage sustainable
development and economic growth in the medium and long term and that the design
and implementation of effective public policies remains critical for improving the
investment climate and for laying the foundation for sustained growth.

IX. Observations
43. I am particularly concerned by the protracted political deadlock in Pristina and
its potential negative impact on the progress achieved thus far in strengthening
democratic institutions and processes in Kosovo. I strongly urge all of Kosovo’s
political entities, and especially their leaders, to intensify efforts to build on the
success of the 8 June election and ensure that the current impasse is overcome. This
includes ensuring that the Assembly is constituted and the next government swiftly
formed and fully empowered in order to tackle many pressing issues affecting the
future of all people living in Kosovo. This generation of leaders must continue the
historic process of normalization with Belgrade, reconcile with the past, make use
of the opportunities presented by the stabilization and association talks with the
European Union and continue structural reforms that will allow Kosovo’s economy
and society to grow.
44. I note with appreciation the work of Kosovo police and security bodies to help
address the global problem of violent extremism, in particular their work to inhibit

14-63300

9/18

S/2014/773

participation in foreign conflicts through action as well as legislation. I also wish to
commend the leadership of the Islamic community of Kosovo, as well as other
religious and secular leaders, for dissociating themselves and their communities
from extremism.
45. I congratulate both the Kosovo authorities and the Government of Serbia on
the progress towards a common European future. In this light, I encourage the
earliest resumption of the high-level meetings on normalization of relations,
facilitated by the European Union, and continuation of the courageous path both
parties have wisely chosen in this respect. I also urge all sides to seek ways to
accelerate momentum in this process, regardless of the rhythms of short-term
political challenges.
46. With regard to the protection and respect for religious and cultural heritage
sites, I urge the responsible authorities to redouble efforts to ensure this rich
heritage is safeguarded and respected, to the benefit of all. Proper establishment of a
long-delayed council for protection of the historic village of Hoçë e Madhe/Velika
Hoča would be an important sign of this proactive commitment.
47. The close cooperation between the North Mitrovica municipality and the
Mitrovica North Administrative Office in preparations for the 2015 municipal
budget is commendable, as are the constructive approaches adopted by nearly all
parties during discussions to resolve differences over construction in the ethnically
mixed area of Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani in North Mitrovica.
48. I commend the professionalism and commitment of forensic and other experts
from Serbia, EULEX and Kosovo for the completion of the process of repatriation
of remains recovered at the mass grave in Rudnica. I reiterate my appeal to political
leaders, civil society and individuals to bring forward any relevant information that
may help advance further progress in determining the fate of those still missing
from the time of the conflict.
49. I wish to thank my Special Representative, Farid Zarif, for his leadership, and
all the staff of UNMIK for their work. I further extend my gratitude to our close and
committed partners in Kosovo, including KFOR, OSCE, the European Union and
EULEX and all members of the United Nations family, for the continuing joint
efforts to forge peace, stability and development and for closely cooperating with
UNMIK.

10/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the Secretary-General
on the activities of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo covering the period from 16 July to 15 October 2014
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued to
undertake monitoring, mentoring and advising activities and to implement its
executive functions in line with its mandate as regards the rule of law. Further steps
were taken in the fight against corruption and serious crimes, as three verdicts were
pronounced by EULEX Kosovo judges, including in the case relating to allegations
over the fraudulent handling of socially owned land, where eight judges and two
legal representatives were found guilty of issuing unlawful judicial decisions. In
terms of monitoring, mentoring and advising activities, the Mission advised on a
range of issues, with the aim of enhancing the institutional capacity of local
counterparts, such as concerning developments relating to the election of the Chief
State Prosecutor and the continuing abuse of hospitalization by influential prisoners.
The Mission also observed with concern the lack of a quorum in the Kosovo
Judicial Council. The implementation of the Mission’s mandate in the north
generated accusations from local leaders regarding ongoing criminal investigations.
EULEX met directly with local leaders and reiterated that justice is independent and
that it remained committed to its policy of transparency as regards the north. The
implementation of the agreement on the integrated management of crossing points,
in the framework of the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, saw progress in September, with the agreement on the draft layouts for the
permanent crossing points by both parties. The Mission commemorated the death of
Audrius Šenavičius, a EULEX Customs Officer and Senior Inspector for the
Customs Department in Lithuania, who was killed in the line of duty in northern
Kosovo, in September 2013.
On 9 October, the Political and Security Committee of the European Union
appointed Gabriele Meucci (Italy) as the new EULEX Head of Mission. He officially
took up duties on 15 October, succeeding Bernd Borchardt (Germany), who had been
in the position since 1 February 2013.

2.

EULEX activities, July to October 2014

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 23 July, a EULEX judge in Gjakovë/Đakovica Basic Court ordered
detention on remand against a Kosovo Albanian defendant who was suspected of
having committed war crimes against the civilian population in April 1999. On
13 August, a EULEX forensic doctor at the Department of Forensic Medicine
participated in the autopsy of the suspect, who had been found dead in his cell in
Pejë/Peć Detention Centre a day before. The cause of death is yet to be officially
established.

14-63300

11/18

S/2014/773

On 11 August, a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution
Office filed an indictment against a Kosovo Serb political leader from northern
Kosovo and four others. An initial hearing was held on 26 August in front of a panel
of three EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court, during which all defendants
pleaded not guilty. One of the defendants is accused of incitement to commit war
crimes in April 1999. He is also accused, together with a second defendant, of
incitement to commit aggravated murder and attempted aggravated murder in
February 2000. The other three defendants are accused of aggravated murder and
attempted aggravated murder.
Main developments in combatting organized crime and corruption
On 9 September, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Prizren Basic
Court convicted all 10 defendants in the case relating to offences committed in
2006-2007 concerning land. Eight judges were found guilty of having issued
unlawful judicial decisions concerning socially owned land, so that high-value land
parcels were conveyed to private claimants. This was done despite the fact that such
decisions are within the exclusive competence of the Special Chamber of the
Supreme Court. Two lawyers were convicted of having facilitated the crimes. The
defendants were sentenced to suspended sentences and accessory punishments
prohibiting them from practicing law for the next two to three years. Given the
suspended nature of the sentences, a EULEX prosecutor from the Kosovo Special
Prosecution Office announced an intention to appeal.
Developments also took place in one of the Mission’s major cases concerning
large-scale migrant smuggling into the European Union. On 10 September, a panel
of one local and two EULEX judges at Prizren Basic Court started the PINK 2 trial,
a case against eight defendants, five of whom are not from Kosovo, accused of
organized crime, migrant smuggling and money-laundering. Four other people have
already been tried in two separate trials, in a related case. The case was investigated
jointly by Kosovo and EULEX Police in cooperation with law enforcement
authorities in several European countries, through INTERPOL and the European
Police Office (Europol). The case is prosecuted by a EULEX prosecutor from the
Kosovo Special Prosecution Office.
Other serious crime cases
On 31 July, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pejë/Peć Basic
Court started the trial against a suspect who is charged with, inter alia, aggravated
murder. He was acquitted in 2007, but the Supreme Court returned the case for a
retrial. The suspect was extradited from Sweden earlier this year.
On 11 August, a panel of three EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court started
the second retrial against a suspect who was sentenced to imprisonment for murder
and unauthorized control, possession or use of weapons in 2012 and 2013. Panels of
local judges at the Court of Appeals have twice returned the case for a retrial. The
Basic Court has now been instructed to have forensic and cardiology examinations
carried out.
On 3 September, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at the Supreme
Court rejected a request by the counsel for the defence for protection of legality and
confirmed the verdict of the court of first instance and the Court of Appeals in the
Bllaca 2 case. The five defendants were variously found guilty of aggravated

12/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

murder and attempted aggravated murder and were sentenced to a total of 54 years
imprisonment by the then District Court of Pristina. The Supreme Court ruled that
once an ongoing case is assigned to a majority EULEX panel, it remains with a
majority EULEX panel during proceedings.
On 9 September, a panel of one local and two EULEX judges at Pristina Basic
Court sentenced a defendant to 25 years imprisonment for aggravated murder of his
father-in-law and illegal possession of weapons. Another defendant, charged with
assisting the defendant in committing the offence, was acquitted.
On 23 September, a panel of EULEX judges at Mitrovica Basic Court started
the second retrial in a case where four defendants are charged with, inter alia,
aggravated murder in 2009. Panels of local judges at the Court of Appeals had sent
the case back for retrial in 2012 and 2013.
On 25 September, a panel of two local judges and one EULEX judge at
Gjakovë/Ðakovica Basic Court sentenced a defendant to 20 years imprisonment for
aggravated murder, while another defendant was sentenced to 8 years imprisonment
for assistance in aggravated murder.
Special Investigative Task Force
Established in 2011, the Special Investigative Task Force is examining
allegations made in the December 2010 report by the Special Rapporteur for the
Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Dick
Marty, entitled “Inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in human organs
in Kosovo”. On 29 July, the Lead Prosecutor of the Task Force, John Clint
Williamson, stated in a press conference that the Task Force has found compelling
evidence to file an indictment against certain former senior officials of the Kosovo
Liberation Army responsible for an organized campaign of persecution of minorities
(including unlawful killings, abductions, enforced disappearances, illegal
detentions, sexual violence and forced displacements, desecration and destruction of
churches and other religious sites) and of fellow Kosovo Albanians labelled either
as collaborators with the Serbs or as political opponents of the Kosovo Liberation
Army. During the reporting period, the Task Force has continued its investigative
work into its findings. Victim advocacy groups, injured parties and individuals are
being engaged in order to collect information useful for the case. Investigative and
operational activities are moving forward, and cooperation with judicial and lawenforcement authorities in the region and beyond continues to be fruitful.
On 29 September, the Council of the European Union mandated EULEX to
“support re-located judicial proceedings within a [European Union] Member State,
in order to prosecute and adjudicate criminal charges arising from the investigation
into the allegations raised in a report entitled ‘Inhuman treatment of people and
illicit trafficking in human organs in Kosovo’ released on 12 December 2010 by the
Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights of the
Council of Europe”. Preparations are ongoing to establish an appropriate judicial
mechanism.
Department of Forensic Medicine
EULEX forensic experts at the Department for Forensic Medicine have
continued to conduct field operations in Kosovo and beyond. On 21 August,

14-63300

13/18

S/2014/773

EULEX forensic experts, under the authority of the Office of the Serbian War
Crimes Prosecutor, completed the excavation at a third site in Rudnica, thus
concluding the field operation in Raška, Serbia. All victims are Kosovo Albanian
and have been linked to massacres in three villages in Kosovo. The repatriation of
remains for identification and re-association took place on 22 August, 12 September
and 13 October. The handing over of remains to the respective families started on
19 September.
On 7 October, EULEX forensic experts at the Department for Forensic
Medicine carried out an excavation in the Gjakovë/Đakovica area, following
information that it could be the possible location of a mass gravesite. No remains
were found at the site. On 9 October, EULEX forensic experts also conducted an
excavation in Batajnica, Serbia under the authority of the Office of the Serbian War
Crimes Prosecutor. No remains were found at the site.
Property rights
In the area of civil justice, commissioners of the Kosovo Property Claims
Commission continued their work. During the reporting period, 303 cases (mainly
inter-ethnic property claims) were adjudicated. Out of the total of 42,745 claims
lodged with the Kosovo Property Agency, only 343 are still pending a decision.
From 16 July to 15 October, the Appeals Panel of the Kosovo Property Agency
received 79 new appeals and adjudicated 32 appeals.
During the reporting period, the Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for
matters relating to the Privatization Agency of Kosovo rendered 88 decisions in trial
panel cases. The Special Chamber also closed 376 workers’ list cases and finalized
55 cases at the Appellate Panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
EULEX has been monitoring the implementation of the visa regime for
foreigners since its entry into force on 1 July 2013. Since then, Kosovo Border
Police has issued over 100 visas at the crossing points, mostly at Pristina Airport.
However, the issuing of visas at the crossing points should be granted in exceptional
circumstances only. EULEX has prepared a set of recommendations for Kosovo
Border Police with a view to enhancing the enforcement of the relevant legislation.
At the same time, irregular migration from Kosovo through the Serbia-Hungary
border to the European Union appears to be increasing. Thus, Kosovo Border Police
started to screen more thoroughly the travel plans of young men from Kosovo at
crossing points in order to identify those wishing to travel to the European Union
without the necessary documentation. Travellers are then either convinced to return
or issued with a refusal of exit form. As a refusal of exit form is only applicable to
non-Kosovo residents, EULEX has advised Kosovo Border Police to end this
practice and is working with counterparts to identify appropriate solutions.
As for the Kosovo Correctional Service, the abuse of medical services and
hospitalization by high-profile prisoners continues to be a concern, as also noted in
the European Commission’s 2014 progress report on Kosovo. The Mission
continues to monitor the issue, and it is the matter of an investigation at the Kosovo
Special Prosecution Office. Furthermore, a high number of detained terrorism
suspects, arrested by Kosovo police in operations in August and September, are

14/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

straining the stretched resources of the Correctional Service. EULEX has advised
the Correctional Service on how to ensure the safe and separate detention of the
suspects while limiting overcrowding. However, there is no short-term solution to
the space issue.
In September, the Mission advised senior management of the Correctional
Service on addressing the issue of several recent escapes from semi-open prisons in
Kosovo. Recommendations include risk assessments for prisoners before transfer to
semi-open facilities, an end to transfers of foreign prisoners, in line with European
Union best practice, on account of the high flight risk, and a comprehensive review
of procedures in said facilities. As a consequence, since 24 September, there are no
foreign prisoners in the semi-open facility at Dubrava Correctional Centre.
On 8 July, the Constitutional Court instructed the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council
to repeat the election procedure for the Chief State Prosecutor, owing to a violation of
the right to fair proceedings. Despite having been advised to explore other options to
swiftly address and rectify all the violations of the election procedure, the
Prosecutorial Council decided to repeat the entire selection procedure. Given the
retirement of the former Chief State Prosecutor on 5 August, the Prosecutorial Council
elected an acting Chief State Prosecutor.
Progress was made with regard to the quorum of the Kosovo Prosecutorial
Council, as the Civil Society Representative, a position that had been vacant since
July 2014, was appointed as a full member of the Prosecutorial Council. However,
there has been no quorum at the Kosovo Judicial Council since 31 August. This
development is directly linked to political developments, as the appointment of
international and local members requires the approval of the Assembly. The
appointment of judges, including from non-majority communities, had to be put on
hold.
EULEX assisted in the training of Kosovo Customs staff during a seminar at
Pristina International Airport on “Cash money controls, fighting money-laundering
and the financing of terrorism”. The aim of the seminar was to enhance cooperation
between the airport staff and prosecutors.
On 27 August, a shooting incident between a group of illegal loggers and
members of the Serbian Gendarmerie took place in Serbia, close to MerdarëMerdare crossing point. One Kosovo Albanian, who had sustained gunshot injuries,
was arrested by Serbian Gendarmes on the spot. He was taken to hospital in Serbia.
On 28 August, in the early hours, a second shooting incident between a group of
illegal loggers and Serbian Gendarmerie took place at the same location. One
Gendarmerie officer sustained gunshot injuries and succumbed to his wounds later
in the day while in medical care. Later, the body of a Kosovo Albanian was
discovered near the scene of the incident. EULEX attended the crime scene and
provided advice on coordinated follow-up actions. In September, EULEX supported
Kosovo police north in the operational planning against illegal logging, in close
cooperation with KFOR.
2.3

The north
In northern Kosovo, reactions against the implementation of the Mission’s
executive mandate marked the reporting period. On 20 July, an attempt by Kosovo
police north to serve summonses to the former and current mayors of Zubin Potok,

14-63300

15/18

S/2014/773

upon the order of a EULEX prosecutor, sparked reactions. The initial hearing in the
war crimes case against Oliver Ivanović and four others added to tensions. As part
of such reactions against EULEX, leaflets and graffiti featuring a swastika next to
the EULEX logo appeared in northern Kosovo. The Mission condemned the actions
while both Belgrade and the leaders of the northern municipalities distanced
themselves from the hate messages. However, some inflammatory language used by
northern leaders in connection with the implementation of the Mission’s mandate in
the region persisted.
On 20 August, the Mayor of Mitrovica North, Goran Rakić, convened a meeting
of the northern mayors, municipal speakers and interim council members to discuss
relations with EULEX. The press release that was issued after the meeting accused
EULEX of being an obstacle to the implementation of the 19 April 2013 agreement.
The following week, on 29 August, during a joint session of the municipal assemblies
of the four northern municipalities, participants accused EULEX of acting outside the
scope of its mandate and invited the Mission’s representatives to a dialogue to end the
“arbitrary and unlawful actions of the Mission”.
To counter this negative messaging, the Mission renewed its efforts to reach
out to local actors. Both the Head of Mission and the Deputy Head of Mission held
background briefings for civil society, media, businesses and legal representatives
on EULEX activities. The Deputy Head of Mission is now based in Mitrovica North
on a part-time basis and has held meetings with both the Head of the Serbian
Government’s Office for Kosovo, Marko Djurić, and with a number of local leaders.
In this way, the Mission maintained and developed open channels of communication
with northern representatives, while reiterating that justice is independent. The
Mission’s efforts were supported by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and by the Special Representative of the European Union.
Panels made up only of EULEX judges continued to decide over cases at
Mitrovica Basic Court. In this period, 7 cases were finalized, there are 21 cases
pending main trial and 65 pretrial cases. In July, EULEX handed over security
responsibilities for Mitrovica Basic Court to Kosovo police north.
The quick response team of Kosovo police north is an important element in the
build-up of a fully functional regional command north. The quick response team has
conducted over 10 operations since July 2014 and has also proven to be able to deal
with small and mid-scale crowd and riot control.
EULEX also advised Kosovo police north to set up a community policing
strategy.
On 19 September, EULEX donated 13 vehicles to the Kosovo Correctional
Service, some of which are intended to support the capacities of Mitrovica
Detention Centre.
2.4

Dialogue implementation
On 4 September, the Belgrade and Pristina parties gave their written
agreement on the draft layout of the crossing points, marking an important
milestone in the implementation of the technical protocol in the framework of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing points. On 11 September, a
central level meeting on the agreement was chaired by the Belgrade party. The
topics for discussion included outstanding infrastructure issues at the interim

16/18

14-63300

S/2014/773

crossing points, exchange of customs information and harmonizing of veterinary
certificates in line with European Union standards. The Mission has continued
supervision of revenue collection at the northern crossing points, at which a total of
over €3 million had been collected between December 2013 and October 2014.
In the framework of the freedom of movement agreement, the Belgrade party
agreed to grant the right of passage out of Serbia to travelers holding Kosovo
entry/exit documents at six additional border crossing points. Belgrade’s Nikola
Tesla International Airport started enforcing the agreement on 22 September. The
agreement is scheduled to become functional at the five remaining border crossing
points by 15 November. Discussions on a mutual recognition agreement for car
insurance are ongoing.
In August, Kosovo police retroactively issued the new ranks for the integrated
former Serbian Ministry of Interior officers in northern Kosovo. Eight of them were
appointed to the rank of major and 17 to the rank of lieutenant.
With a view to establishing a reliable civil status system, EULEX continues to
monitor the use of the certified copies of the civil registry books through field visits
to the regions. A consolidated report on the use of the registry books in the Pristina
region was finalized in September, which was based on multiple assessment visits to
the region over the past four months. The overall assessment by the Mission is
positive, with some recommendations to further improve the use of the registry
books. The books were distributed to all offices and sub-offices, with very few
exceptions. While civil status officers use the registry books in their daily work,
conducting official training on existing legislation and establishing internal standard
operating procedures were among the recommendations of EULEX.

3.

Other key issues
On 1 September, EULEX integrated the international staff of the Constitutional
Court. The day before, the Kosovo President confirmed the continued mandate of the
three international judges in the Kosovo Constitutional Court, in accordance with the
exchange of letters between her and the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, as confirmed by the Assembly of Kosovo on
23 April 2014.
On 19 September, EULEX commemorated the death of Audrius Šenavičius,
who was killed in the line of duty in northern Kosovo one year earlier. On
9 October, the Political and Security Committee of the European Union appointed
Gabriele Meucci (Italy) as the new EULEX Head of Mission. He officially took up
duties on 15 October, succeeding Bernd Borchardt (Germany), who had been in the
position since 1 February 2013.
The Mission has completed its reconfiguration process, in line with the
decision of the Council on 12 June to extend its mandate until 14 June 2016 and the
invitation letter from the Kosovo President to the High Representative for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy.

14-63300

17/18

S/2014/773

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2014)

Country

Number

Austria

1

Croatia

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Pakistan

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

9

Composition and strength of the military liaison component
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo
(as at 15 October 2014)

Country

18/18

Number

Czech Republic

2

Poland

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

7

14-63300
