A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/201
13 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (c)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add/3)]

49/201. Human rights in Haiti

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 48/151 of 20 December 1993,
Guided by the principles embodied in the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights 1/ and the International Covenants on Human Rights, 2/ and aware of its responsibility to
promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all,
Reaffirming that all Member States are required to promote and protect human rights and to comply
with the obligations laid down in the various instruments in this field,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1994/80 of 9 March 1994, 3/ in which the
Commission decided to extend for one more year the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, with a view to having
him submit a provisional report on the situation of human rights in Haiti to the General Assembly at its fortyninth session and a final report to the Commission at its fifty-first session,

1/

Resolution 217 A (III).

2/

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

3/ See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1994, Supplement No. 4 and corrigendum
(E/1994/24 and Corr.1), chap. II, sect. A.
95-77203

/...

A/RES/49/201
Page 2

Recognizing the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of American States and the former Special Envoy to re-establish democratic institutions in Haiti,
Welcoming the appointment of the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Haiti,
Recognizing the work carried out by the International Civilian Mission to Haiti, when circumstances
allowed it, for the defence of human rights in Haiti,
Welcoming the re-establishment of the democratic system and the return of the constitutionally elected
President of the Republic of Haiti, Mr. Jean-Bertrand Aristide,
1.
Expresses its satisfaction at the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to Haiti on
15 October 1994 and the re-establishment of constitutional order;
2.
Urges the Haitian authorities to continue to promote full respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, in conformity with the relevant international covenants in the field of human rights;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General, through the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat, to take appropriate steps to ensure financial and
human resources for the urgent establishment, in conjunction with the International Civilian Mission to Haiti, of
a special programme of assistance to the Government and people of Haiti in their efforts to ensure the
observance of human rights;
4.
Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Commission on
Human Rights, Mr. Marco Tulio Bruni-Celli, on the situation of human rights in Haiti 4/ and the
recommendations contained therein;
5.
Commends the cooperation between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the Organization of American States and requests the speedy return to Haiti of all members
of the International Civilian Mission to Haiti, with the task of verifying compliance by Haiti with its international
human rights obligations, namely, to promote respect for the rights of all Haitians and to contribute to the
strengthening of democratic institutions;
6.
Decides to continue its consideration of the situation of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in Haiti at its fiftieth session, on the basis of information provided by the Commission on Human Rights and the
Economic and Social Council.

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

4/

A/49/513, annex.
