VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

and programmes relating to the role of the United
Nations Volunteers programme,
Recognizing the important role of youth in the realization of the purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially those concerning economic and
social progress and development,
Convinced that the active participation of the younger
generation should be an integrated component of the
over-all development process,
Believing that the United Nations must intensify its
efforts to implement practical programmes to assist
younger people to play constructive roles in the development of their societies, including the means of
financing such programmes,
Acknowledging the role in the achievement of national and international development goals that has
been entrusted to the United Nations Volunteers programme and the potential of that programme for the
advancement of the role of youth in development,
l. Considers the United Nations Volunteers programme to be a major operational unit of the United
Nations for the execution of youth programmes, especially of pilot projects to increase the participation of
youth in development activities and training programmes for youth workers, such programmes to be
undertaken only after consultation with the Governments of the recipient countries concerned;
2. Decides to expand the terms of reference of the
Special Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Volunteers to include the receipt of additional contributions
for the purpose of implementing youth programmes
requested by developing countries;
3. Appeals to Governments and all other potential
sources for contributions to the Special Voluntary
Fund for the United Nations Volunteers to help finance
such youth programmes;
4. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme:
(a) To hold joint intersecretariat consultations at
least once every year to discuss the implementation of
the programmes described above on the basis of principles and programme objectives laid down by the
relevant policy-making bodies;
( b) To take whatever administrative action is
necessary within existing resources to implement the
course of action described above with effect from 1
January 1977;
( c) To study the best ways and means of ensuring
the participation, to the fullest extent possible, of
youth and youth organizations in the planning and
implementation of youth programmes launched by the
United Nations Volunteers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a progress
report on the implementation of the present resolution
with recommendations for further action.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/132.

Channels of communication with youth
and youth organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2037 (XX) of 7 December
1965, 2497 (XXIV) of 28 October 1967, 2633 (XXV)

109

of 11 November 1970, 2770 (XXVI) of 22 November
1971, 3022 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972 and 3140
(XXVIII) of 14 December 1973,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on channels of communication with youth and international youth organizations, 59
Convinced that the pre-conditions of effective channels of communication are the promotion of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the existence of practical opportunities for
youth and youth organizations to participate in the
work of the United Nations at the national, regional,
interregional and international levels,
Invites the Economic and Social Council to prepare,
through the Commission for Social Development at its
twenty-fifth session, appropriate recommendations concerning the best channels of communication between
youth and youth organizations and the United Nations
at the national, regional, interregional and international
levels, and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/133.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975, in which it proclaimed the period from 1976
to 1985 United Nations Decade for Women: Equality,
Development and Peace,
Recalling also that it decided at its thirtieth session
that the voluntary fund for the International Women's
Year, established by Economic and Social Council resolution 1850 (LVI) of 16 May 1974, should be extended to cover the period of the Decade, 60
A ware that some countries, particularly the least
developed ones, have limited financial resources for
carrying out their national plans and programmes for
the advancement of women and for the implementation
of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation
of the Objectives of the International Women's Year61
adopted by the World Conference of the International
Women's Year, held at Mexico City from 19 June to
2 July 1975,
Recognizing the necessity for continuing financial
and technical support for these programmes,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the Voluntary Fund for the Decade, 62
I . Adopts the following criteria and arrangements
for the management of the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women:
(a)
Criteria:
The resources of the Fund should be utilized to
supplement activities in the following areas designed to
09 A/10275.

r.o See Official Records of the General Assembly Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034) p. 100 ite{ns 75 and
76.
'
'
r,i Report of
the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.l), chap. II, sect. A.
' 2 E/5773.

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

110

implement the goals of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, priority
being given to the related programmes and projects of
the least developed, land-locked and island countries
among developing countries:
(i) Technical co-operation activities;
(ii) Development and/or strengthening of regional
and international programmes;
(iii) Development and implementation of joint interorganiza tional programmes;
(iv) Research, data collection and analysis, relevant to (i), (ii) and (iii) above;
(v) Communication support and public information activities designed to promote the goals
of the Decade and, in particular, the activities undertaken under ( i) , (ii) and (iii)
above;
(vi) In the selection of projects and programmes,
special consideration should be given to those
which benefit rural women, poor women in
urban areas and other marginal groups of
women, especially the disadvantaged;
( b) Arrangements:
The General Assembly endorses the arrangements
for the future management of the Fund contained in
the annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to consult the
Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme on the use of the Fund for technical co-operation activities;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to select, with due regard to regional distribution, in
the first instance for a period of three years, five Member States, each of which should appoint a representative to serve on the Consultative Committee on the
Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for
Women to advise the Secretary-General on the application to the use of the Fund of the criteria set forth in
paragraph 1 above;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General Assembly on the management of
the Fund.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
ANNEX
Arrangements for the management of the Voluntary Fund
for the United Nations Decade for Women

1. The Secretary-General shall apply the following arrangements for the management of the Voluntary Fund for the
United Nations Decade for Women:

I.

SOLICITATION AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF PLEDGES AND THE
COLLECTION OF CONTRIBUTIONS

2. The Controller, in consultation with the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Economic and Social Affairs and the Assistant
Secretary-General for Social Development and Humanitarian
Affairs, shall determine the responsibility and procedures for
soliciting voluntary contributions to the Fund.
3. Any prospective donor desiring to make a voluntan
contribution to the Fund shall submit a written proposal t;
the Secretary-General; the request for acceptance shouid
contain all relevant information, including the amount of !he
proposed contribution, the currency and the timing of pay-

ments, and may indicate the purposes and any action expected
of the United Nations.
4. The proposal, with the comments, inter alia, of the
Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs and
the Assistant Secretary-General for Social Development and
Humanitarian Affairs, shall be forwarded to the Controller,
who shall determine whether or not any proposed gift or
donation might directly or indirectly involve additional financial
liability for the Organization. Before acceptance of any gift
or donation involving such liability, the Controller shall request
and obtain the approval of the General Assembly through the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions.
5. The Controller shall acknowledge all pledges and shall
determine the bank account or accounts in which contributions
to the Fund should be deposited; he shall be responsible for
collecting contributions and following up on payments of
contributions pledged.
6. The Controller may accept contributions in any national
currency donated for the purpose of the Fund.
IJ.

OPERATIONS AND CONTROL

7. The Controller shall ensure that the operation and
control of the Fund shall be in accordance with the Financial
Regulations and Rules of the United Nations; he may delegate
responsibility for the operation and administration of the Fund
to the heads of departments or offices designated by the
Secretary-General to execute activities financed by the Fund;
only officials so designated may authorize the execution of
specific activities to be financed by the Fund.
8. Subject to the criteria for disbursements from the
Fund endorsed by the General Assembly, the Controller may,
after consultation with the Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, allocate resources of the Fund to a specialized agency
or another t;nited Nations body for the execution of projects
financed by the Fund; in such an event, the administrative
procedures of the executing body would apply, subject to
such provisions for periodic reporting as the Controller may
specify. Before making disbursements for technical co-operation
activities, the Controller should consult the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme.
9. In respect of activities conducted by the United Nations,
requests for allotments of funds shall be submitted to the
Controller by the Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
accompanied by such supporting information as the Controller
may require. After review, allotments to provide for expenditures of the funds received shall be issued by the Director of
the Budget Division, and certifying officers for the Fund shall
be designated by the Controller in accordance with established
procedures.
10. The Controller shall be responsible for the reporting
of all financial transactions concerning the Fund and shall
issue quarterly statements of assets, liabilities and unencumbe,ed Fund balance, income and expenditure.
11. The Fund shall be audited by both the Internal Audit
Service and the Board of Auditors, in accordance with the
Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations.

III.

REPORTING

12. An annual report showing funds available, pledges and
payments received and the expenditures made from the Fund
,hall be prepared by the Controller and submitted to the General Assembly and, as appropriate, to the Commission on the
Status of Women.

*

*

*

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-General 63 that, in accordance with paragraph 3 of the above resolution, he had selected the following
States as members of the Consultative Committee on the
Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade for Women:
63 A/31/477.

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

GERMAN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC, JAMAICA, NIGERIA, PHILIPPINES and UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTIIBRN
IRELAND.

31/134.

Improvement of the status and role of
women in education

The General Assembly,
Recalling that the Declaration on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women emphasizes the need to
take all appropriate measures to ensure to women
equal rights with men in education at all levels,
Recalling further its resolutions 3520 (XXX), 3521
(XXX), 3522 (XXX), 3523 (XXX) and 3524 (XXX)
of 15 December 1975,
Recognizing that the full and complete development
of a country requires the maximum participation of
women on equal terms with men in all fields,
Recognizing also the necessity for women to have
equal rights, opportunities and obligations with men,
particularly in the fields of education and professional
and vocational training, to enable their full participation in the process of development,
Recognizing further the importance of promoting the
education of women and its impact on the rearing of
the young generation,
Noting that, despite the world-wide progress in reducing illiteracy, the illiteracy rate for women far exceeds that of men and, in some cases, continues to rise,
Recognizing the importance of exchange of experience in the elimination of illiteracy and improvement
of the educational standard of women at the national,
regional and international levels,
l. Appeals to all States which have not yet done so
to become parties to the Convention against Discrimination in Education, 1960,64 elaborated by the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, and to the Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958 611 and the Human Resources
Development Convention, 1975,66 elaborated by the International Labour Organisation;
2. Calls upon States to undertake, whenever necessary, in their economic, social and cultural programmes,
specific short-term and long-term measures aimed at
improving the status and role of women in education,
bearing in mind the following:
(a) The provisions of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women;
(b) The provisions of the World Plan of Action
for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year 67 concerning education and
training, particularly with respect to an increase in
literacy and equal access of women at every level of
education, as well as the provisions of the Convention
and Recommendation against Discrimination in Education, 1960 and the appropriate recommendation concerning technical and vocational education of the United
64 United

Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 429, p. 93.
Labour Organisation, Conventions and Recommendations, 1919-1966 (Geneva, 1966), Convention No.
111.
66 International Labour Office, Official Bulletin, vol. LVIII,
1975, Series A, No. 1, Convention No. 142.
67 Report of the World Conference of the International
Women's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1), chap. II, sect. A.
611 International

111

Nations Educational, Social and Cultural Organization,
and the provisions of the Discrimination (Employment
and Occupation) Convention, 1958, the Human Resources Development Convention, 1975 and the appropriate recommendations concerning discrimination
( employment and occupation), employment ( women
with family responsibilities) and human resources development of the International Labour Organisation;
3. Calls upon States, whenever necessary, to undertake all possible measures to eliminate illiteracy among
women, especially during the United Nations Decade
for Women;
4. Calls upon States which have not yet done so
to consider undertaking all appropriate measures:
(a) To introduce free and compulsory education
at the elementary level and, where possible, free education at all levels, including professional, vocational and
technical education, which should be accessible to
women without discrimination;
(b) To promote co-education;
(c) To ensure that men and women have access
on a footing of equality to scholarships and other study
grants when these are provided nationally or are made
available to States under bilateral or multilateral agreements;
5. Recommends that States should introduce measures to expand the exchange of experience on issues
concerning the improvement of the status and role of
women in education, particularly through courses, seminars and symposiums organized at the national, regional
and international levels;
6. Invites Member States, as well as the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the International Labour Organisation and other
organizations of the United Nations system, including
regional commissions, and interested intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations having consultative status with the Economic and Social
Council, to submit to the Secretary-General their observations concerning the improvement of the status
and role of women in education;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration
with the Directors-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the
International Labour Organisation and taking into account the comments and observations received under
paragraph 6 above, to submit to the General Assembly
at its thirty-third session a report on the status and role
of women in education;
8. Decides to consider the report of the SecretaryGeneral at its thirty-third session.
102nd plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/13:i.

International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women

The General Assembly,
Rccallini its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December 1975,

Noting the recommendations made by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 1998 (LX) of
12 May 1976,
