S/2021/815

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 30 September 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8864th meeting of the Security Council, convened
on 23 September 2021 under the item entitled “Maintenance of international peace
and security: climate and security”. The interventions of the briefers and Council
members will be published as an official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8864).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members
for the 8864th meeting, the following delegations and entities submitted written
statements, copies of which are enclosed: Austria, Bangladesh, Chile, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, the European Union, Fiji, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Malta, Morocco, Nauru, the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland and the United
Arab Emirates (annexes 1 to 25).
These statements will be issued as an official document of the Security
Council in accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from
the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and
reference to the document will be made in S/PV.8864.
(Signed) Geraldine Byrne Nason
President of the Security Council

21-13934 (E) 251021 151121

*2113934*

S/2021/815

Annex 1
Statement by the Permanent M ission of Austr ia to the
United Nat ions
We thank Ireland for convening today’s open debate.
Since the Security Council open debate on “Addressing climate-related risks
to international peace and security through mitigation and resilience building”,
held on 23 February 2021, and the written statement submitted by Austria on that
occasion (S/2021/198, annex 23), discussions on this and related topics have taken
place in a number of settings. Moreover, the European Union (EU) is deepening
its own understanding of the matter and strengthening its own capabilities in that
connection. Austria supports the EU statement prepared for today’s open debate
(annex 8).
Since February 2021, the understanding of climate change and the measures
needed to address its negative consequences have been shaped by the contribution of
Working Group I of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to its Sixth
Assessment Report, entitled Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. It is
clear that the international community has been off track in its efforts to implement
the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
The IPCC points to the consequences of emissions, which continue to rise due
to human activities. We can see the effects across the climate system as a whole. As
the IPCC summary states:
“Human-induced climate change is already affecting many weather and
climate extremes in every region across the globe. Evidence of observed
changes in extremes such as heatwaves, heavy precipitation, droughts and
tropical cyclones, and, in particular, their attribution to human influence, has
strengthened since the Fifth Assessment Report.”
With growing stress put on the human environment by climate change, societal
strains will also increase. As paragraph 2 of the concept note for this open debate
(S/2021/782, annex) also points out, “climate change is a vector which increases the
risk of violent conflict in many contexts”. In other words, not only is climate action
urgent, but the Security Council should also intensify its own activities, both to
anticipate and prevent future conflicts as well as to deal with current ones.
Given the importance of the step from early warning to early action, the
Security Council can best fulfil its mandate to maintain international peace and
security and take timely, informed decisions if all actors are kept aware of climaterelated risks, in particular through regular briefings on the security implications of
climate change, in general, and on developing crisis situations.
Information, data and analysis are key for timely action. An integrated
approach to climate and security that fully leverages the entire United Nations
system is needed. That should be accomplished together with other international
and regional organizations that are active in the crisis region concerned in order to
ensure the synergy of the international community.
The climate crisis alone could push millions of people into poverty, particularly
in Africa and Asia. With agriculture badly affected, people are ultimately left
without water to drink and soil to grow food. The situation has become even more
complex with the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. Existing conflicts
have become more protracted. All those factors contribute to a cycle of vulnerability.
Against that backdrop, addressing the humanitarian-development-security
nexus is key if we are to break the conflict cycle. Achieving the Sustainable
2/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Development Goals and finding lasting solutions to ensure human security is
impossible without peace. The aim should be to effectively address the root causes
of conflict before it becomes a crisis. Humanitarian assistance, peacebuilding and
development cooperation that effectively address climate change are all needed.
Also critical are efforts to peacefully resolve conflicts that involve increasingly
scarce resources.
While this open debate focuses on the Security Council, more well-coordinated
efforts by the entire international community will be necessary to achieve peace
and a sustainable future for generations to come. Austria is increasing its national
capacities and efforts relating to peace and mediation. One of our traditional institutes
for mediation is the Austrian Study Centre for Peace and Conflict Resolution. Among
its recent initiatives, the Centre addresses the question of climate and security in
the context of an inclusive dialogue between stakeholders from the south of Libya
and the Tripoli area with the aim of exploring perspectives around water issues and
related conflicts. The project involves the use and training of insider mediators. If
successful, this dialogue initiative will effectively constitute a mediation exercise
that will also enable the implementation of technical measures to ensure a sustainable
supply of drinking water, improve resilience to climate change and prevent further
conflict.
At another level, the Vienna-based United Nations Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO) deals with industrial safety. This important work is directly
related to climate and security because UNIDO enables industrial actors to prevent
climate-related accidents and disasters and to avoid industrial pollution, which has
negative effects on the climate. In that way, UNIDO furthers the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals and the goals and targets of the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change, while simultaneously mitigating climate change as a recognized
vector for conflict.
Similarly, all energy-related activities by the organizations headquartered
at Energy Hub Vienna have a bearing on the global climate and on achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals. At the seventh Vienna Energy Forum, organized
by Austria, UNIDO and the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
from 5 to 7 July 2021 under the motto “Where Action Meets Ambition”, participants
sought to spur ambitious action on energy and climate in the lead-up to the United
Nations Food Systems Summit, the United Nations High-Level Dialogue on Energy,
co-organized by Vienna-based Sustainable Energy for All on 24 September, and the
twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, to be held in November in Glasgow. The Energy Forum is a
regular platform for dialogue and exchange where Austria showcases priority
energy- and climate-related topics of global and regional importance.
In 2021, special attention was given to small island developing States (SIDS), a
particularly vulnerable group of countries. For a long time, the Austrian Development
Agency has been supporting SIDS, as well as UNIDO projects on renewable energy
and energy efficiency, including the establishment of regional networks. Energy
is of geopolitical importance and is an essential engine for driving development.
Addressing climate change also requires an energy transition, which has the potential
to cause disruptions and conflict. We need to deal with that challenge in a cautious,
inclusive manner.
The above-mentioned activities are important elements of a comprehensive,
cooperative approach to peace, climate and security. They contribute to maintaining
peace and security while addressing the climate and sustainable development
challenges of our times. Mutually supportive international cooperation and
diplomacy is needed if we are to achieve our global goals.
21-139343/47

S/2021/815

Annex 2
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, Rabab Fatima
I thank the Ireland presidency for convening today’s high-level open debate
of the Security Council on the “Maintenance of international peace and security:
climate and security”. I also thank the Secretary-General and other briefers for
sharing their insights on this important issue.
This open debate is very timely. We just concluded a closed-door roundtable meeting, convened by the Secretary-General and the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom on the margins of the high-level week of the General Assembly at
its seventy-sixth session. In addition, we are now preparing for a high-level climate
dialogue in October, led by the President of the General Assembly, in order to build
further momentum towards an ambitious outcome to the twenty-sixth Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
in November.
Speaking at the closed-door dialogue, my Prime Minister highlighted the
dire consequences facing climate-vulnerable countries due to the double threat of
the coronavirus disease pandemic and climate-induced disasters. She called for
an ambitious action plan by developed countries for reducing carbon emissions,
fulfilling the $100 billion climate-financing target, fostering technology-transfer
and supporting green recovery, among other things.
The Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, issued in August, predicts that the global temperature will cross the threshold
of 2°C by 2100. That will cause irreversible damage to our planet. As such, climate
change is an existential issue for all of us. It could have security implications by
putting pressure on shared and scarce resources and induce large-scale displacement,
and thus become a source of political instability, tension and conflict.
We recognize the multifaceted risks posed by climate change, yet we feel that
an alarmist approach and the over-securitization of climate-change discourse would
not be helpful because it would divert attention from the essential interlinkages
between climate change and global development.
The nexus between climate change and development is well established.
Agenda 21, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and the Sendai Framework have all recognized those interlinkages.
However, no conclusive evidence-based connection has been established between
climate change and international security. We therefore believe that international
development cooperation is the most effective way to deal with the adverse impacts
of climate change. Big emitters must pursue the rapid mitigation of greenhouse
gases. In addition, we should ensure adequate support — in the form of resources
and technology — to the most vulnerable countries so that they can address these
challenges. Let me share a few specific thoughts in that regard.
First, we see climate change as a risk multiplier that may affect various
dimensions of human security in climate-vulnerable countries. It may create new
risks or exacerbate existing ones by undermining food, water, energy and livelihood
security, for example. It is imperative to create opportunities for alternative
livelihoods and encourage localized solutions to such pressing problems, especially
to prevent or minimize population displacement.
Secondly, we need to consider the impacts of climate change on sustained
livelihoods, population displacement and socioeconomic shocks through the
lens of development and human security. In order to take appropriate action, the
4/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

United Nations must take an evidence-based approach, drawing on national and
subnational sources.
Thirdly, a high number of conflict-affected countries are also climate
vulnerable. As such, peacekeeping operations on the ground must be as climatefriendly as possible. Their operational activities should place the do-no-harm
principle high on their agenda in the context of climate change.
As one of the top troop- and police-contributing countries to the United
Nations, Bangladesh is now leading the Group of Friends for leading on
environmental management in the field, which aims to raise awareness on reducing
the environmental footprint of United Nations peace operations in the field.
However, we see limited scope for peacekeeping operations to contribute
to climate-change issues. The security risks emanating from climate change are
primarily non-traditional in nature, and those can best be tackled by enhancing
global development cooperation.
Fourthly, the impacts of climate change may interact with other drivers of
fragility in a conflict situation to further exacerbate human-security challenges.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), with its mandate for peacebuilding and
sustaining peace, can play a crucial role in such contexts. Prevention at the source
is key, and we recognize the important role that the PBC is playing in supporting
national efforts in that regard.
Finally, it is important to leverage the synergies among peace and development
actors. The twin resolutions on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (General
Assembly resolution 75/201 and Security Council resolution 2558 (2020)) stress the
importance of such a cross-cutting approach. In order to support climate-vulnerable
countries, we must ensure adequate resources for climate action.

21-139345/47

S/2021/815

Annex 3
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
Chile welcomes this opportunity to provide its views on the issue of climate
change and security.
As has been clearly established, climate change and environmental degradation
can aggravate international conflicts and affect peace and stability. Climate
disruption, both through extreme weather events and slow-onset events, represent
clear threats to the livelihoods of communities and can disrupt food security.
As President of the twenty-fifth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Chile led international efforts to
advance the international climate change agenda. That task is becoming increasingly
urgent in the light of the recent evidence provided by science, especially as detailed
in the Sixth Report of Working Group I of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, published in August. In that document, the international community of
scientists provides clear indications that climate change is accelerating in processes
that are unequivocally caused by humans and, in many cases, with consequences
that are irreversible.
Those consequences can also take many different forms, depending on specific
vulnerabilities, such as food insecurity and disruption of agricultural production,
competition for water resources, migration due to sea-level rise and economic
damage due to environmental degradation, among many others.
Given those trends, the impact on security issues is also expected to increase.
Climate change is a multidimensional phenomenon, and its connection with security
is particularly complex and multifaceted. It is therefore important that it be addressed
as a cross-cutting issue that needs to be included across the United Nations agencies.
Chile calls for more ongoing Security Council work in that regard, bearing in
mind that increased resilience and adaptation capacities are critical to preventing dire
situations and possible conflicts. In addition, climate-change considerations should
be integrated across the United Nations system and, in particular, in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping missions.
All those efforts must be consistent with the immediate needs and priorities,
as set by countries, and should be a complement to other processes, such as
discussions under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,
which remains the primary international intergovernmental forum for negotiating
the global response to climate change.
Chile believes that having better data and greater observation is key to
increasing our ability to respond to the climate crisis. That data should be open and
accessible to all decision-making processes at the national level.
In that regard, Chile welcomes the proposal to request the SecretaryGeneral to regularly report on security and climate change, particularly pointing to
knowledge gaps and priorities to strengthen adaptation, with a specific focus on the
most vulnerable regions and groups.
Chile would like to underline its ongoing interest in contributing to that effort,
especially through ambitious targets and national policies that can provide local and
global benefits. Chile was one of the first countries to present a new and enhanced
nationally determined contribution (NDC), which sets out a peak in emissions in
2025 and a budget of emissions for the 2020-2030 period. The trajectory reported
aims at an absolute reduction of emissions of 16 per cent, as compared to the 2016
levels. The new NDC also includes specific goals for adaptation, with specific plans
for the relevant sectors of Chile’s economy.
6/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

The link between security and climate change has been addressed in Chile’s
2017 National Defence Book and 2020 National Defence Policy, developed by the
Ministry of Defence. Both documents include the security and climate connection,
especially through the reduction of available resources, as well as due to mitigation
measures in the use of fossil fuels and access to new technologies.
Likewise, any initiative linking climate change and security must be
implemented with the full participation of all relevant stakeholders.
Finally, it is important to highlight that the risks and security threats connected
with climate processes can vary significantly according to national and regional
circumstances. Different degrees of development can also be conducive to different
approaches, such as those that middle-income countries can take. In that regard,
local partnerships and public-private initiatives should be considered, making use of
local capabilities for more effective policies and conflict-prevention efforts.

21-139347/47

S/2021/815

Annex 4
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic to the
United Nations
The Czech Republic aligns itself with the statements submitted on behalf of
the European Union (annex 8) and the Group of Friends on Climate and Security
(annex 17).
The Czech Republic thanks Ireland for convening this open debate. We highly
appreciate the inclusion of debates related to the implications of climate change for
international peace and security on the regular agenda of the Security Council. The
Council’s close attention to this topic will surely enhance international efforts for
successful climate action.
We echo the call of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security that the United
Nations system needs to further strengthen its capacities in order to minimize the
security risks from climate change. We share the view that efforts must be increased
across the whole United Nations system to address the peace and security aspects of
climate change, including through the prevention and resolution of conflicts. Indeed,
climate change is undoubtedly one of the key security issues for the international
community in the twenty-first century.
We welcome that a number of Security Council resolutions already
acknowledge the link between climate change and a specific conflict. In fragile
and conflict-affected countries in particular, climate security implications can cause
negative feedback loops and slow down, or even hinder, peacebuilding.
Therefore, systematic integration of climate-related security risks into the
work of the Security Council is needed, including in its mandates, strategies and
actions in the areas of peacekeeping, conflict prevention and mediation.
We are convinced that the periodic presentation of a global climate risk
assessment report by the Secretary-General to the Security Council, based on
scientific analysis and predictions and with concrete recommendations for further
action, would be another milestone in the building of a United Nations system that
effectively responds to the security impacts of climate change.
The guidance provided by the Climate Security Mechanism is valuable.
The next step that should follow is the appointment of a United Nations Special
Representative for climate and security, who would help to improve coordination
among United Nations entities.
The upcoming twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP26) will be the most
important climate meeting since the adoption of the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change. Mitigation, adaptation and resilience-building should stay high on its
agenda, as they contribute to reducing risks, including climate-related security risks.
Attention to preparedness and capacity-building in the area of climate and
security, as well as climatology expertise at the local and regional levels in the
framework of development cooperation, is important. We need to enhance our ability
to integrate climate-related security risks into our analysis and involve local partners.
We also need to strengthen the ownership of climate-related risk management and
prevention at the local and regional levels. Local actors and women must be included
in mediation efforts.
Strengthening the resilience of communities and countries against climate
change-induced security risks through adaptation tools and practices constitutes a
crucial part of the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. The Sendai Framework
8/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 is particularly relevant in that context. The
Framework’s recommended approaches are included within the official development
assistance of the Czech Republic. Their implementation enhances the social cohesion
of communities and supports peacebuilding activities on the ground.
The Czech Republic supports global cooperation and action targeting climate
change and its impacts on security. The time is ripe to advance that agenda in the
Security Council and to translate that debate into concrete action, for which the
upcoming COP26 will be an ideal opportunity.

21-139349/47

S/2021/815

Annex 5
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Denmark to the
United Nations
I have the pleasure of submitting this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
I thank Ireland for hosting today’s debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
and Ms. Ilwad Elman for their briefings.
We welcome today’s timely debate on climate and security. Addressing
climate-related security risks is key to sustaining peace and avoiding humanitarian
disasters. We fully support the Security Council’s strengthened focus on the issue.
Today’s open debate presents a great opportunity to discuss how we can move from
talk to action. We need to act now to tackle climate change-related security risks.
The research paints a clear picture. Climate change is a risk multiplier. That is
especially true in fragile States and for vulnerable populations, which already bear
the brunt of the adverse effects of climate change. While fragile States often suffer
the worst consequences, it is incumbent upon us all to counter climate change. That
requires global action and a renewed collective commitment to multilateral solutions.
That is the only way in which we can address complex transnational challenges such
as pandemics and climate change and mitigate their potential impact on conflict and
insecurity. Allow me to share four additional observations.
First, a context-specific analysis will be a key part of the answer as we
move ahead. Climate change affects countries and regions in different ways in
various parts of the world. Changes in rainfall are disrupting food production,
either through drought or flooding. Small island States face an existential threat
of drowning. Societies and regions also differ in their resources, capacities and
readiness to respond to these challenges. It is therefore imperative that we have
a comprehensive understanding of the situation on the ground. There is no onesize-fits-all solution. Strengthened cooperation with civil society, weather services
and regional and subregional actors on climate-sensitive analysis and early-warning
systems are therefore required. In short, we must improve our understanding of the
specific situation on the ground, including through improved climate scenarios for
the medium term and the long term, with the help of partners, to anticipate and
mitigate climate-related security threats.
Secondly, finding solutions to climate-related security risks is complex and
requires a whole-of-society approach. We need to draw on all tools, capacities and
expertise at our disposal. To do so, we need a networked and inclusive multilateralism
in which the entire United Nations family, regional organizations, civil society
organizations and the private sector work together. Climate change must be taken
seriously, and it must be addressed as a security issue. It must also be fully integrated
into the work of United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions on the
ground. The Nordic countries are exploring the possibility of funding climatesecurity advisors to United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions,
which we hope will strengthen the capacity to address climate-related security risks
in such missions, and that that will allow the Security Council and the wider United
Nations family to better understand the implications of climate change on security
and conflict. To this end, we will also continue to support the important work of the
climate security mechanism as well as research carried out on the topic, such as that
being undertaken in the newly established Nordic-Baltic expert network.
Thirdly, to succeed, solutions to tackle climate-related security risks must take
a bottom-up approach. We must engage civil society, women and youth in the process
10/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

of finding and implementing solutions. We know that societies are more resilient
when human rights are respected, protected and fulfilled. Advancing implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda must be a priority. Whether in analysis
or policy frameworks, funding modalities or political negotiations, we should
always strive for approaches and processes that are comprehensive, inclusive and
just. When addressing climate change as a risk multiplier, it is therefore important
for the Security Council to listen to and more deeply engage with civil society, not
least women’s and girls’ organizations. Applying a gender-transformative approach
to climate and security interventions is crucial.
Lastly, but not least, protecting, restoring and sustainably managing the
environment is fundamental. Environmental degradation and biodiversity loss are
important drivers of insecurity and conflict around the world, and rising rates of
degradation and loss are increasingly affecting global peace and security. Moreover,
climate- and nature-related risks to global peace and security overlap and are
mutually reinforcing. As they cannot be fully addressed independently from one
another, solutions are equally interconnected: climate-related security risks can
be reduced by actions to protect, restore and sustainably manage ecosystems that
allow them to keep providing vulnerable populations with food, water and energy,
enabling climate adaptation and disaster-risk reduction.
How we systematically act upon the risks of climate change, biodiversity loss
and environmental degradation today will not only build the resilience of fragile
societies but determine the prospects for peaceful societies and human security for
millions of people in the coming decades. Fragile regions and vulnerable communities
suffer the severest impacts but addressing the problem and finding the solution is
a collective responsibility. It requires cooperation, renewed multilateralism and
solidarity. As we continue to respond to the crises that unfold across the world, this
is our opportunity to build back better and greener for a sustainable, climate resilient
and peaceful future in full support of the Sustainable Development Goals, the Paris
Climate Agreement and the Decade of Action.

21-1393411/47

S/2021/815

Annex 6
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Human Mobility
of the Republic of Ecuador, Mauricio Montalvo Samaniego
[Original: Spanish]
I would first like to highlight Ireland’s work as President of the Security
Council during this month of September, as well as its substantive contributions as a
non-permanent member of the Council since 1 January 2021. I am also grateful for its
convening of today’s open debate on climate and security as part of the peacekeeping
agenda.
As early as 17 years ago, the report of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change, established by then-Secretary-General Kofi Annan, noted
that infectious diseases, environmental degradation and war are mutually reinforcing.
Over the past two decades, the international community has repeatedly found that
the adverse effects of climate change are undermining the ability of all countries to
achieve sustainable development. This fact is all the more worrisome, given the risk
that global warming of 1.5°C may become irreversible.
Desertification and drought, the loss of biodiversity and the rise in sea level
generate such socioeconomic problems as food insecurity, problems in health
systems, unemployment and lack of livelihoods, inter alia. Similarly, the impact on
ecosystems and biodiversity increases the transmission of infectious and zoonotic
diseases. This situation is exacerbated by the illicit trade in wildlife.
Ecuador also recognizes the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of
climate change. The loss of millions of lives, population displacement and the
weakening of the social fabric have a disproportionate impact on women, girls and
the most vulnerable groups. With socioeconomic deterioration and marginalization,
the conditions for the spread of violent extremism and organized crime are amplified.
The density and severity of catastrophes resulting from climate change add
an additional source of security risk. For that reason, Ecuador promotes prevention
and capacity-building as essential components of disaster-risk reduction, in
accordance with the Sendai Framework, together with climate-related early-warning
mechanisms. Adequate financial resources, capacity-building and technology
transfer for developing countries are key.
We recognize that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change is the primary intergovernmental forum with the expertise and capacities
necessary for negotiating the global response to climate change. These discussions
in the Security Council allow for a complementary but valuable approach to climateand-security linkages. In addition to promoting complementarity and synergies within
the United Nations, this approach contributes to national conflict-prevention and
peacebuilding efforts. The conflict-prevention approach promoted by the SecretaryGeneral and the outcome of the 2020 United Nations peacebuilding architecture
review both call for joint efforts by the Security Council and the United Nations as
a whole to include the issue of climate in strategies to strengthen sustainable peace.
Finally, we call for providing peacekeeping operations with technical
capabilities and mandates to assess climate-related security risks, in accordance
with their specific contexts. Should Ecuador be elected as a non-permanent member
of the Security Council for the period 2023-2024, we will continue to support this
agenda and efforts aimed at deepening the analysis of the linkages between climate
and security.

12/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 7
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Egypt to the United Nations
Allow us at the outset to express our appreciation to Ireland, President of the
Security Council for the month of September 2021, for its initiative to hold an open
debate on climate and security in relation to the maintenance of international peace
and security.
We are steadfast in our commitment to addressing challenges posed by climate
change and believe that the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the relevant international conventions, especially the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Paris Agreement, remain the
platforms with the original mandate and constitute the heralds of the solutions that
are needed to address the climate crisis in all its manifestations. Nevertheless, since
climate change should be considered a driver of conflict, affecting the peace and
stability of several regions globally, it is important to address the growing connection
between climate change and security.
Egypt is fully cognizant of the severe impacts that climate change poses for
human livelihood and for our planet. It is worth noting that economic vulnerability
and resource dependency are key elements in the link between climate change and
sustainable livelihoods in developing countries, as well as peace and security. The
impacts of climate change are crystal clear; they are seen in extreme weather events,
water scarcity, rising sea levels, desertification and biodiversity loss.
According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
despite contributing the least to the global emissions, Africa is the continent that is
most affected by climate change. Data have shown that climate change is having a
growing impact on the continent, contributing to food insecurity and stressed water
resources; it even acts as a driver of conflict over resources. Moreover, the situation
has been further aggravated by the complications brought by the coronavirus disease
pandemic.
In this vein, it is worth noting that Egypt is the most heavily populated waterscarce country in the world. Currently, water scarcity affects 2.5 billion people
around the globe, and it is expected that climate change will result in putting half
of the world population under severe water stress by 2050. Moreover, by 2030,
water scarcity could displace 700 million people. These figures are clear proof of
the negative impacts of water scarcity on peace and security, the achievement of
sustainable development and the fulfilment of human rights. In this context, we
eagerly urge the international community to address the needs of the most vulnerable
water-scarce countries and promote transboundary cooperation in accordance with
applicable international law, so as to preserve water for peace and security.
We remain fully committed to the global efforts aimed at addressing the
implications of climate change. We have worked hard on formulating the African
Adaptation Initiative to represent the African contribution to global adaptation efforts.
Also, Egypt and the United Kingdom co-chaired the adaptation and resilience track
of the Climate Action Summit 2019. Moreover, as President of the twenty-seventh
session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change, to be held in 2022, Egypt looks forward to continuing our global
work in reaching concrete outcomes in relation to climate change.
Addressing the adaptation needs of developing countries will enable badly
needed preventive actions against climate risks that will safeguard development
gains. The international community has an important responsibility to bear in
addressing the risks posed by climate change. A main avenue through which the
21-1393413/47

S/2021/815

international community can support addressing related risks is the provision of
sufficient means of implementation support to developing countries. In addition
to being an obligation for developed countries under the UNFCCC, such support
is critical to ensuring that developing countries are able to achieve adaptation and
mitigation. Without international support for means of implementation, including
financial means, threats from climate change, including those related to peace and
security, will continue to multiply.
In conclusion, we would like to stress the urgency of comprehensively
addressing the challenges of climate change, with an approach that aims at its core
to achieve the sustainable development of developing countries while ensuring their
peace, security, stability and prosperity.

14/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 8
Statement by the Head of Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, Olof Skoog
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries the Republic of North
Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We thank the Irish presidency for organizing today’s important and timely
open debate on climate and security.
The EU was one of the first to identify climate change as a security issue.
For more than a decade, we have considered climate change and environmental
degradation to be an existential threat multiplier that needs to be put at the heart of
EU security policy and the global agenda.
A world beyond 2.0°C can hardly be a secure one. As the report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states, with global warming
already at 2.0°C, heat extremes would reach critical tolerance thresholds for health
and agriculture more frequently, contributing to both food and human insecurity.
The more intense rainfall and flooding and the more intense drought that the IPCC
report predicts will accelerate and deepen ongoing or latent vulnerabilities and
instability. These developments could become new conflict drivers, particularly
in areas where they are coupled with demographic challenges, where there will be
heightened competition over scare natural resources and where food systems will
be disrupted. These developments will have severe consequences on the climateand-security nexus, representing different types of challenges to human and State
security and undermining global peace, which underlines the importance of enabling
the Security Council to deal more comprehensively with the interlinkages between
climate change and security.
In the Sahel, we are already seeing how the impacts of climate change can
undermine security and aggravate conflict. In the Lake Chad region, fluctuating
water levels caused by climate change are contributing to serious water scarcity,
food insecurity and resources competition, fuelling grievances and heightening
levels of instability, conflict and terrorism influence in the region.
In Central Asia, climate change has been identified as a potential exacerbating
factor of conflict, due to it influencing water flows into and around the Aral Sea. As
final examples, in Iraq and Afghanistan, rising temperatures and extreme weather are
putting pressure on natural resources and undermining livelihoods, causing tensions
and displacement and opening up opportunities for illegal trade and terrorism.
The Security Council has recognized the climate and security risks and has
mainstreamed the adverse impacts of climate change into country and regional
peacekeeping mandates in the Lake Chad basin, Somalia, Mali, Darfur, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Cyprus and
Iraq. The EU warmly welcomes such inclusions and believes that should be done on
a more structured and systematic basis.
On the EU’s side, under the European Green Deal, we will strive to ensure our
own climate resilience in a shifting geopolitical security landscape. The foreign and
security policy of the EU and its member States will systematically consider climate
and environmental factors and risks. We will also work with partners, including
the United Nations, to develop conflict prevention measures such as early-warning
21-1393415/47

S/2021/815

systems and support relevant international instruments such as the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction.
In the framework of EU-United Nations partnership crisis management and
peace operations, the nexus between security and climate change and environmental
degradation will be addressed as part of the next set of joint EU-United Nations
priorities for 2022-2024, which is to be adopted by the end of the year. Together,
we are planning to foster strategic foresight and situational awareness to better
anticipate, prevent and prepare for the effects of climate change and environmental
degradation on the security environment, as well as to reduce the footprint of our
missions and operations.
The Security Council should continue working on climate and security,
building upon previous debates and the Climate Security Mechanism, towards the
recognition of the link between climate change and security. It should aim to go
beyond the holding of thematic debates to systematically integrating climate-related
security issues, where appropriate, in its resolutions. It should also consider adopting
a resolution on climate change and security, as first initiated by Germany in 2020
and a like-minded group encompassing Belgium, Estonia and France, among others.
To that end, we reiterate the need to work with the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Climate and Security, which Ireland is co-chairing in 2021.
Moreover, in its capacity as a member of the Group of Friends on Climate and
Security, the EU wishes to stress the importance of building capacity in the United
Nations system to address climate-related security risks.
Finally, let us not forget the broader environmental dimension of the issue,
with climate change often exacerbating environmental degradation, water scarcity
and desertification. That is particularly relevant for least developed countries, many
of them in Africa, small island developing States and landlocked developing States,
and for other regions such as the Mediterranean.
The European Union and its member States express their readiness to
contribute further to this important topic.

16/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 9
Statement by the Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum and Prime
Minister and Minister for iTaukei Affairs, Sugar Industry and
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Fiji, Josaia Voreqe Bainimarama
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States member
of the Pacific Islands Forum with a presence here at the United Nations, namely,
Australia, the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau,
Papua New Guinea, Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and my own country, Fiji.
At the outset, let me extend our deep appreciation to the President of the
Security Council and Taoiseach of Ireland, His Excellency Mr. Micheál Martin,
for presiding over this high-level open debate. I also thank Secretary-General
Mr. António Guterres for his briefing, and the members of the Security Council for
ensuring that the dialogue on climate and security continues to remain a part of this
very important organ.
Urgent action on climate change and security is needed to ensure the survival
of the Pacific island peoples that our Forum serves and represents here today. That
was reaffirmed last month in the fifty-first Pacific Islands Forum communiqué of
6 August, in which climate change was recognized by our leaders as the singlegreatest threat facing our Blue Pacific region. We count ourselves among other
regional organizations, including the African Union, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
European Union, in recognizing the grave implications of climate-related security
risks for peace.
While the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic response and recovery
efforts remain the immediate focus across the world, the climate crisis facing
Pacific island countries continues. There is increasing concern from our region that
COVID-19 might be used to delay the immediate and urgent need for ambitious
actions to curb the continual rise in greenhouse-gas emissions, which, according to
the latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, could result in
irreversible changes in the Earth’s climate system.
What that means for our Blue Pacific continent, which is home to many
populations living on atolls and low-lying coastlines barely a few metres above
sea level, is that climate change impacts present the single-greatest security threat
to our very survival as peoples, communities and nations. I cannot stress enough
that time is of the essence, with climate change being the ultimate threat multiplier,
aggravating already fragile situations and potentially contributing to further social
tensions and upheaval.
To promote durable and sustainable development, human security and peace,
we must address and act on the interaction of climate change with socioeconomic,
political and demographic factors. A failure to do so will come at a high cost,
particularly for our island-dwelling peoples, whose livelihoods, security and wellbeing are at risk.
Our Pacific leaders are leading the way in that context. We are defining the
collective future we want for our children through the development of our 2050
Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent. That collective vision will put climate
change at the centre of our development plans, and together we will take ownership
of, and collectively respond to, the pressing challenges ahead.
Our leaders also endorsed the 2018 Boe Declaration on Regional Security,
which promotes an expanded concept of security, elevating climate security as the
21-1393417/47

S/2021/815

greatest single threat to security for the peoples of our region. We appreciate the
recognition of that important Declaration for our region and its alignment with the
Security Council’s recent discussion on maritime security (see S/2021/722).
Our efforts have been further elevated through the recently endorsed declaration
on preserving maritime zones in the face of climate change-related sea-level rise of
6 August. That declaration recognizes that, in order to promote a peaceful, secure
and sustainable future for our region, our maritime zones, as established and notified
to the Secretary-General in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, and the rights and entitlements that flow from them shall continue to
apply without reduction, notwithstanding any physical changes connected to climate
change-related sea-level rise. We also welcome the work of the International Law
Commission on sea-level rise in relation to international law.
Those endeavours, while crucial for our security, do not alter the fact that
Pacific island nations are facing a crisis that can be averted if we come together as a
global community to generate urgent action. We cannot leave our collective future to
chance by turning a blind eye to the catastrophic climate events taking place around
the globe, with the most recent — Hurricane Ida — impacting the very place where
the United Nations Headquarters stands as a symbol for world peace and security
and where this organ meets.
The Security Council has a central role to play in mainstreaming the security
dimensions of climate change within the United Nations and in facilitating action to
mitigate climate-related instability before it leads to conflict. We believe that to be in
alignment with the spirit of preventive security enshrined in Article 1, paragraph 1,
of the Charter of the United Nations.
We welcome the Security Council’s recognition of the women and peace
and security agenda as a cross-cutting subject and further emphasize the gendered
nature of climate-related security risks, which affect women, girls and the most
vulnerable disproportionately.
We also recognize the work of the inter-agency Climate Security Mechanism
and the Group of Friends on Climate and Security, which continues to grow and now
counts 59 members from around the world, including 12 members of the Pacific
Islands Forum. We join other Member States and civil society actors in calling for the
United Nations response to be coordinated by a newly appointed special rapporteur
on climate and security.
The Security Council can — and should — add its weight to calls to ensure
that all efforts towards a just and lasting peace are in line with the goals of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. While climate mitigation remains the most
effective way to reduce climate impacts, more investment is also needed to ensure
that vulnerable States can effectively adapt to the impacts of climate change that are
already occurring. Building resilience, disaster risk reduction and adaptive capacity
allows countries to better cope with climate-related events before they become
security challenges.
Finally, we call on the global community to uphold, with a united voice, the
goals of the Paris Agreement. The Katowice Rulebook must be finalized at the
twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. The Paris Agreement is not just a political tool. We cannot
overstate the urgency of taking the actions necessary to make net-zero emissions
achievable by all countries in order to keep the 1.5°C temperature goal of the Paris
Agreement within reach and to protect the collective peace and security and wellbeing of present and future generations.

18/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 10
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Indonesia to
the United Nations, Mohammad Kurniadi Koba
I wish to express my appreciation to Ireland for convening today’s meeting, as
well as thank the Secretary-General and all the briefers for their briefings.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has been one of the most devastating events
for our planet. At the same time, the threat of climate change remains unabated with
increasing urgency and presents the greatest challenge of this century.
While we are still coping with the pandemic, extreme weather events have
compounded the challenges we face, affecting our resilience and creating conditions
that could further escalate conflicts. We have witnessed rainfall lead to deadly
flooding, while others are enduring water scarcity and suffering from fires due to
extreme drought and a prolonged dry season.
We should not ignore those warnings. It befalls on us all to respond within our
common yet differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. On that note,
allow me to highlight the following points.
First, the linkage between climate change and security risks is highly contextspecific. The recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
entitled Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis, elaborated at length how
the impact of climate change is wide-ranging and projects varied challenges across
regions and countries. While climate change was never the sole driver of conflict,
we have been observing cases in which it has multiplied existing risks and insecurity
that could further escalate conflict situations.
That linkage depends on many other factors, including the availability
of resources and the capacity to adapt, which varies from one conflict area to
another. Therefore, the Security Council needs to devise its response accordingly
through informed analysis that takes into account local contexts and up-to-date
climate information.
Secondly, we need concrete applicable actions. While raising awareness through
Security Council meetings is important, Indonesia believes that the Council needs
to take concrete, applicable actions to respond to the emerging threat. The Council’s
efforts need to go beyond injecting climate-related lexicons in outcome documents.
Indonesia firmly believes that we need to start by addressing the needs
of impacted local communities, especially with regard to the increased risk
of intercommunal violence in resource-scarce areas. That could be done by
strengthening community engagement through peacekeeping missions. Moreover,
we need to enhance the capacity of affected countries to adapt and mitigate the
impact of climate-related security risks.
The Climate Security Mechanism has also been established to provide an
assessment of climate-related security risks and their management strategy. All
stakeholders need to enhance their support for the Mechanism.
Thirdly, we need coordinated actions. The solution to climate change needs
to be rooted in a multilateral approach, with the full and impartial implementation
of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, including support for its means of
implementation. The Security Council must contribute to its success. The Council’s
work in that area needs to be mutually reinforcing, while avoiding any duplications
within the existing stream of work on climate in the United Nations system.
21-1393419/47

S/2021/815

To that end, Indonesia calls for continued cooperation and synergy within the
United Nations system, including United Nations peacekeeping missions and country
teams on the ground, as well as national Governments and regional organizations.
The ultimate goal is to support stability and build resilience in countries and regions
that face increasing climate-related security risks.

20/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 11
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
I would like to begin by making a reference to the former Secretary-General,
who said,
“Climate change is one of the most complex, multifaceted and serious
threats the world faces. The response to this threat is fundamentally linked
to pressing concerns of sustainable development and global fairness ... of
economy, poverty reduction and society” (A/62/511, annex I, para. 1).
Accordingly, we share the view that climate change is essentially an issue
related to sustainable development rather than a matter of international peace
and security, since the direct correlation between climate change and security
has not been proved. Therefore, the negative impacts of climate change must be
addressed in a proper, holistic, coordinated and action-oriented manner based on a
multilateral approach.
In practice, to date the international community has made significant efforts
at the global level aimed at addressing climate-related challenges.
Such efforts have led to the development of landmark international legally
binding instruments, namely, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The Convention is
therefore the primary international mechanism for dealing with climate-related risks.
Addressing the risks and challenges posed by climate change should be
considered a collective responsibility, and, accordingly, all States must fully fulfil
their respective obligations under that Convention.
We strongly call for the strict observance of the principle of the common
but differentiated responsibility of States, according to which, while all States
must cooperate in the spirit of global partnership to address the adverse impacts
of climate change, developed countries, owing to their substantial contributions to
climate change and the technologies and financial resources they command, have
greater responsibility in addressing such challenges.
The developed countries must therefore fully implement all their respective
obligations under the Convention. They must take the lead in reducing greenhousegas emissions and provide adequate, predictable and timely support, including in the
area of finance, technology transfers and capacity-building to developing countries.
Similarly, while developing countries must also fulfil their respective
commitments, of course commensurate with their capabilities and national
development circumstances, the international community must assist developing
countries by removing all obstacles to the effective implementation of the
commitments of developing States.
In that context, unilateral sanctions are among the main barriers that seriously
impede the capabilities of a number of developing countries such as Iran to positively
contribute to addressing climate-change challenges.
Despite those pressing challenges, the Islamic Republic of Iran has taken
the measures necessary to face the challenges posed by climate change and has
developed plans and programmes to move towards a low-carbon economy.
Nevertheless, the unilateral sanctions imposed on Iran primarily by the
United States have not only prevented our access to necessary financial resources
and technological means but have also adversely affected the effective use of our
21-1393421/47

S/2021/815

national capacities to carry out our respective undertakings. Such unlawful and
inhumane sanctions, which are in flagrant violation of international law, must come
to an immediate end.
Despite existing differences among States on certain aspects of climate
change, there is a clear-cut consensus at the international level that new and climatefriendly technologies can play a significant role in mitigating the risks associated
with the challenge.
However, owing to a host of barriers, the transfer of climate-friendly
technologies to developing countries is far short of what is needed. That alarming
trend is inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations, one of which, according
to Article 1, paragraph 3, of its Charter, is
“To achieve international cooperation in solving international problems
of an economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character”.
Accordingly, we call for removing all barriers to and the facilitating of the
transfer of climate-friendly technologies, including knowledge and operating skills,
to developing countries.
We also support the arguments that climate-related issues must be considered
in their own relevant forums, namely, the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the UNFCCC.
Yet given that the Security Council obviously lacks the requisite expertise or
tools to effectively respond to possible climate-related security risks, its engagement
in such issues, which, due to their socioeconomic nature, do not fall within the
mandate of the Council, also constitutes an encroachment on the prerogatives of
other principal organs of the Organization. That is in contradiction with the spirit of
the Charter and must therefore be avoided.
Instead of placing climate-change security risks on the agenda of the Council,
we must call for the full and effective implementation of the relevant commitments
by all, particularly developed States, in a responsible manner, and allow the relevant
platforms to continue considering and properly addressing issues related to climate
change. For its part, Iran stands ready to contribute to related efforts in such forums.

22/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 12
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations, Ishikane Kimihiro
I welcome today’s open debate on climate and security organized by the Irish
presidency during the high-level week of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth
session, less than 40 days before the opening of the long-awaited twenty-sixth session
of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change in Glasgow. I also thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Climate change has multidimensional negative impacts on the survival,
livelihoods and dignity of peoples. Water scarcity, drought, desertification, land
degradation and food insecurity are affecting people severely in the Sahel and other
arid regions. Sea-level rise and the erosion of coastlines pose an existential threat
to small island developing States (SIDS) and their people. While the victims of
hurricanes, torrential rains, and heat waves are everywhere, the most devastating
and widespread impacts on human security are imposed on the most vulnerable
people and communities.
The linkage between climate change and conflict is certainly indirect.
However, there is no doubt that human insecurity, exacerbated by the impacts of
climate change, becomes a multiplier of risk, not only in terms of humanitarian
crises but also peace and security, particularly in conflict-prone areas. Japan
therefore joins Ireland in recognizing climate change as a vector that increases the
risk of violent conflict.
As we place people at the centre of our security paradigm, climate change is
undoubtedly one of the priority issues for the maintenance of peace and security.
However, whether or not the Security Council, the principal organ in that area,
can effectively engage in efforts to mitigate climate change or adapt to its negative
impacts is another issue. Beyond raising public awareness about the climate-related
risks of violent conflict, is there a clear role the Security Council could and should
play? Should the issue of climate-related security risks be dealt with separately from
other drivers of conflict, including various socioeconomic root causes, in the context
of peacekeeping operations, conflict prevention or mediation?
The answers to those questions need thorough consideration. But one thing
is clear: climate change is linked to violent conflict through its impact on human
security; that is to say, on the survival, livelihoods and dignity of people. It is vital
that the international community focus on people when analysing the impacts
of climate change on conflict. By placing people at the centre of our response to
climate-related security risks, it becomes evident that United Nations system should
break silos and respond in a comprehensive and seamless manner, building on the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus.
Japan remains steadfast in addressing climate change and contributing to
maintaining international peace and security. In such efforts, Japan places great
importance on carrying out immediate actions to enhance resilience to the negative
impacts of climate change and to build institutional capacities to strengthen the
national ownership of countries facing climate-related challenges.
Japan has been supporting the efforts of African countries to strengthen climate
resilience through the processes of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD). We support projects for sustainable forest management,
integrated water resource management and measures to fight desertification and
enhance agricultural productivity under the African Initiative for Combating
Desertification to Strengthen Resilience to Climate Change in the Sahel and the Horn
21-1393423/47

S/2021/815

of Africa, launched at TICAD VI in Nairobi in 2016. In addition, Japan supports the
African countries’ efforts at institution-building under the New Approach for Peace
and Stability in Africa, launched at TICAD VII in Yokohama in 2019, in order to
overcome vulnerabilities while addressing the root causes of conflicts.
Climate-related risks go beyond borders, and therefore regional cooperation
is indispensable. Japan has promoted such regional cooperation through the
Japan-Caribbean Community framework and the Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting
(PALM). At PALM 9, co-chaired by the Prime Ministers of Japan and Tuvalu in July
2021, leaders affirmed their commitment to cooperating closely in strengthening
resilience against disasters. In June 2021, Japan announced that it would provide
climate finance, both public and private, totalling approximately $60 billion over the
next five years from 2021 to 2025 and that it would further enhance its assistance
for adaptation.
In closing, Japan believes that the United Nations is the primary player for
deepening international cooperation for action against climate-related risks. Japan
will be an active partner in that endeavour.

24/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 13
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Latvia to the United Nations
Latvia thanks the Irish presidency of the Security Council for having organized
this important open debate at this crucial time for increasing climate ambition and
commitment to action.
Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the European Union
(annex 8).
Unequivocally, climate change is one of the most critical global challenges
that the world faces today, with profound consequences for international peace and
security. For many countries, particularly least developed countries and small island
developing States, it is an existential threat. It is important that the Security Council
fully embrace that reality and ensure that the impact of climate change is considered
in a cross-cutting manner in the Council’s work and the activities it mandates.
Extreme weather and the climate events of 2021 have provided many
reminders of the fact that climate change is already a reality on the ground in many
parts of the world. The recent reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, the World Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Chance show that climate change is human-induced and
that its resolution therefore also depends on human action. Success of our actions
depends on multilateral cooperation; only by working together can we overcome this
global challenge.
To limit the threat of climate change to international security, an ambitious
and urgent climate action is needed. Latvia is committed to reaching the collective
European Union emission reduction target of at least 55 per cent by 2030 and
achieving climate neutrality by 2050. Latvia encourages all countries to commit
to more ambitious climate targets in their new and updated nationally determined
contributions before the twenty-sixth session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
However, some climate-change impacts are already locked in, and further
uncertainties remain. Urgent attention must be paid to climate adaptation measures.
The adaptation agenda at the national and international levels can be part of the
peacebuilding process and the conflict-prevention agenda, especially in applying
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus approach. Strengthening preparedness
and adaptation can help communities in contexts of fragility to manage the threat
multiplier effect of climate change. Building awareness and adapting lives and
livelihoods to the realities of a warming climate can strengthen their overall resilience.
Latvia believes that it is important for all United Nations actors that operate in
such environments to work jointly and seek integrated solutions. The Security Council
can promote that through its mandates for peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities.
We welcome the fact that climate aspects are already included in the
mandates of several United Nations peacekeeping missions, including the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, in which Latvia
participates. Equally, it is important to continue comprehensive efforts to implement
the environment strategy of the United Nations Department of Field Support, which
has set out goals in five areas to reduce the environmental footprint of United Nations
field activities by 2023.
While regional tensions and conflicts stem from diverging interests and
perceptions, the adverse effects of climate change can actually offer opportunities for
building a common understanding and consensus in the light of a common challenge.
The climate angle should not be left out of peacebuilding and mediation activities.
21-1393425/47

S/2021/815

Latvia therefore welcomes the call by the Secretary-General in his report
entitled “Our Common Agenda” to consider an expansion of the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) by focusing also on cross-cutting issues such as
climate change. We stand ready to contribute to those deliberations as a member of
the PBC in 2022.

26/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 14
Statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Education and Sport
of Liechtenstein, Dominique Hasler
Thank you, Mr. President, for bringing the key systemic security issue of our
time to our attention today. Over the course of multiple open debates on the nexus
of climate change and security, Member States have increasingly acknowledged the
fact that climate change is not only an aggravating factor and a threat multiplier
for conflict but itself a cause of mass insecurity. Addressing this issue in a humancentred manner is thus a prerequisite if the Council is to fulfil its mandate to maintain
peace and security.
As laid out in this year’s Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, it is increasingly likely that the next 20 years will see
the world reach 1.5°C of warming — a threshold deemed the point of no return
during the Paris negotiations and a frightening portent for our fragile world. It is
clear that climate impacts such as life-threatening heatwaves, dwindling water
resources and the extinction of species and fisheries increase existing violent
conflict and involuntary migration, poverty and social tensions. Many States fear
the major disasters caused by extreme weather events, of which global warming has
dramatically increased the probability, or sea-level rise, which according to current
projections is likely to inundate entire territories within our lifetimes.
Those impacts demonstrate how climate change is not just an intensifying
factor but the most significant threat to our common security itself. Accordingly, the
Council’s engagement on climate and security would be significantly strengthened
by moving beyond a “hard security” paradigm framed in terms of causes of and
solutions to armed conflict. Attempts to restrict the Council’s work in this way would
result in a myopic focus on militarized causes of and solutions to conflict, instead
of sustainable and comprehensive conflict prevention and resolution. Instead, the
Council should embrace a human security paradigm, which allows for a perspective
in which climate change itself is a cause of insecurity.
Liechtenstein continues to advocate for a Security Council resolution on climate
and security as a standalone topic and that establishes a reporting mechanism. In its
day-to-day work, it is crucial that the Council include more systematic references
to the impact of global warming in country situations, in particular those outside
the African continent. In doing so, the Council should draw from the wide range
of expertise across the United Nations system, including the important innovation
of the Informal Expert Group of Members of the Security Council on Climate and
Security as well as the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs-United
Nations Development Programme-United Nations Environment Programme Climate
Security Mechanism, and ensure regular briefings on the climate and security nexus.
According to our common but differentiated responsibility, all States,
collectively and individually, must significantly increase their ambitions and
follow through with implementation. Council members, of course, have a special
responsibility in that regard given the mandate conferred on them by the General
Assembly to uphold peace and security. When climate change is itself the security
threat, that implies an additional impetus for Council members to curb their
emissions. For our part, Liechtenstein recognizes the need to improve adaptation
measures and take early action to reduce vulnerability to the massive effects of
climate change. Liechtenstein contributes to those efforts through the provision
of climate finance of approximately SwF 2.5 million per year to climate-related
projects in developing countries.

21-1393427/47

S/2021/815

Annex 15

Statement by the Permanent Mission of Malta to the United Nations
Malta thanks Ireland for having organized this timely discussion on climaterelated risks in peacekeeping, conflict mediation and conflict prevention.
Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union (EU) (annex 8) and by Germany on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate
and Security (annex 17) and would like to make some additional remarks in its
national capacity.
Climate change is the most serious existential threat facing our planet. As we
continue to battle a pandemic and instability across the globe, climate action cannot
wait for us to find the right time to deal with it, when all our global crises are over.
Unless climate action responds to what science is urging us to do to avoid irreparable
harm, the anthropogenic increase in greenhouse-gas emissions will inevitably
intensify global security threats, with dire physical and economic consequences. The
latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change confirms what is
already widely recognized: climate change has direct and indirect implications for
international security and stability.
The effects of climate change on global and regional security are already being
felt in several parts of the world. In the Mediterranean region, that will result in
numerous challenges, including water shortages, food insecurity and sea-level rise,
as well as destabilization and increased vulnerability, exacerbated by unpreparedness
for the global shift away from fossil fuels.
We welcome the increased focus on the security implications of climate
change at the international level, particularly within the United Nations. As a State
member of the EU, Malta is pleased that the EU has set an example by leading in
terms of climate ambition.
We consider it important for the United Nations to adopt a comprehensive
approach to climate action, including through the international community’s efforts
towards the maintenance of international peace and security. The Security Council
has a central role to play in that regard.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts take place in challenging
environments, and climate change further exacerbates the existing problems in those
scenarios. An interdisciplinary approach to peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts
needs to include climate change as an integral part of the strategy towards supporting
recovery in the short and medium term, and ensuring stability and resilience in
the longer term, especially in view of the required preparedness adaptation to
climate change.
We need to aim to advance peace and tackle climate-related security risks
through comprehensive, multidimensional security and peace-oriented approaches.
The creation of the Climate Security Mechanism is an important development in
that respect, and we call for a more integrated approach across all bodies of the
United Nations, including the Security Council. To ensure lasting peace and
stability, we must incorporate climate considerations into the actions mandated by
the Security Council.
Malta is appreciative of the work undertaken by several members of the
Council, including efforts spearheaded by Ireland and the Niger as co-Chairs of the
Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security.
As an island State, we are very much aware of the threat that climate change
poses, and for that reason we will put the spotlight on climate and security issues
if entrusted to serve on the Council in 2023-2024. The time is ripe to intensify our
work to better understand the nexus between climate change and security.

28/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 16
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Morocco to the United Nations
[Original: French]
Morocco thanks Ireland for having organized this high-level public debate
in the Security Council on the crucial issue of climate and security. This debate is
the perfect opportunity to deliver our messages to the United Nations and to the
world in order to raise awareness of the security consequences of climate change
and to remind people that climate change is not only a question of environmental
and economic policy but also a major challenge for international peace and security.
Morocco joins the declaration of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security,
in which we recall that the Security Council has a particularly central role to play in
terms of that nexus. We believe that the Security Council should consider the link
between climate and security in its decisions before conflicts erupt or escalate. The
issue of climate migrants is also important and must be taken into account in a more
sustained manner, as the worsening effects of climate change throughout the world
could push more than 216 million migrants to relocate by 2050 owing to drought,
poor harvests, rising sea levels and worsening desertification.
Morocco attaches particular importance to climate action at the national,
African and international levels. Nationally, Morocco has adopted an ambitious policy
to combat climate change and develop renewable energy sources. Morocco revised
its voluntary national contribution on 22 June, aiming to reduce its greenhouse-gas
emissions by 45.5 per cent, and set itself the objective of meeting 52 per cent of its
energy needs from renewable sources by 2030.
However, the African continent, to which Morocco belongs, is being unduly
and disproportionately penalized by the consequences of global warming, to which
it barely contributes. A low emitter of greenhouse gases with less than 4 per cent of
global emissions, Africa is unfairly suffering the drastic effects of climate change.
That situation should be of concern to the whole world.
Based on that observation, Morocco is fully committed to continuing the
momentum that began at the first African Action Summit, held in Marrakech on
the side-lines of the twenty-second session of the Conference of the Parties to the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, in favour of continental
co-emergence and focused on ambitious, concrete transnational projects.
As such, and in accordance with the very high instructions of His Majesty
King Mohammed VI, Morocco provides significant financial and technical support,
within the framework of South-South cooperation, for the operationalization of
the Congo Basin Climate Commission, chaired by the Republic of the Congo; the
Climate Commission for the Sahel region, chaired by the Republic of the Niger; and
the Island States Climate Commission, chaired by the Republic of Seychelles.
Morocco welcomes the commitment made by international partners during
the first Conference of Heads of State and Government of the Climate Commission
for the Sahel Region, held in Niamey in February 2019, to provide approximately
$3.41 billion in financing for the implementation of the Commission’s regional
priority programme. That is an important step that should continue to provide the
Commission with the support needed to carry out the Climate Investment Plan in
its entirety.
Moreover, the Kingdom of Morocco, as a founding partner country, and
especially as a supportive African member of the region, is firmly committed to
supporting the actions of the Sahel Commission by undertaking the feasibility studies
21-1393429/47

S/2021/815

to finalize its Climate Investment Plan. With a view to supporting the Republic of
the Niger in order to strengthen climate action in the Sahel region, a memorandum
of understanding between the Climate Change Competence Center and the Climate
Commission for the Sahel Region was signed in October 2020 in Rabat.
Climate change is a risk multiplier. It occurs particularly in regions that are
already fragile and threatens the stability of States and societies. Seemingly stable
regions can also face climate change-related turbulence.
In Africa, disruptions in water availability are a driver of internal climate
migration. They drive people out of coastal and inland regions where water is scarce
and into urban centres that are often ill-prepared to accommodate additional migrants.
In that regard, climate adaptation measures are very important for climatesensitive sectors, including agriculture, given its importance to livelihoods and
employment in Africa. It is in that spirit that Morocco has launched the Adaptation of
African Agriculture initiative and the African Initiative on Sustainability, Stability
and Security, which aim to reduce the vulnerability of Africa and its agriculture to
climate change. The objective is to place the adaptation of African agriculture at
the heart of climate debates and negotiations and to channel a substantial share of
climate funds to the continent.
Lastly, Morocco calls on the international community to start planning today
for orderly and well-managed climate migration. Since the adoption of the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, States have been called upon
to strengthen their efforts to maximize the overall benefits of migration, while
mitigating its risks and challenges for individuals and communities in countries of
origin, transit and destination.

30/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 17
Statement on behalf of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security
It is my distinct honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the Group
of Friends on Climate and Security, a broad and diverse group of now almost
60 countries and the European Union from all regions of the world. We are delighted
that our membership continues to grow as more countries are showing interest in
joining our ranks, evidence that the wider United Nations membership takes a very
keen interest in the issue before the Security Council today. The common concern of
the members of the Group of Friends is the threat posed by climate change to peace
and security, to stability and prosperity, to the effective enjoyment of human rights
and, in some cases, possibly even to the existence of States.
Let me thank Ireland, as President of the Security Council, for convening this
very important open debate on one of the most pressing challenges of today. It could
not be timely.
As Secretary-General Guterres rightly pointed out: climate change is one of
the defining security issues of our time. After decades of inaction and delay, many
dangerous impacts are now unavoidable. In small island developing States and other
climate-vulnerable regions of the world — such as the Sahel, the Horn of Africa and
the Caribbean — many of those effects have already arrived. More intense and more
frequent extreme weather events, sea level rise, droughts and ocean acidification and
salinization are already contributing to greater food and water insecurity, economic
volatility, societal stress, human displacement and migration around the world. That
is especially evident in vulnerable countries and regions, particularly those that are
often least responsible for climate change. But no country is immune. Developed
countries have suffered unprecedented floods, heat waves, drought, desertification
and fires in recent months, and will continue to do so.
The cover of The Economist in July read “No Safe Place”, in reference to a
world shaped by the devastating impact of climate change. We have a narrow window
of opportunity to prevent the worst impacts, but we must significantly strengthen our
efforts to address the root causes. It is critical that we all raise our ambition to limit
global warming to 1.5°C, scale up adaptation action and climate financing and make
sure that the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, to be held in Glasgow, is the success it needs to be
to avoid a future where there is truly no safe place. The Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change recently made it crystal clear: if the international community fails
to make rapid and immediate cuts to greenhouse-gas emissions, there is a greater
than 90 per cent chance that global warming will surpass 1.5 °C within the next two
decades, and further changes in temperature will only increase the likelihood of
extreme events such as heavy rainfall, droughts and wildfires.
Limiting global warming is crucial, but it is only part of the challenge before
us. The climate is already changing, and we can no longer completely prevent all of
the negative effects of climate change from occurring. But we can, and indeed we
must, do more to prevent the unavoidable effects of climate change from contributing
to the destabilization of countries and entire regions, which risks leading to new
armed conflicts or worsening existing conflicts.
A laissez-faire approach will not be enough to address the security implications
of climate change. Building climate-resilient systems that support peace and stability
urgently requires a much more concerted international effort. The Group of Friends
on Climate and Security was formed to support such efforts.
The entire United Nations system must address this challenge in all relevant
forums and within all relevant mandates. The United Nations is already doing
21-1393431/47

S/2021/815

important work on climate and security. The Climate Security Mechanism is one
laudable example of inter-agency cooperation, strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations system to analyse and address the adverse impacts of climate change
on peace and security. We encourage all Member States to continue to support and
engage with the Climate Security Mechanism. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
call for an increased focus on the effects climate change has on peace and security
in his recent report entitled Our Common Agenda.
The Security Council has a critical role to play given its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security, the agenda item framing
today’s debate. Far too much time has passed since the last, and to date only, Security
Council product explicitly on climate and security — the statement by the President
of the Security Council S/PRST/2011/15 — which was issued more than 10 years
ago. Nevertheless, we welcome the acceleration of tangible progress we see in the
Security Council’s work on this important issue. We acknowledge and welcome
the Council’s recognition of the need to integrate the effects of climate change in
peacekeeping and special political mission mandates in West Africa and the Sahel,
Somalia, Mali, the Sudan, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, South Sudan, Cyprus and Iraq. Those are all steps in the right direction,
but more needs to be done to ensure a more a structured and systematic approach to
addressing the impacts of climate change on peace and security.
The Informal Expert Group of Members of the Security Council on Climate
and Security has grown into a useful forum for improving our understanding of
complex country situations, thereby better informing its work and decisions. The
Group of Friends has been calling on the Security Council to create the necessary
tools to enable the United Nations to do its part in preventing and resolving conflicts
that are, at least in part, driven by the effects of climate change, as many of today’s
conflicts are and more of tomorrow’s will be.
Once more we are calling for concrete, tangible actions to be considered: regular
reporting by the Secretary-General on the security implications of climate change;
the appointment of a Special Representative for climate and security who could
improve the United Nations ability to address climate-related security risks; climaterelated early-warning systems, conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding;
adequate consideration of climate risks in mandates of all relevant peacekeeping
and special political missions; enhanced capacity through mandated training for all
relevant United Nations personnel to analyse and address the implications of climate
change on peace and security and humanitarian crises; and strengthened cooperation
with civil society and other regional and national actors, including national weather
services and regional climate centres, on climate-related security risks to ensure the
United Nations work can benefit from profound local expertise.
Those proposals have been put forward repeatedly in the Security Council.
Last year, a group of Security Council members translated them into a draft
resolution. A thematic resolution would provide the framework needed to translate
those proposals into action. The Group of Friends would very much welcome the
Council’s consideration of such an ambitious draft resolution.
The need for action by the United Nations in general and by the Security
Council in particular has only become more urgent since the Council last discussed
this issue in February (see S/2021/198). The evidence is clear: climate change is
a threat to international peace and security. No nation can face it alone. We must
act now, and we must act together. We must act as one throughout the entire
United Nations system. That means that the Security Council must live up to its
primary responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations to address threats
to international peace and security and, in that context, threats that climate change
poses and will increasingly pose.
32/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 18
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Netherlands to
the United Nations, Yoka Brandt
We would like to start off by thanking the Republic of Ireland for organizing
today’s debate on an issue that features so prominently in many interventions at the
General Assembly Hall this week.
Like you, the Kingdom of the Netherlands sees an important role for the
Security Council in addressing climate-related security risks more effectively and
systematically. In fact, it is why we made this topic a priority during our Security
Council term in 2018.
As the Secretary-General rightfully mentioned in his speech this week to the
General Assembly (see A/76/PV.3), the most recent report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change is a “code red for humanity". The effects of climate change
are unprecedented. The consequences of climate change are manifold and affect us
all, although not in an equal manner. Yet again, the most vulnerable are most at risk.
The impact of climate change on the lives and livelihoods of people and
communities worldwide is increasingly one of the root causes of conflict and
instability. Urgent action is therefore needed to reduce climate-related security risks.
In order to prevent conflict, we need to predict, prepare and peacefully
manage disputes that may arise as a consequence of climate change. That is why the
Kingdom of the Netherlands believes we need to integrate climate considerations
in the work of the United Nations on peace and security every step of the way. We
would like to highlight three points that are vital in doing so.
First, we need to integrate climate-related security risks in the United Nations
conflict-prevention strategy and early-warning tools. Early-warning systems are
vital for effective conflict prevention. To that end, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has launched the Water, Peace and Security Partnership. The Partnership pioneers
the development of innovative tools that signal potential water-related security risks.
Those tools can pinpoint changes in short-term water availability and provisionally
assess their potential impacts on society. Based on that information, evidence-based
actions can be triggered to prevent or mitigate human security risks.
Secondly, we need to mainstream climate change in the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture. In that regard, we welcome the increased attention by
the Peacebuilding Commission, of which we are a member, and the Peacebuilding
Fund, the work of the Climate Security Mechanism of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, the United Nations Environment Programme and the
United Nations Development Programme.
Countries where the United Nations implements peacebuilding activities are
often located in areas that are highly exposed to climate change. As a systemic risk
factor, climate-related security risks to both peacebuilding and peacekeeping efforts
deserve further scrutiny.
And finally, we need to enhance training for United Nations personnel
deployed in the various United Nations peacekeeping operations and special political
missions around the world. United Nations personnel need to be adequately trained
and informed about all aspects of security-related challenges, including climaterelated risks.
Synthesized existing knowledge should be used to inform training and improve
the capacity of United Nations personnel to respond to climate-related security risks.
21-1393433/47

S/2021/815

It is up to the Security Council to maintain peace and security. It is therefore
incumbent on the Council to call for appropriate action when stability is at risk, as
well as in the case of climate-related risks.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands would therefore welcome a draft resolution
on the matter containing those three points. We stand ready to work with you and
would like to thank you for your leadership in this regard.

34/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 19
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Poland to the United Nations
Poland commends Ireland for convening this timely debate. As one of the
founding members of the United Nations Group of Friends on Climate and Security,
Poland aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the Group (annex 17)
and with the statement of the European Union (annex 8).
Climate change is one of the biggest challenges we face. We need strong
multilateral commitment to make the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change a success story.
Cutting emissions in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and
Katowice Rulebook is essential. We would like to see all major economies update
their nationally determined contributions this year to match the current level of the
European Union’s ambition.
Climate change and environmental degradation increasingly influence the
peace and security landscape. Climate insecurity often overlaps with an increase
in poverty and social disparities. The scarcity of food, water and other natural
resources forces people to migrate, undermining the stability of whole regions.
Our understanding of complex interactions between climate, food and conflict is
improving, allowing us to better anticipate changes. We need to deliver innovative
and cross-cutting approaches to ensure that stabilization and peace efforts are
climate-sensitive.
Poland is positive that climate and security challenges should be addressed
within the work of the Security Council and in all efforts aimed at sustaining peace.
We underline the key role of the Peacebuilding Commission in advising the Security
Council on that matter.
We cannot overestimate the role of peacekeeping in integrating climate and
security considerations into conflict prevention and resolution. United Nations
missions and operations contribute significantly to assessing and managing climaterelated security risks. In that spirit, Poland welcomes the progress made by addressing
climate change in many specific mandates, notably by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, where the first United Nations Environmental Security Adviser
has been appointed. We reiterate our support for following that practice in other
United Nations missions and operations, where relevant.
It is pivotal to mainstream climate and security considerations in risk
assessment, conflict analysis, early warning and strategic foresight. Tailored training
for all relevant United Nations personnel, including peacekeepers, is key in that
regard, along with adequate tools to conduct climate risk assessments and deliver
operational responses.
Peacekeeping missions more and more often will have to operate in
environments affected by climate change. We must address the vulnerabilities
resulting from dependence on energy resources, especially for critical infrastructure.
Energy efficiency and energy autonomy will be key to making missions more
resilient. Without prejudice to their operational needs, we should also limit the
footprint of United Nations missions and operations to make them more sustainable.
We also need to enhance coordination among all relevant peacebuilding actors
in the field and systematically use climate data to inform early peacebuilding decisions.
As climate security risks vary depending on a specific country or region,
Poland underscores the crucial role of partnerships between the United Nations and
other organizations, as well as regional organizations, in tackling those challenges.
21-1393435/47

S/2021/815

We also underline the interlinkages among climate and security and the
women and peace and security agenda. Women tend to be disproportionally affected
by climate change. Therefore, adaptation initiatives must take their situation, needs
and perspectives into account.
Poland strongly supports the work of the Climate Security Mechanism and
the Informal Expert Group of Members of the Security Council on Climate and
Security. We must take decisive action to further operationalize the climate and
security agenda. The latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
leaves no doubt: we are running out of time, and there is already no going back from
some changes affecting the climate.

36/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 20
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Portugal to the
United Nations, Francisco Duarte Lopes
Portugal aligns itself with the statements submitted both by the European
Union (annex 8) and by the Group of Friends on Climate and Security (annex 17). In
our national capacity, we would like to add the following points:
The Security Council has the primary responsibility for ensuring international
peace and security. As the impact of climate change is becoming increasingly felt
around the world, we welcome the Council’s stance on the implications of weatherrelated events on security.
Higher sea levels, more severe floods, longer periods of drought and increasing
scarcity of resources are already taking a heavy toll in a variety of countries and
societies, but most evidently in Africa and in small island developing States. Those
phenomena are at the root of growing inequality, migration, increase in water stress
and biodiversity degradation, tensions among increasingly vulnerable populations
and more widespread recruitment by terrorist organizations.
The Security Council and the United Nations system as a whole still need
to assume a more direct role in addressing those risks, namely, by designing
peacebuilding efforts with a view to strengthening the national resilience and capacity
of the countries concerned to adapt to climate change’s adverse impacts. One of
the means to achieve that is continuing to mandate United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions to assess climate-related security risks and
devise appropriate responses, including conflict prevention tools, and to take into
account climate risks across United Nations early-warning and planning processes.
The Secretary-General has called for a people-centred approach to this issue.
That is important because the consequences of climate change do not affect everyone
in an equal manner. The disparities are not only apparent among countries and
societies, but also within them, along socioeconomic, age and gender lines.
Consequently, the influence of climate change on security should be considered
throughout the Council’s horizontal agendas. The information gathered and shared
by the Climate Security Mechanism across the United Nations system is crucial to
that end.
Women are disproportionately harmed by climate change. For that reason,
not only must the United Nations policies be aimed at bringing that disparity to an
end, but also the participation of women in sustaining and maintaining peace should
be strengthened. More could be done to identify and strengthen the interlinkages
between the women and peace and security and the climate and security agendas.
It is also unequivocal that today’s children and youth will bear the brunt of
the costs of not properly tackling climate change’s effects. They should therefore be
included in these discussions, both when it comes to appraising the links between
security and climate and when devising the necessary steps to address them.
Tackling the adverse impact of climate change on international security
will demand a broad and innovative perspective, both by individual countries and,
perhaps more important, by the United Nations system as a whole. Given its historical
role and concrete responsibilities, the Security Council must take a decisive lead in
that effort.

21-1393437/47

S/2021/815

Annex 21
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, we express our sincere appreciation to Ireland for its initiative to
hold this important meeting. We particularly appreciate that it is being presided over
by the Taoiseach of Ireland. We take this opportunity to commend the commitment of
the Security Council to devoting important space on its agenda and its deliberations
to the impacts of climate change on peace and security. We would also be remiss if
we did not thank His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and the briefers for their comprehensive and valuable statements.
Qatar is delighted to take part in this meeting, which addresses an important
subject that is a top priority for the entire international community. Many are
becoming increasingly concerned about the challenges posed by worsening weather
events, climate change and natural disasters, and the threat they pose to peace and
security.
Those challenges, which we are all witnessing, presage a dangerous future
that threatens the survival of human beings and the planet. The situation has been
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has placed burdens on
national health systems around the world and on the global economy. That only
underscores the urgent need to marshal efforts and take urgent and earnest action.
We must show greater political will to reverse this trend, which is an obstacle to
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
The State of Qatar has taken numerous measures at the national level to
address the threat posed by climate change. It is proud that it has not hesitated for
one moment to play its role as an active partner in the international community to
address the effects of climate change, in keeping with its belief in the importance of
multilateral international action. Allow me to recall a major milestone for Qatar in
that regard, which occurred in 2012 when it hosted and took and active part in the
eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change.
Small island developing States and least developed countries are uniquely
vulnerable to the challenges associated with climate change. At the United Nations
Climate Action Summit held in September 2019, His Highness the Amir of Qatar
announced that Qatar would contribute $100 million to help build the capacities of
such States. The Qatar Fund for Development is also making efforts to mobilize
support to address climate change and promote green growth in such countries.
Qatar is committed to collaborating with its strategic partners to help those countries
develop flexible strategies and programmes to deal with climate change.
We are pleased to say that Qatar recently announced its nationally determined
contributions. They give a clear and transparent picture of the approach and actions
taken, which reflect our ambitious goals for adapting to and mitigating climate change.
Qatar is also proud that it will be hosting the fifth United Nations Conference
on Least Developed Countries from 23 to 27 January 2022. The conference will
produce the Doha work programme. Addressing climate change and mitigating its
impacts will be a major item on the agenda and will undoubtedly be among the
most prominent issues taken up at the conference. We look forward to the vital
opportunity the conference will provide to highlight innovative plans and solutions
for combating climate change.
38/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Allow us to conclude by saying that, in keeping with our awareness of the
gravity of the challenges and the underlying cause of instability posed by climate
change, the State of Qatar will spare no effort to continue to work with all partners
and build strong partnerships to address this threat and ensure international peace
and security.

21-1393439/47

S/2021/815

Annex 22
Statement by the Permanent M ission of Slovenia to the
United Nat ions
Slovenia would like to commend the Irish presidency for deciding to include
climate change and security on the agenda of this meeting.
Climate change is a security challenge and a threat multiplier. According to
the latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, it represents a
catastrophic danger. We are to expect extreme heat waves, droughts, flooding and
the key temperature limit of 1.5°C being broken in just over a decade.
The blueprints for action are in the Paris Agreement on Climate. We should
work together to forge a new and more ambitious international consensus around a
climate-conscious future at the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. In Glasgow, there will be no
time to fail.
The climate emergency is a grave and increasing danger to stability and peace.
A failure to consider the risks will undermine the efforts at conflict prevention and
peacebuilding and place vulnerable countries and social groups in a vicious cycle
of conflict and deprivation. Climate change should be integrated into security and
defence planning. In order to undertake this task successfully, we need expertise
and capacity-building. We need strong interplay within the triple humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus.
Climate change already is taking a toll across the globe. Allow me to bring
to the Council’s attention a dire situation in Madagascar, where, due to the worst
drought in four decades, more than 1 million people are being exposed to food
insecurity. The famine in Madagascar is the first in modern history to be caused
solely by global warming.
Slovenia pays particular attention to the linkage among human rights, climate
change and environmental degradation. We believe that human rights must be placed
at the centre of any measures to tackle the environmental crisis. Therefore, during
the current session of the Human Rights Council, Slovenia — together with other
like-minded countries — will submit a draft resolution on the right to a safe, clean,
healthy and sustainable environment. That will be a step towards global recognition
of the right to a healthy environment.
Climate change represents an entry point for engagement in preventing crises
and sustaining peace. The Security Council should address the issue in a proactive
manner. In doing so, the United Nations should recognize that one of the most critical
consequences of climate change is water scarcity. The United Nations system should
improve its understanding of the climate-water-peace nexus and increase its capacity
to leverage climate and water for peace, including by enhancing the work of the
Climate Security Mechanism on water and peace.
It is in our collective interests to shape the global hydropolitics agenda. In
practice, that means promoting multi-stakeholder and cross-sectoral transboundary
water cooperation and applying principles on the protection of water sources and
installations in conflict situations.
In experiencing first-hand that water can be an instrument of peace, Slovenia
places water diplomacy and the water and peace nexus at the forefront of its foreign
policy. In order to promote this topic further, Slovenia co-founded the Group of
Friends on Water and Peace, which it is currently chairing, under the aegis of the
Geneva Water Hub.
40/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Annex 23
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
Spain aligns itself with the statement submitted by the Permanent Mission of
the Federal Republic of Germany to the United Nations on behalf of the Group of
Friends on Climate and Security, of which it is a member (annex 17).
The relationship between climate change and security continues to be the
subject of intense debate both within United Nations entities and in the multilateral
system as a whole. At the recent Security Council meeting last February on the issue
(see S/2021/198), it was apparent that every State does not similarly view the urgent
need to address the challenges related to climate change as a threat to international
security. Spain’s position on this issue is clear and unequivocal. The impact of global
warming is leading to the loss of human lives and economic resources, together
with its impact on population displacement and social destabilization. There is clear
scientific evidence to that effect. Added to that is the vicious circle in which armed
conflicts, environmental degradation and humanitarian emergencies mutually
reinforce one another.
In various reports on the protection of civilians in conflict situations, the
Secretary-General has stated that those factors have a negative impact on health
and the environment, consequently increasing the loss of biodiversity, the excessive
exploitation of resources and environmental degradation. The destruction of
infrastructure exacerbates the effects of pollution and greenhouse-gas emissions.
It is therefore a humanitarian imperative to include environmental protection in
the mandates of peacekeeping missions as well as in negotiations, mediation and
conflict resolution processes.
We have all witnessed the floods, droughts, heatwaves and fires that have
struck our countries this year and the limited ability of all our Governments to react
to prevent the loss of human and economic life. Far from being sporadic, such climatic
phenomena will occur with greater frequency, as confirmed by the first instalment
of the sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
which was just published, and which Secretary-General Guterres described today
before the Council as a “code red for humanity”. Spain fully shares his assessment
and concerns.
Humankind is facing a triple crisis of unprecedented global dimensions, with
the combination of climate change and the accelerated rate in the loss of biodiversity
and environmental degradation caused by pollution. Environmental protection and
conflict resolution are directly related to one another and must be addressed together
in our efforts to ensure international peace and security.
The increasing vulnerability of the most disadvantaged populations and
inequalities in access to health and well-being, which has been highlighted by
the coronavirus disease pandemic, act as multipliers of conflicts and tensions at
all levels. Competition for increasingly scarce resources, food insecurity and the
deterioration of health-care infrastructure act as multipliers of intracommunital
tensions at the local and regional levels, making conflicts increasingly complex and
difficult to resolve.
As the strategic report of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding
Affairs rightly points out, 60 per cent of the conflicts in the past decade have been
recurrent, and traditional negotiation mechanisms are becoming increasingly less
effective in such situations.
21-1393441/47

S/2021/815

Spain is particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, especially
desertification. Not only have we undertaken meeting the goal of climate neutrality,
but we have also adopted ambitious domestic legislation to that end to uphold our
commitments. Our second national climate change adaptation plan, which was
recently adopted, includes the peace and security dimension and cross-border
cooperation, and our national security strategy addresses climate impacts. Finally,
one of the four pillars of our new foreign action strategy is building a more resilient
and greener planet.
As it is aware that global warming and environmental degradation have a
negative impact on people’s security, especially in situations of armed conflict, Spain
has also introduced the climate and environmental dimension across its diplomatic,
humanitarian and cooperation policy.
The combination of climate and health crises are also seriously compromising
food security and access to drinking water for millions of people in especially
vulnerable situations. Spain has therefore joined the Sanitation and Water for All
partnership, as it is aware of the importance that access to drinking water has in
relation to hygiene, especially for women. In addition, we must not forget that climate
action entails imperatively focusing on the gender dimension and the empowerment
of women. The women and peace and security agenda must also incorporate the
climate dimension, which, so far, it has failed to do sufficiently.
As part of the effort to realize concrete and operational commitments, our
Permanent Mission to the United Nations has dedicated the annual retreat at the
Greentree Foundation to be held June to international humanitarian law and the
protection of the environment in conflict situations. In order ensure the continuity of
the process, Spain has already begun preparations for a seminar on the environment,
peace and security to be held before the end of the year and which will promote
greater cooperation among institutions, experts and international organizations in
the areas of mediation, humanitarian action and rallying the scientific community
in order to identify more effective methodologies to take action based on the link
between conflict and the environment.
At the recent Security Council open debate on climate and security,
environmental activist David Attenborough delivered a clear message about the
impact that the collapse of the ecosystems that sustain life on our planet would
have on collective security. The interrelationship between all forms of life and
their natural environments is what ensures the renewability of drinking water, food
production chains and habitable natural environments.
At the twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change, which will take place in a few weeks, countries will
have to show our citizens that we are capable of meeting the global challenges and
making sufficiently ambitious commitments to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions
in order to prevent a maximum rise of 1.5°C in global temperature by 2040. All
countries must urgently act and address a problem caused by human activity.
Moreover, it will be necessary to incorporate environmental issues more
effectively into the peace and security pillar and conflict resolution processes. Spain
advocates that all such elements be reflected in a new thematic Security Council draft
resolution specifically addressing the challenges they pose in the area of climate and
security. Such a step would be in line with progress in various other forums. The
International Committee of the Red Cross, for example, published new rules for the
protection of the environment in armed conflict in 2020, and the European Union
included the environment as one of the priorities in its December 2020 concept note
on mediation.
42/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

As for Spain, we will stand ready to promote effective initiatives that reinforce
the positive effect of combined action on climate change and conflict resolution in
order to build a reinvigorated and more effective multilateral system.
Spain senses that there is an emerging international consensus in that regard,
which is gaining in intensity and scope. Important steps have been taken. The
establishment of the Informal Expert Group on Climate and Security within the
Security Council, the Climate Security Mechanism and the Group of Friends is a
good example. But we can also develop additional operational mechanisms to turn
those principles into specific initiatives.
We cannot waste any time in addressing the challenges posed by climate
change. It does not only pose a threat to the future of humankind, but to our lives in
the here and now, as evidenced by the increase in the number of natural disasters.
Much remains to be done, and the cost of failing to act will become increasingly high.

21-1393443/47

S/2021/815

Annex 24
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Switzerland to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
Switzerland thanks Ireland for convening this open debate and thanks the
speakers for their contributions.
The Secretary-General recalled that humankind faces a stark and urgent
choice between progress and a greener future in his presentation of Our Common
Agenda. He stressed once again the serious level of instability and climate chaos
pose an existential threat to us. The consequences of climate change for international
peace and security are profound.
As an active member of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security,
Switzerland would like to highlight three areas of action that require increased
engagement by the Security Council.
First, climate risks should be adequately and more systematically integrated
into the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations. The Council recently
recognized the negative effects of climate change on peace and security in West
Africa and the Sahel. With regard to future mandate renewals, such as the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic, we call on the Council to provide peace missions with the mandate
to analyse and report on the climate risks in their areas of deployment, the measures
already taken and the possible improvements that could be made. Such risks should
also be taken into account in the context of missions’ transitions and withdrawals.
Switzerland would welcome a priority component of the Peacebuilding Fund
dedicated to climate risks in order to support such efforts.
Secondly, climate change represents a risk factor in terms of conflicts today,
and it will be even more acute in that regard in the future. The Charter of the United
Nations confers upon the Security Council the task of addressing risks and threats
to international peace and security. In carrying out its mandate, the Council will
have to make best use of the resources available within the United Nations system.
Data collection, climate scenarios and early-warning systems are already being used
successfully. It is important to share such knowledge and promote synergies. The
Council could benefit more from the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Collaboration with academia and civil society is also imperative. Together with
various partners, including members of the Security Council, Switzerland has
supported the use of digital technology to visualize the links between climate change
and violence in West Africa. A similar analysis for East Africa will be made available
soon. For every situation on its agenda, the Council will have to base its action on
scientific data. The project has also highlighted the importance of partnerships with
regional organizations and local expertise.
Thirdly, our shared challenge is also providing opportunities. The Freetown/
Blue Peace Initiative, launched by Switzerland, is an example of how the joint
management of shared water resources can reduce tensions and help stabilize
relations among various States and stakeholders. Several programmes have been
implemented in the Middle East, Central Asia and West Africa. The thread linking
climate risks, security and conflict prevention through cooperation is also the focus
of a training course offered by the Geneva Centre for Security Policy, hosted by
Switzerland, for public and private sector actors. The Security Council’s support
for preventive diplomacy through special political missions is inspired by the same
approach and has great potential for development.
44/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

Prevention entails climate action. The twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in
Glasgow, will push us to ramp up our joint efforts towards meeting the goals of the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change. Limiting global warming to 1.5°C must be our
priority. As a candidate as a non-permanent member in the Security Council for the
term from 2023 to 2024, Switzerland will also continue its commitment to mitigate
the consequences of climate change on peace and security.

21-1393445/47

S/2021/815

Annex 25
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Emirates
to the United Nations
The United Arab Emirates would like to congratulate the Republic of Ireland
on its presidency of the Security Council and for bringing this important matter to
the attention of the Council.
Every year, intensifying droughts, hurricanes, floods and other climateinduced disasters and strains degrade food and water availability, shelter, human
health and ultimately the safety of hundreds of millions of people across the globe,
with disproportionate impacts on women and girls. Those worsening trends increase
migration, resource competition and societal stress, especially in vulnerable regions.
The United Arab Emirates welcomes and strongly supports the growing international
consensus that climate change is a contributing factor to conflict and instability. It
is crucial for the Security Council to play its part in addressing the climate-security
nexus and act to manage the impacts on global stability and security. Climate is
not always a determinative factor in the crises and situations on the Council’s
agenda, but it must be consistently considered by the Council to ensure that we are
not underresponding.
As a member of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security, the
United Arab Emirates aligns itself with the statement submitted by Germany on
behalf of the Group (annex 17) at this open debate and would like to make some
additional recommendations.
First, the Security Council needs to develop institutional mechanisms to
enable early warnings and translate them into timely actions. For example, the
deployment of climate security advisers, as we have seen recently in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, can be an effective way to credibly analyse
climate impacts and promote coordination and integration across the mission and
the United Nations country team to address them. Some of the same analytical
experience might also be found in United Nations country teams. The United
Nations humanitarian system has developed reliable tools for predicting climatelinked disasters, providing an opportunity for the Council to be briefed earlier and
consider its options. We encourage the Council to seek lessons learned from those
mechanisms and consider them when discussing issues on its agenda, as appropriate.
Secondly, effective action on climate security needs a gender-responsive
approach. The disproportionate impact of climate change on women and girls
requires their active role in decision-making and consultation around responses to
climate threats, as well as systematic analysis of gender when the United Nations
and its partners consider climate security issues. That is crucial to building
sustainable peace in climate-vulnerable regions. Ensuring women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in all aspects of conflict resolution, from de-escalation to
reconstruction, remains a key priority for the United Arab Emirates.
Thirdly, United Nations peace operations should systematically integrate
sustainability considerations into how they operate in order to avoid harm to host
communities as well to avoid contributing to global climate change. The United
Arab Emirates strongly supports the United Nations commitment to shifting to 80
per cent renewable energy use by 2030. That goal hinges largely on peacekeeping
missions. In that regard, the United Arab Emirates is working with the International
Renewal Energy Agency, Norway and a number of United Nations partners to
support the transition of peacekeeping missions to renewable energy where it is
practical, especially by buying from host community providers. Initial results from
46/47

21-13934

S/2021/815

the field indicate that there are cost, security and host community benefits alongside
greenhouse-gas emission reductions.
Climate security threats must be treated with the same urgency as any other
security threat. As for the United Arab Emirates forthcoming term on the Security
Council and our offer to host the twenty-eighth Conference of the States Parties
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in 2023, we are
committed to ensuring that the different components of the international system play
their part to deliver the climate security we all need.

21-1393447/47
