S/PV.8967

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8967th meeting

Wednesday, 16 February 2022, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Vershinin/Ms. Evstigneeva. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-25947 (E)
*2225947*

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

terrorism, drugs and crime, refugees and peace and
security. Biennial resolutions of the General Assembly
welcome and note with appreciation our partnership.
And I am pleased that — since the signing of the Joint
Declaration on Cooperation between the Secretariats
of the United Nations and of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization in 2010 — we have continuously
strengthened our ties and deepened our response to
regional challenges.

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security
Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Armenia,
Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Stanislav Zas, Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, to whom I now
give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this opportunity
to address the Security Council on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO). My thanks go to the Russian
presidency for organizing this open debate.
Cooperation with regional organizations is at the
core of United Nations activities and enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. Our founders understood
that no single organization can alone ensure peace,
security and development in a complex and rapidly
changing world. It requires partnership across all
levels — from the local to the regional to the global.
Now more than ever, a more effective United Nations
depends on stronger and deeper cooperation with
regional organizations.
The CSTO has been an important partner for
the United Nations. Several memorandums of
understanding and protocols on cooperation between
the CSTO and various United Nations entities are
testaments to the increasing depth and breadth of
our relationship — notably in the areas of counter2/24

16/02/2022

On the tenth anniversary of the Joint Declaration,
Secretary-General Zas and I reaffirmed our commitment
to enhancing the scope of our cooperation even
further. We identified a number of key areas, including
early warning, conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping, preventing and countering terrorism,
the fight against international crime and illicit arms
trafficking, disaster preparedness and response, and
information-sharing.
Let me briefly touch on three priority areas
for strengthening relations across the peace and
security spectrum.
First, with regard to cooperation on conflict
prevention, counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia has been working in close
partnership with the CSTO to address the root causes of
potential conflict and develop shared solutions to shared
problems. Today, good working relations between the
CSTO and our Regional Centre enable constructive
early-warning exchanges and regular contacts during
security-related events in the region. The Centre is
also promoting measures against cross-border crime,
terrorism and drug trafficking to ensure conditions for
peaceful sustainable development — all areas where we
look forward to building our partnership with the CSTO.
Secondly, with regard to cooperation on
peacekeeping, we are grateful to CSTO countries for
their contributions to our peace operations. Further
deepening our cooperation in this area will help
advance the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its
implementation strategy, Action for Peacekeeping Plus.
Regular expert participation in joint working groups
already provides an important catalyst of cooperation.
CSTO experts recently visited the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, providing them with firsthand insights into the prevention work done by the
mission, as well as highlighting the potential needs and
gaps it faces. We also appreciate the participation of
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

senior CSTO officials at United Nations Chiefs of Police
Summits, as well as ongoing partnership in support of
United Nations training standards. As we deepen our
ties in the years ahead, we look forward to receiving
further pledges from CSTO members to the United
Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System.
The third area I want to address is cooperation in
the context of Afghanistan. The humanitarian crisis is
worsening by the day. Meanwhile, terrorism remains a
constant threat — not only to the security of Afghanistan
and the region but also to the entire world. Without
determined action, the severe economic contraction,
rising unemployment and escalating humanitarian
crisis will fuel despair and breed extremism. The threat
from illicit drugs and arms flows, as well as criminal
and terrorist networks, is increasing.
Regional and interregional cooperation are
an essential element in our response; so too are
strengthened regional dialogue, as well as cross-border
law enforcement and judicial coordination. Close
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the CSTO, will be critical in
helping defuse those evolving threats, prevent spillover,
promote stability and, ultimately, save lives.
(spoke in French)
The three areas that I have discussed have a common
theme: the fundamental role of regional organizations in
our joint efforts to advance peace and security. We are
determined to strengthen this work together. We are also
counting on the participation of regional organizations
in United Nations peace and security efforts.
We are counting on their support both politically
and in terms of civilian and military capabilities.
We have succeeded in strengthening our partnership
and are increasingly supporting each other in addressing
common threats.
One of the main goals of my report Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982) is to build, by encouraging
partnerships, a more inclusive and effective
multilateralism that operates more like a network.
To that end, I will continue to hold annual meetings
with all the leaders of regional organizations. In all
of this, we are guided by the Charter of the United
Nations and other instruments of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
Together, we are accountable for everything we do and
how we do it. And we have an ultimate responsibility to
the people we serve.

S/PV. 8967

We look forward to exploring ways to strengthen
the important cooperation between the United Nations
and the CSTO in our common quest for a more peaceful
and secure future for all.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zas.
Mr. Zas (spoke in Russian): I would like to
thank the Russian presidency of the Security Council
for the invitation to discuss the participation of our
organization in the maintenance of international peace
and security. I am convinced that today’s meeting will
help to develop additional mechanisms for cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) in the interest of
fostering peace.
We fully support the ideas expressed by SecretaryGeneral António Guterres in the new agenda for peace
on the importance of reducing strategic security risks
through preventive regional action. We agree with his
assessment that regional security organizations play
a central role in maintaining peace and preventing
and overcoming instability. For its part, the CSTO is
focusing on how to effectively address these challenges
in its area of responsibility, and it has the necessary
capacity to do so.
We view the United Nations as our main international
partner and are interested in strengthening the role of
the global Organization. This approach is enshrined
in the joint statement of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the CSTO member States on reaffirming
the commitment to the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and strengthening cooperation to
ensure their strict observance.
I would also like to point out that our organization
was commended as a partner in General Assembly
resolution 75/276, on cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, which was adopted by the
General Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. The
resolution notes that
“since the signing of the Collective Security Treaty,
the Collective Security Treaty Organization has
transformed into a multifunctional structure with
the potential to provide an adequate response to a
wide range of threats and challenges within the area
of its responsibility” (General Assembly resolution
75/276, seventh preambular paragraph).

22-259473/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We intend to further develop all areas of cooperation
with the United Nations, including with the Regional
Center for Preventive Diplomacy,on the basis of the Joint
Declaration on Cooperation between the Secretariats
of the United Nations and of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, dated 18 March 2010, and existing
memorandums and protocols on cooperation between
the CSTO and the United Nations in various areas.
We are pleased with the development of our
cooperation with the Office of Counter-Terrorism and
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime within the framework of existing
memorandums. We are in favour of further expanding
that cooperation.
The CSTO has developed practices to deprive
international terrorist organizations of their breeding
grounds, including by countering drug trafficking and
the use of information and communications technologies
in the interests of the international terrorist activities.
For the past three years, CSTO special security
forces have been conducting Operation Mercenary,
whose main objective is to cut off channels for the
recruitment, entry and exit of nationals of our States
to participate in terrorist activities. The idea is also to
remove the resource base of terrorist organizations,
which has proved to be effective.
During the most recent anti-drug operation last
year, known as Operation Channel-Centre, more than
five tons of various drugs were seized from the illicit
market. This year we plan to conduct three active stages
of that operation in the CSTO’s area of responsibility.
To improve international cooperation in combating
the spread of terrorist ideology and propaganda, and in
line with existing resolutions, in particular resolutions
1624 (2005) and 2354 (2017), we stand ready to unite our
efforts in the information sphere. Under the auspices
of the United Nations, the aim is to develop universal
rules, norms and principles for proper conduct in the
information sphere. The principles for our joint action
to prevent and combat the illicit use of the Internet
for terrorist purposes, including with the central
coordinating role of the United Nations, are outlined in
the relevant joint statement by the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the member States of the CSTO adopted on
2 December 2021.
4/24

16/02/2022

We are prepared to share our experiences in
conducting rapid response prevention operations.
Incidentally, just today, the CSTO ecretariat conducted
a trilateral meeting on strengthening cooperation
and sharing experiences in the area of combating
international terrorism and extremism. Participants
included the Secretary-General of the CSTO, the
Director of the Executive Committee of the Regional
Anti-Terrorist Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Head of the Anti-Terrorism Centre
of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
We would like to use this opportunity to encourage
international and regional organizations and individual
States not only to observe our activities but also to
participate in them. The mechanisms for partnership of
that kind exist within our organization and enable it to
flourish. In order to share experiences and information
on those issues, we support the proposal to hold regular
consultations with the United Nations, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
CSTO experts. We stand ready to begin an in-depth
exploration of those various agenda items.
We deem cooperation in the area of peacekeeping
to be an important practical area of our cooperation
with the United Nations over the long term. In that
regard, I thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, Jean-Pierre Lacroix. Considerable progress
has been made since our meeting on 22 June 2021. A joint
United Nations-CSTO working group on peacekeeping
has been established. Expert-level consultations
with representatives from the Department of Peace
Operations were held at the beginning of December
2021. With the assistance of the Department, CSTO
representatives conducted a working visit to the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Useful meetings
were held with the leaders of the peacekeeping mission
and other peacekeepers in the field.
We received beneficial assistance in conducting
certification procedures for various programmes and
methodology for the training of our peacekeepers,
based on CSTO methodology, in line with United
Nations standards. We are reviewing the possibility of
CSTO peacekeepers participating in United Nations
peacekeeping operations through a coordinating
State. We stand ready to involve peacekeeping units,
including military police and medical and engineering
units, which would all be staffed by the member States
of the organization.
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Heads of State established a position for a Special
Representative of the CSTO Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping, with the rank of Under-SecretaryGeneral. We look forward to his active cooperation
with the relevant United Nations structures.
The CSTO has considerable resources, enabling it to
effectively participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Currently, CSTO peacekeeping forces are
approximately 3,800 strong. They are highly trained
units and are properly equipped with modern weaponry
and equipment. The majority of them have military
experience. They have also participated in peacekeeping
operations. They meet the standards and requirements
of the United Nations, in terms of their structure and
preparedness alike.
The professionalism of the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the CSTO was confirmed during the recent
peacekeeping operation in Kazakhstan. The operation
was conducted at the request of the President of the
Republic of Kazakhstan, Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, in
line with articles 2 and 4 of the Treaty on Collective
Security and the agreement on the CSTO peacekeeping
activity. It attests to the legitimacy of, and compliance
with, the agreement, which was ratified by members
of parliament of the States of our organization.
Furthermore, the operation was fully in line with
the political and international legal principles of the
United Nations.
In line with the requirements under Article 54 of
the Charter of the United Nations and article 4 of our
Agreement, the Secretary-General of the United Nations
was swiftly informed by letter about the operation. That
was the first case of CSTO peacekeeping capacity being
used in practice. It is important to note that the objective
of eliminating the threat to security and stability was
swiftly achieved. I would like to underscore that the
goal of the operation was achieved, in large part, thanks
to the moral and political support provided to the
Republic of Kazakhstan by its CSTO allies, and thanks
to the clear, coordinated actions of the peacekeepers.
They arrived swiftly and left immediately once the
operation ended. We welcome the fact that, throughout
the entire operation, no shots were fired by our
peacekeepers — not one shot. The peacekeeping units
were used purely to protect essential infrastructure
facilities and to prevent a humanitarian disaster.
I would like to assure the members of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and all participants in

S/PV. 8967

today’s meeting that the CSTO has genuine potential
and capacity, including peacekeeping capacity that,
if necessary, could be used to foster the maintenance
of international peace and security. Of course, we are
seeking the broadest cooperation possible with the
relevant United Nations structures and departments.
I have touched upon a few areas of the CSTO’s
work where, in our opinion, we can and should expand
our cooperation with the United Nations and other
organizations and countries. Of course, the list of
tasks performed by the organization is a much longe
one, and the spike in international tensions and the
recent negative trend in the area of global and regional
security are exacerbating current challenges and create
new challenges for our countries.
In our work, we pay particular attention to our
southern borders, where Afghanistan remains a longterm ongoing source of danger, in the light of the
unfolding socioeconomic and humanitarian disaster
resulting from the situation in the country, the terrorist
threat and the risk posed by drug trafficking continue
to rise. There has also been an unprecedented increase
in tension on our western front, so to speak, in Eastern
Europe.
The ongoing expansion in recent years of troop
formations, military infrastructure and military activity
near the western border of CSTO member States,
coupled with the lack of progress in reaching a peaceful
settlement in eastern Ukraine, has led to a situation on
the verge of spiralling into military hostilities. We very
much trust that the parties to the negotiating process
will be able to find acceptable solutions to the issue and
stop the deployment of military activities.
It is clear that the challenge posed by regional
conflicts will not dissipate, which poses a permanent
threat to international peace. With regard to preventive
action and to overcoming threats, we are prepared to
tap into our significant potential by uniting the efforts
of the CSTO and the relevant United Nations structures
in the area of security and, above all, in peacekeeping
and combating new challenges and threats.
This year we commemorate the thirtieth anniversary
of the signing of the Treaty on Collective Security and
the twentieth anniversary of the establishment of the
organization. This year’s anniversary is welcomed by
the CSTO as a body that views itself as an effective
international organization that, on a collective basis,
protects member States from existing security threats.

22-259475/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

We reaffirm our commitment to developing friendly
and mutually acceptable relations with third countries
and international organizations to maintain peace
and stability. We wish to build cooperation based on
the principles of international law, the rejection of
confrontation and an embrace of lasting solutions
reached purely through political and diplomatic means,
in line with the provisions and aims of the United
Nations Charter.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank Mr. Zas
for his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation.
We thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing on such an important topic for our region.
We also thank the Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), Mr. Stanislav
Zas, for his detailed briefing and information about the
work of the organization.
The Russian delegation has made this meeting
one of the main events of the Russian presidency of
the Security Council for several reasons. Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is key to the current international agenda,
in general, and the Security Council, in particular.
We unswervingly advocate the development of such
cooperation in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and, above all, Chapter VIII.
Regional organizations must complement United
Nations efforts within their areas of responsibility
and mandates. In most cases, they are more familiar
with the situation on the ground and should play a key
role in determining ways to resolve conflicts. That is
particularly the case in the Eurasian region with regard
to the Collective Security Treaty Organization. We
cannot ignore the fact that, at times, we have found
that some members of the international community are
inadequately informed of the CSTO’s work. Such a lack
of information is apt to lead to an incomplete picture
of its role in the maintenance of international peace
and security, which we would like to avoid. We hope
that the briefers’ presentations and further discussion
will inform the international community about how
the CSTO is helping find solutions to the problems
encountered in our region.
6/24

16/02/2022

As was mentioned earlier, this year marks the
thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the Collective
Security Treaty and the twentieth anniversary of the
subsequent establishment of the multifaceted Collective
Security Treaty Organization. Over the years, the
organization has established itself as an important actor
in regional and international security. We would like
to emphasize the peace-loving and open nature of the
work of the CSTO and its willingness to develop and
expand constructive cooperation with third countries
and organizations, including with the United Nations.
As a result, practical contacts have been established
with the Secretariat related to the various aspects of
the situation in the Eurasian continent. Cooperation
is supported with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
Cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO
in peacekeeping is continuously being examined. In
December 2021, representatives of the Secretariat and
the CSTO joint staff visited the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon to gain knowledge of practical United
Nations peacekeeping experience.
The normative and legal framework for
peacekeeping activities within the CSTO itself has
been evolving. In 2021, the principle of a coordinating
State was established. Under the latter, one of the
CSTO member States will be mandated to register
CSTO peacekeeping resources within the United
Nations system and conclude agreements on their use.
In addition, last year the institution of the Special
Representative of the CSTO Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping was established. One of his tasks is to
expand contacts and coordinate peacekeeping activities
with the United Nations.
The first positive CSTO peacekeeping experience
was garnered during the January events in Kazakhstan.
The country faced an unprecedented challenge to its
security, integrity and sovereignty. Only the effective
actions of the Kazakhstan authorities, as well as the
legitimate operational assistance of the CSTO allies,
helped prevent a catastrophe. The operation was
carried out on a sound international legal basis and in
a transparent and predictable manner. The President
of Kazakhstan, Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, made a
request of his CSTO partners to that effect, in accordance
with article 4 of the Treaty. It was immediately supported
by all Heads of the organization’s member States, and
the Security Council and the Secretary-General were
immediately informed of that.
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

The presence of peacekeepers — who, as Mr. Zas
stressed earlier, did not fire a single shot — was shown
to be a stabilizing factor in exerting the necessary
influence on the radicals. The CSTO contingents were
engaged in protecting strategically important facilities,
did not take part in military operations and, with the
agreement with the Kazakhstan authorities, left the
country as soon as the situation stabilized. In that
context, we note the growing positive interest in the
work of the CSTO on the part of individual countries
in the region, as well as international organizations,
primarily in terms of experience in countering new
challenges and threats, including terrorism, its related
extremism, illegal migration and drug trafficking.
The situation in Central Asia has been and
remains a priority topic on the CSTO’s agenda, while
primarily taking into account the Afghanistan factor.
The organization is taking preventive measures to
curb threats, including those emanating from that
country. Joint comprehensive exercises are conducted
on a regular basis. Operation Illegal and Operation
Channel, against illegal migration and drug trafficking,
respectively, have already proven to highly effective,
and a set of operational and preventive counterterrorism measures, known as Operation Mercenary,
are also being carried out.
In order to overcome all those challenges effectively,
a dialogue has been established with key United Nations
bodies, including the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.
The CSTO is developing cooperation with the relevant
structures of other regional organizations, in particular
the Anti-Terrorism Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Executive Committee of
the Regional Anti-terrorism Structure of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization. Such a trilateral meeting, in
fact, was held today.
In order to ensure international cybersecurity
within the CSTO, Operation PROXY, to combat the
cybercrime, is being carried out. Countering threats
in the area of biosecurity is also a priority. The
coordinating council for biological safety is a brand-new
mechanism for carrying out work in that area. It will
combine the capabilities of both military and civilian
structures responsible for shielding our countries from
biological threats.

S/PV. 8967

One of our most important joint tasks is to preserve
the historical truth surrounding the Second World War
and counter the justification and glorification of Nazism.
We would like to point out that the resounding majority
of United Nations Member States supports our efforts
in that area, as demonstrated by the broad support for
the related annual General Assembly resolution.
We are concerned about the risks and threats
posed to the security of CSTO member States on their
southern and western borders. Like our CSTO allies,
we cannot but be alarmed by the build-up of NATO
military capabilities near our borders. Over the past
year, we have seen a high intensity of NATO exercises
aimed specifically at offensive operations training.
That is a fact, and no propaganda can gloss it over.
In that regard, we recall that the CSTO has
repeatedly approached NATO with initiatives for
cooperation. At one time, cooperation on Afghanistan,
which was relevant at the time, was proposed. Two
years ago, the Foreign Ministers of CSTO member
States signed an open appeal to their colleagues from
NATO countries to strengthen mutual trust and develop
cooperation. The proposals went unanswered.
For our part, we would like to express the shared
desire of the CSTO member States to resolve emerging
problems exclusively through political and diplomatic
means under international law, with the United Nations
playing the primary role. We are ready to cooperate
constructively with all members of the international
community, and it is precisely that approach that
is enshrined in the fundamental documents of
our organization.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Secretary-General and Mr. Stanislav Zas
for their briefings today on cooperation between the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) and
the United Nations.
The United Kingdom followed the violent clashes
in Kazakhstan in early January with deep concern.
We condemn the acts of violence seen and greatly
regret the loss of life. There is much that we still do
not know about those events, but we note that President
Tokayev set up an investigative commission to establish

22-259477/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

16/02/2022

the causes of the violence. It is vitally important that
the investigation process be conducted urgently,
transparently and effectively.

promotion of, and respect for, those rights must be at the
heart of all United Nations cooperation with regional
organizations, as well as our collective action.

We note that a CSTO force was deployed to
Kazakhstan at the invitation of the Kazakh Government
to stabilize the unrest. We were clear at the time that
such deployments should be proportionate in any use
of force and that Kazakhstan’s sovereignty must be
respected. Sovereignty and territorial integrity are
at the heart of the Charter of the United Nations and
essential to the work of the Security Council.

Among our priorities for collective action is the
fight against terrorism, which presents a constant
challenge. The threat from terrorist groups, whether
Da’esh, Al-Qaida or their affiliates, persists. France is
fully committed to fighting that scourge. Our action
is targeted at drying up the resources of terrorist
groups, countering their propaganda and hindering the
movement of foreign terrorist fighters, wherever that
may be.

We welcome regional partnerships on peacekeeping
where those partners share the values and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. We emphasize
the importance of United Nations primacy in United
Nations-funded
and
United
Nations-mandated
missions, and we again stress the importance of respect
for human rights and gender equality during operations
in response to security threats. It is also vital that the
United Nations human rights due diligence policy be
applied wherever the United Nations is working with
external actors.
Finally, we would like to underline the importance
of the rule of law as a key component of institutional
cooperation, consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations for his
briefing and the Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization for his presentation on
its activities.
The United Nations needs to cooperate with
regional organizations to address the crises affecting
the world. Because they are closest to the ground,
those organizations are the first to witness such crises.
They also know the deep roots of those crises and the
effective solutions to resolve and prevent them. That is
the entire point of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which must be the framework for all
cooperation with regional organizations. The aims,
principles and actions of regional organizations must
be compatible with our founding Charter.
Those organizations must also respect and promote
human rights, including women’s rights and the full,
equal, substantial and effective participation of women
in all aspects of public life. Those are the conditions
for lasting peace and security, and that is why the
8/24

The fight against organized crime is also essential
to ensuring that criminal dividends, particularly those
from drug trafficking, do not finance terrorist actions.
High yields, the growing prevalence of synthetic drugs
and the dynamism of the Eurasian market must continue
to spur us to take action.
We must also ensure that there is no impunity for
terrorists. They must be tried for their actions as close
as possible to where they committed them.
The region we are dealing with today is facing
major challenges. The Taliban takeover of Afghanistan
by force has led to a severe humanitarian crisis and
economic collapse in the country, the impact of
which is already being felt and may lead to further
significant repercussions throughout the region and
internationally. The response of the international
community has been very clear, with five preconditions
for any normalization of relations with the Taliban. One
of those conditions is the severing of Taliban links with
terrorist groups, as the terrorist threat persists. Attacks
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
Province have increased and, more generally, terrorist
groups — including Al-Qaida — seem to have drawn
strength from the Taliban taking power.
At the same time, France is committed to the
collective effort to help the Afghan population.
Exceptional humanitarian aid, in the amount of
€100 million, announced at the conference in Geneva
on 13 September, was fully disbursed by the end of
2021, mainly by United Nations agencies. While we
will soon review the modalities of the presence of the
United Nations in Afghanistan, we will be attentive to
the fact that it respond to current threats as well as to
the constant concern that human rights — in particular
those of women and girls — be respected in the country
by all, starting with the Taliban.
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Finally, with regard to the situation in Kazakhstan,
I would like to reiterate our wish that light be shed fully
on the circumstances that led to the tragic events that
took place in January. Respect for the rule of law must
remain a priority.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I welcome your presence,
Sir, at today’s debate. I also welcome the presence of
our Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres, as well
as the Secretary-General of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO), and note with appreciation
the insightful remarks respectively made. I further
welcome the representatives of the five Member States
participating in this meeting under rule 37.
Without dispute, the Security Council is the
foremost body designed by the architects of the
present order for the maintenance of international
peace and security. However, the founders of our
Organization also recognized that, beyond the work
done by the Council, the General Assembly and the
Secretary-General, the peace crafted within the walls
of the United Nations must be kept by the States whose
existence are intertwined with the destinies of the
regions within which they are located. The Charter of
the United Nations is therefore prescient in envisaging
an Organization that works with regional arrangements
or agencies to prevent, manage and resolve crises.
Regional arrangements as provided for under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
are, in that regard, a veritable but often under-utilized
opportunity for establishing peace across the world.
Indeed, recent historical and contemporary experiences
have underscored the imperative of promoting better
coordination and cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations for ensuring
security and the enjoyment of the dividends of peace.
In welcoming the cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO, Ghana believes that debates such
as this can help identify the opportunities for cooperation
and the challenges that militate against enhanced
collaboration. In that context, I recall Ghana’s working
paper placed before the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations, entitled “Strengthening
the Relationship and Cooperation between the United
Nations and Regional Organizations or Arrangements
in the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes”, aimed at
addressing apparent gaps or shortcomings at the level
of cooperation and working relationships between

S/PV. 8967

the United Nations and regional arrangements in the
context of the peaceful settlement of disputes.
It is my delegation’s view that enhanced cooperation
should be based on clearly defined arrangements with
mechanisms for periodic monitoring and evaluation.
We also see opportunities for increasing the role of
academia, research institutions and women and youth
in preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding through
coordinated partnerships with regional organizations
or arrangements.
Within the context of the CSTO, and in an effort
to identify opportunities for strengthening security
in the Eurasian region, I would want to share three
brief points.
First, we note the Joint Declaration by the
United Nations and the CSTO of 18 March 2010 and
encourage further regular consultations between the
two organizations to help bridge conceptual differences
in the understanding of the security challenges of
the Eurasian region and to improve the harmonized
responses required in addressing such challenges.
More, not fewer, consultations within a structured
format are therefore required.
Secondly, the wealth of experience of the United
Nations in preventive diplomacy should be enhanced
in its engagement with the CSTO, particularly through
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy. The two organizations can work even
more closely together in identifying the root causes
of conflicts in the Eurasia region and develop shared
solutions within the context of sustaining peace with
programmes that prevent the outbreak, escalation,
continuation and recurrence of conflict.
Thirdly, the CSTO has established a clear interest
in developing its capacity. The further processes of
that development would require close engagement
with the United Nations and in a manner that ensures
the incorporation of the harmonized arrangements
that exist within that context with other regional
arrangements, such as the African Union. Collaboration
with the African Union in that regard has led to the
development of a few initiatives, including the United
Nations-African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and
Security and the Joint United Nations-African Union
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security. In that respect, and while taking note
of the deployment of the CSTO force to Kazakhstan
early this year, we believe that closer collaboration on

22-259479/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

any future deployment would enhance the Security
Council’s accountability over actions for regional peace
and security.
Let me conclude by once again drawing attention
to the many untapped opportunities that exist in
enhancing the implementation of Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations. Our effectiveness as a
Council lies in deepening such cooperation.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his remarks. I am
also grateful for those of Secretary-General Zas, of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).
The United States strongly supports the work
of regional organizations around the world and
welcomes their contributions to international peace
and security, sustainable development and prosperity
and to upholding and protecting human rights. We also
support cooperation between regional organizations
and the United Nations to prevent and resolve conflict,
whether through promoting confidence-building
measures, fostering political dialogue with all parties
concerned or furthering efforts to build just, lasting
and sustainable peace.
The United States partners with numerous regional
organizations globally, and we are proud of our robust
partnerships in Central Asia. The C5+1 — the five
Central Asian States and the United States — is an
essential diplomatic platform that enhances United
States cooperation and coordination with and within
the region to advance shared goals. Those goals are
clear and simple: the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the States of Central Asia. We
support a Central Asia that is free to pursue its political,
economic and security interests on its own terms.
The C5+1 seeks to enhance regional security and
prosperity by focusing on rights-respecting approaches
to national security issues, fostering economic
development and addressing climate change. Since
its launch in 2015, the C5+1 format has contributed
greatly to efforts to increase economic connectivity
and trade, mitigate environmental challenges and
jointly address security threats and advocate for
women’s empowerment.
Beyond our work through the C5+1, the United
States engages throughout Central Asia in numerous
bilateral and regional initiatives that promote security
and prosperity and respect for human rights and
10/24

16/02/2022

fundamental freedoms, including with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The United States supports the work of the OSCE
Transnational Threats Department’s Action against
Terrorism Unit and Border Security and Management
Unit. Those efforts promote reliance on the rule of law
and the implementation of a legal framework to counter
the types of extremism and radicalization that lead to
violence or terrorism. The United States also supports
efforts by participating States and partners to improve
travel data exchange and travel fraud prevention,
which has a direct impact on preventing terrorist travel
throughout the region.
With respect to the CSTO, we are concerned
that the CSTO’s recent military deployment in
Kazakhstan — the organization’s first deployment
since its inception — was sought before sustained
efforts at national dialogue, reconciliation and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. The Security Council
has emphasized that advancing such efforts is the
most critical role that regional organizations play in
maintaining international peace and security. If the
CSTO seeks to develop its own peacekeeping capacity,
it is important to bear in mind that peace operations
are an important and useful tool for protecting civilians
and mitigating conflict in specific circumstances and
must be undertaken with full respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
As we have said previously in the Council,
the United States underscores its commitment to
regional organizations and our support for the work
of the United Nations to partner with those entities as
engines of diplomacy. We welcome the engagement
of the United Nations with regional and civil society
organizations in order to promote the rights and wellbeing of all persons, including underrepresented and
at-risk populations such as women, youth, lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons,
members of religious and ethnic minority groups and
persons with disabilities. The voices of all deserve
to be heard and must be incorporated to ensure that
resolutions to conflicts are inclusive and respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Stanislav Zas, SecretaryGeneral of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), for their briefings and perspectives on
the subject under discussion. I also welcome the
participation of the member States of the CSTO.
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

International peace and security today is under
immense pressure from a growing web of threats
ranging from inter-State and intra-State armed
conflicts to terrorism and violent extremism to other
transnational organized crimes. Kenya believes that the
maximum utilization of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations must be the cornerstone for
responding to those threats.
Kenya has always upheld the role of regional and
subregional organizations, working in partnership with
the United Nations, as the most strategic option in
efforts to confront threats to peace and security in the
Horn of Africa and on the continent at large. I therefore
commend you, Mr. President, for convening us today to
consider this subject of enhancing cooperation between
the United Nations and the CSTO.
I will limit my remarks to four points.
First, Kenya welcomes the ongoing work on
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the CSTO. History and experience remind
us that, when there is good cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, emerging crises can be effectively
contained with manageable peace and security
implications. But whenever we read from different
scripts or take unilateral actions, conflicts become
unnecessarily complex, protracted, internationalized
and, certainly, more destructive. That is why in Africa,
for instance, the role of subregional organizations such
as the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
as part of the African Union’s peace and security
architecture, has become indispensable, especially as
the first recourse to seeking solutions to challenges in
each organization’s respective subregional context.
Secondly, peaceful solutions to threats to
international peace and security demand sustained
coordination between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. The adoption of best
practices in dealing with common threats is critical in
ensuring complementarity and harmonious responses
to threats to international peace and security. Kenya
therefore commends the CSTO’s ongoing efforts to
strengthen its peacekeeping capacities and its efforts
to counter terrorism and other transnational organized
crime, to combat illicit trafficking in drugs and
weapons, irregular migration and human trafficking,

S/PV. 8967

as well as to respond to disasters, thereby contributing
to the realization of the objectives and principles of the
United Nations.
Thirdly, we note that collaboration between
the United Nations, the CSTO and the countries of
the region creates an important platform to develop
shared solutions to their common challenges, thereby
strengthening the security, political and economic
environment in Central Asia.
We ask the United Nations and the CSTO to
undertake joint horizon-scanning and analysis to
inform strategic actions that draw specific support
from the Member States of the region.
Fourthly, in a globalized world where many security
threats are shared, regular exchanges between regional
and subregional organizations with the United Nations
can be enriching, not only in sharing experiences
and best practices but also in building collaborative
frameworks to deal with transregional threats such as
terrorism, piracy and sea-based crime. We recommend
that the CSTO and other regional and subregional
organizations intentionally engage and work together
in that regard.
In conclusion, I reaffirm Kenya’s commitment to
the values and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. We will continue to work collectively
with all Members at all levels to strengthen international
cooperation in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Madam President, for having
organized this meeting on cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations, with a special focus on the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). I fondly recall the
visit to New Delhi of Deputy Minister Sergey Vershinin
a fortnight ago and the meetings with our leadership.
I thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and CSTO Secretary-General Stanislav Zas for
their comprehensive briefings today. I welcome the
presence of CSTO member States at today’s meeting.
I also take this opportunity to congratulate the CSTO,
which is celebrating the twentieth anniversary of its
establishment this year.
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
ascribes a special role to regional organizations for
dealing with matters relating to the maintenance of

22-2594711/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

international peace and security. In fact, Article 52
of the Charter encourages the settlement of disputes
through regional arrangements or by regional agencies.
Regional and subregional organizations have time
and again shown how important their role is in the
maintenance of international peace and security. They
have an important role in the settlement of disputes,
especially in conflict situations. Because of their deep
knowledge of local factors and complexities, regional
and subregional organizations are uniquely placed to
provide better solutions to conflicts in their regions. We
therefore support active engagement between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in
line with the Charter of the United Nations.
The world order that we inherited following the
Second World War has seen a complete transformation.
Similarly, the threats that Member States were faced
with when the United Nations was founded 75 years
ago have also changed substantially. Contemporary
security challenges such as terrorism, extremism,
drug trafficking, transnational crime and pandemics
transcend physical or political boundaries. To
effectively tackle such diverse challenges, we need
coordinated and concerted actions across borders.
Enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations can therefore be
useful in that regard.
Today regional organizations have become more
assertive, and Member States have increasingly
reposed faith in their actions. That has brought positive
synergy to the actions of the United Nations and the
Security Council.
India notes the ongoing cooperation between the
United Nations and the CSTO based on the 2010 Joint
Declaration on Cooperation between the United Nations
and the CSTO. The United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia has also
contributed further to the strengthening of cooperation
on issues of shared interest and concern, mainly
terrorism, violent extremism and drug trafficking.
Central Asia is central to India’s vision of an
integrated and stable extended neighbourhood. The
diplomatic relations between India and Central Asian
countries have completed 30 meaningful years. On that
occasion, Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi hosted
the first-ever India-Central Asia Summit in virtual
format on 27 January. The summit was symbolic of
the importance attached by the leaders of India and
12/24

16/02/2022

the Central Asian countries to a comprehensive and
enduring India-Central Asia partnership.
In the spirit of our development partnership with
the Central Asian region, India has just offered, inter
alia, a $1 billion line of credit for priority development
projects. India is also providing grant assistance
for the implementation of high-impact community
development projects. We have created the IndiaCentral Asia Dialogue platform for strengthening
cooperation between India and the Central Asian
countries. India’s steps to modernize the infrastructure
of the Chabahar port in Iran, which will become an
important link in trade and transport communications
between the markets of Central and South Asia, has
been appreciated by the Central Asian countries. India
welcomes the interest of Central Asian countries in
utilizing the services of the Chabahar port. The port
has now emerged as a commercial transit hub for the
region. In the context of United Nations peacekeeping,
India also has a co-deployment of Kazakh troops within
the Indian battalion in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon, reflecting our long-standing partnership.
The developments in Afghanistan will have wider
ramifications for the Central Asia region, particularly
the possible growth in international terrorism and
drug trafficking emanating from Afghan territory.
Resolution 2593 (2021) reflects the expectations of
the international community that Afghan soil should
not be used for sheltering or training terrorists or for
planning or financing terrorist acts. The international
community needs to take cognizance of the concerns
that Central Asian countries have with respect to the
developments in Afghanistan.
Let me conclude by reiterating our strong support
for cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In the current difficult circumstances
caused globally by the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the United Nations and its agencies should continue
to work closely with regional organizations to ensure
resilient supply chains of medicines and vaccines. We
believe that this partnership is important to promote
global peace and development.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I wanted to welcome
among us this morning Deputy Foreign Minister
Sergey Vershinin. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing earlier and warmly welcome SecretaryGeneral Zas to our meeting today. I would like to
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

acknowledge the participation of Collective Security
Treaty Organization member States in today’s debate.
We in Ireland have a deep appreciation of the
vital role that regional and subregional organizations
can play in building and sustaining peace. That is an
appreciation informed directly from our own national
history and experience. Our membership in the
European Union (EU) was central to the growth and
development of our country. But the EU also played a
key role in the journey to peace and reconciliation on
the island of Ireland.
The Council is charged with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. But we know that this requires
collective and multilayered efforts. We have seen time
and again the critical role that regional organizations
can play, from promoting dialogue to mediation to
advancing confidence-building measures.
It is clear that strengthening cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations enhances
our ability to prevent and resolve conflict and to
advance the broader goals and objectives of the Charter
of the United Nations.
United Nations peacekeeping helps countries
navigate the difficult path from conflict to peace. In
that context, regional organizations have also played
an important role. Ireland, as a long-standing troop
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping, also
participates in a number of United Nations-authorized
EU missions and operations. Those support peace and
security, facilitating political processes, protecting
civilians, promoting human rights and enhancing the
rule of law.
In the 15 years since the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia was
established, it has supported the efforts of the Central
Asian nations to jointly build peace and security in
their region through cooperation. Those efforts are an
ongoing process but, by seeking solutions to common
challenges rooted in cooperation, the countries of
Central Asia have sought to ensure better outcomes
for their citizens. Joint endeavours on transboundary
water management, climate and security, counternarcotics and cross-border trade have begun to lay the
groundwork for stronger, more sustainable and resilient
communities and economies across the region.

S/PV. 8967

We welcome Central Asian countries’ engagement
with the women and peace and security and the youth
and peace and security agendas. We see those as crucial
to maintaining peace and stability in the region. The
United Nations has played a critical role in supporting
such regional efforts. The Central Asia Women Leaders’
Caucus is a clear demonstration of the undeniable
impact of women’s engagement in peacebuilding and
preventive diplomacy.
Providing spaces for the Central Asian youth to
address the issues directly affecting them encourages
reflexive cooperation and dialogue. It also sets the
stage for continued regional peace and stability. Ireland
strongly encourages the sustained prioritization of
the women and peace and security and the youth
and peace and security agendas in all regional
organization partnerships.
Ireland understands all too well from its own history
that parity of esteem and mutual understanding — essential
building blocks for peace — are achieved through
constructive, interpersonal dialogues grounded in
equality. We also know the value of the support that
regional organizations can provide to peace processes
and peacebuilding efforts.
The recent events in Kazakhstan underlined
the importance of preventive diplomacy and close
cooperation of neighbouring States in preventing
destabilizing conflict. Ireland and our EU partners
were deeply concerned by the violence that occurred
following peaceful protests across the country. Respect
for the fundamental freedoms and human rights of all
citizens is fundamental to peace and stability in all
circumstances, including in Kazakhstan.
Ireland will always stand in strong defence of
democratic principles and the right of a people to
determine their political leaders and their system
of Government.
To conclude, Ireland reiterates its strong support
for continued and strengthened cooperation between
regional organizations and the United Nations. By
working together, we can do more, and we can do
it better.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): Let me acknowledge the
presence here today of Deputy Foreign Minister Sergey
Vershinin. I would also like to thank Mr. António
Guterres, Secretary-General of the United Nations, and
Mr. Stanislav Zas, Secretary-General of the Collective

22-2594713/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
briefings to the Security Council.

for

their

As the world continues to be confronted with peace
and security challenges, exacerbated by the ongoing
coronavirus disease pandemic, it is of paramount
importance to strengthen partnerships and enhance
linkages between the United Nations and regional
organizations. They should not only complement each
other, but also combine efforts to develop effective tools
for conflict prevention, mediation, crisis management
and post-conflict peacebuilding. We have different
examples of such partnerships.
The United Nations partnership with the African
Union (AU), for example, is of particular relevance.
Brazil supports the role of the African Union and
subregional organizations in the search for African
solutions to African problems. In order to avoid the
duplication of efforts and optimize available resources,
we need to continue working towards improving the
collaboration between the Secretariat and the AU
Commission, as well as between the Security Council
and the AU Peace and Security Council. In that regard,
I particularly praise the work of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, which deserves to
be strengthened.
In our region, the Organization of American States
(OAS) is well placed to contribute to the defence and
promotion of democracy, human rights and sustainable
development, as well multidimensional security. From
the perspective of the OAS, security is multidimensional
in nature given that we face both traditional threats to
security and new threats with complex characteristics.
On the Collective Security Treaty Organization
specifically, we welcome the renewal of its commitment
to tackling common challenges. The recent clashes
on the border between Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan last
January were cause for serious concern. We praise the
efforts of the CSTO for its role in halting the armed
confrontation on the Tajik-Kyrgyz border. We echo
the words of the CSTO Secretary-General that this
conflict must be resolved exclusively at the negotiating
table, where the member States will find peaceful
ways to resolve their differences. In order to achieve
peace and stability, regional organizations should
not only bring together the relevant stakeholders in
situations of conflict but also provide strong support
for confidence-building measures.
14/24

16/02/2022

Regarding the recent events in Kazakhstan, we
reiterate our support for dialogue and negotiation to
achieve political change through pacific means and
the rejection of violence. We hope that Kazakhstan
can overcome the consequences of the events of
last January. The rule of law should be maintained
and strengthened, and the Kazakh Government and
institutions should remain attentive and responsive to
people’s legitimate aspirations.
We note that cooperation among the CSTO members
has already achieved significant results in dealing with
various issues. The shared management of scarce water
is an example. We are conscious that other relevant
challenges remain, such as the persistent criminal
activities across the region, especially the trafficking of
illicit drugs, and the threat of terrorism and extremism.
Moreover, in the current difficult global circumstances
caused by the pandemic, regional organizations must
consider how best to work with national Governments
to ensure resilient medical supply chains, vaccines and
active pharmaceutical ingredients.
The CSTO’s work on the women and peace and
security agenda is also of great importance. The
international community must support all initiatives
to raise awareness and eliminate all forms of violence
against women and girls. We urge that the women
and peace and security agenda remain at the core of
all CSTO activities in peace operations and crisis
management. We see that as a cornerstone of any
peacebuilding partnership.
We believe that various regional and subregional
organizations are very relevant in tackling global
challenges, with the United Nations at the core of
multilateral efforts. The international community gains
from robust and renewed cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations to
promote peace and security. The driving principles and
values of such cooperation should be based on respect
for democracy, human rights and the rule of law. The
common objectives of that cooperation must be the
promotion of peace, reconciliation, stability, freedom
and economic prosperity. We expect the CSTO and its
members to work together to deliver progress along
those lines.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Russia’s initiative to hold this meeting. I
also thank Secretary-General Guterres and SecretaryGeneral Stanislav Zas for their briefings, which
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

provided important insights for today’s meeting. I
also welcome members of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) who are represented at
today’s meeting.
The promotion of cooperation in the field of peace
and security between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations, is conducive to
strengthening the universality and effectiveness of
collective security mechanisms and to improving the
maintenance of international peace and security.
As a regional security organization with significant
influence, the Collective Security Treaty Organization
has played an important role in safeguarding the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
its member States and in preventing and responding to
new threats and challenges to regional security.
China appreciates the cooperation of recent years
between the CSTO and the United Nations in the fields
of counter-terrorism, combating drug smuggling and
organized crime, and peacekeeping. We support the
CSTO in continuing to leverage its advantages and
forming synergies with the United Nations efforts to
maintain international peace and security.
On 28 April 2021, the General Assembly adopted
by consensus, at its seventy-fifth session, resolution
75/276, on cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, which
welcomes the cooperation outcomes between the two
organizations and sets out the planning for their future
cooperation. The resolution is of great significance.
Recently, large-scale anti-Government acts of
violence broke out in Kazakhstan, causing heavy
casualties and loss of life and property. China is highly
concerned about this. China supports all measures that
are conducive to restoring stability to Kazakhstan. At
the same time, China is firmly opposed to attempts
by any force to undermine Kazakhstan’s stability or
threaten its security. We are against the attempt of
external foreign forces to create turmoil and a so-called
colour revolution in Kazakhstan. On this issue, Chinese
President Xi Jinping sent an oral message to President
Tokayev, expressing in clear terms China’s support for
Kazakhstan in maintaining its stability and ending the
violence. Chinese State Councilor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Wang Yi had a telephone conversation
with Mr. Mukhtar Tileuberdi, Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan, in

S/PV. 8967

which he reiterated China’s relevant position. At the
request of the Kazakh Government, the CSTO went to
Kazakhstan to assist it in maintaining law and order in
the country. At that critical moment, the CSTO played a
positive role in stabilizing the situation in Kazakhstan.
As a friend and neighbour and permanent
comprehensive strategic partner of Kazakhstan, China
looks forward to Kazakhstan’s achievement of lasting
peace and stability and supports the country’s efforts
to restore stability, develop its economy and improve
people’s livelihoods. We believe that the Kazakh
authorities are capable of resolving the problem properly
and keeping the country on a path of steady and healthy
development. We also hope that the international
community can fully respect Kazakhstan’s sovereignty
and play a constructive role in maintaining stability and
development in Kazakhstan and the region.
The world is entering a new period of turbulence
and change. Regional hotspot issues pop up one after
another, while conventional and non-conventional
security threats are intertwined. The threats of
terrorism, extremism and separatism continue to rise.
Problems, such as transnational organized crime and
drugs, are becoming ever more prominent. Compounded
by the coronavirus disease pandemic, they pose
severe challenges to the security and development of
all countries.
A certain country in particular is pursuing unilateral
hegemonic policies, running amok with power politics
and harming the security and development interests of
other countries through improper means by provoking
a new world war and geopolitical competition, which
has severely undermined the international order and
global strategic stability. Faced with this complex and
grave situation, the international community needs
to practice genuine multilateralism and oppose bloc
politics and the forming of cliques. It needs to strengthen
solidarity and cooperation and to oppose confrontation
and exerting pressure. It needs to strengthen equality
and mutual trust and oppose bullying by power. Only
by staying on the right path can we join hands to build a
more prosperous, stable, equitable and just world.
China and the CSTO member States, including
Russia, are important partners with long-standing
friendship and mutual trust. Against the new backdrop,
China stands ready to work with the CSTO member
States to deepen cooperation in the areas of the Belt
and Road Initiative, the economy, trade, security and

22-2594715/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

people-to-people and cultural engagement to improve
our connectivity and promote the economic integration
process. We will explore effective means to fully unleash
the cooperation potentials of mechanisms, such as the
CSTO and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, to
firmly crack down on terrorism, promote sustainable
peace and common prosperity in the region and build a
closer community with a shared future.
In their interventions, some Council members have
referred to the situation in Afghanistan. The top priority
for the international community in Afghanistan now
is to do everything possible to avoid a humanitarian
crisis. To that end, massive efforts must be made to
provide humanitarian relief, and the overseas assets
that belonged to Afghanistan should be returned
quickly and in full to the Afghan people. We will also
step up foreign policy communication and coordination
with the CSTO member States and carry out close
corporation on multilateral platforms, such as the United
Nations, so as positively contribute to the maintenance
of international order, based on international law, and
safeguard the central coordination role of the United
Nations in international affairs.
Mr. Biang (Gabon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for the initiative of convening
this debate on issues that are so central for most
African States. African States view regional and
subregional organizations as key actors in responding
to international crises and conflicts and increasingly
advocate the prevalence of a regional narrative in the
Security Council’s consideration of the items on its
agenda. I thank United Nations Secretary-General
António Guterres and the Secretary-General of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO),
Mr. Stanislav Zas, for their enlightening briefings. I
also welcome the participation of States members of the
CSTO in this debate.
The choice of this topic leads us to revisit and
reassess the crucial role of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
Against a security backdrop marked by multifaceted
crises and exacerbated by an unprecedented pandemic,
the number of calls on the United Nations and the
increasingly regional nature of crises require the
United Nations to strengthen its strategic cooperation
16/24

16/02/2022

with regional and subregional organizations to ensure
effectiveness and greater connection to the realities on
the ground.
In Africa, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union has had significant
achievements in many areas. It has even been
strengthened in recent years, in particular in the areas
of peace and security. I would like to mention the closer
relations between the United Nations Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union, in particular through regular consultations on
crises and conflicts in Africa.
In Central Africa, aware of its important role as an
interface in peacekeeping, the Economic Community
of the Central African States, under the leadership
of President Bongo Ondimba, together with the
international community, has finalized its institutional
and organizational reform process so as to endow
itself with the means to respond to the challenges it
faces, in particular in the fields of peace and security.
Ultimately, the involvement of regional stakeholders,
along with United Nations action, enables us to bolster
the effectiveness of the stabilization process and better
understand persistent threats.
Although it is true that through its actions in recent
years the United Nations has made a genuine effort
to engage in regional and subregional partnerships,
the proliferation and complexity of crises compel us
to go further. The Group of Five for the Sahel and the
African Union Mission in Somalia, now the African
Union Transitional Mission to Somalia, continue
to generate high hopes for the partnership between
the United Nations and Africa. They are flagship
regional peacekeeping initiatives in the fight against
terrorism and require predictable financial, logistical
and technical support of the United Nations, in the
light of the fact that peacekeeping is, above all, one of
the priorities of the Council, pursuant to the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), we must recall that that organization covers a
vast zone — from Eastern Europe to the Far East — and
has great political, diplomatic and military potential,
as well as a collective security strategy that extends
to 2025. The CSTO has demonstrated commitment in
its response to the common challenges of collective
security and the fight against terrorism. That potential
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

has paved the way for CSTO efforts in the context of
peacekeeping and for the organization to play a decisive
role in normalizing and stabilizing the situation in
Kazakhstan, via an effective regional solution. Needless
to say, it is vital to continue enhancing the partnership
between the CSTO and the United Nations system, in
particular with the United Nations Regional Centre
for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia and the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, not only in
conflict prevention and peacekeeping efforts, but also
in the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and in the prevention of
violent extremism and drug trafficking.
I conclude by again calling for enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, including
interregional partnerships. One main consequence
of such partnerships is the support provided to the
United Nations in its mission to maintain international
peace and security. Working in synergy with regional
organizations is not an option, but rather a sine qua non
that reminds us of our commitments inscribed upon
the tablets of international solidarity and within the
collective memory of the peoples of the world.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I welcome Deputy Minister Vershinin
to the Council. I thank Secretary-General Guterres
and Secretary-General Zas for their briefings. I also
welcome the representatives of the States members of
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).
Mexico attaches the greatest importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in conflict prevention
and resolution. Experience has shown that those
organizations often possess more in-depth knowledge
of the specificities of each region, which is essential
in more effectively addressing challenges to peace
and security.

S/PV. 8967

between the United Nations and the CSTO, in particular
in terms of information-sharing, becomes relevant in
such circumstances. Mexico reiterates that all actions
to combat terrorism must be in line with international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
Other challenges we all face are the illicit
trafficking in drugs and the illicit trafficking and
diversion of weapons. We recognize the efforts of the
countries of the region to address drug trafficking.
However, countering the traffic in small arms and light
weapons requires greater commitment, with a vision
of shared responsibility and joint efforts to address
that scourge more effectively. Resolution 2616 (2021)
specifically encourages regional cooperation, including
through joint border activities, which are essential to
halting trafficking in such weapons before they fall into
the wrong hands. The resolution also underscores the
importance of capacity-building within member States
to achieve that objective.
I conclude by reiterating Mexico’s position in the
Council. Our work should be more preventive in nature,
so as to address the underlying causes of conflict:
marginalization, lack of opportunities and inequality,
which are all on the rise throughout the world. They
encourage radicalization and the illicit flow of drugs
and weapons.
Lastly, I take this opportunity to acknowledge
the work of the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia in that area,
as well as other areas related to the women and peace
and security agenda. We hope that we can create new
synergies between the United Nations and the CSTO in
those areas.

Today’s briefings have already highlighted several
challenges we all face. It is time to identify new
opportunities for cooperation and complementarity and
to put them into practice.

Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I too would like to
thank Secretary-General Guterres for briefing us on
the cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). I
also welcome CSTO Secretary-General Zas to today’s
meeting and thank him for his briefing.

One such challenge, which is a threat to us all,
as we have already heard, is international terrorism.
Cooperation and coordinated efforts among CSTO
member States are key to combating terrorism in
a region that has been particularly hard hit by the
complex situation in Afghanistan. Greater interaction

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is a long-standing practice that
has contributed to advancing the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations. In that vein, we
support regional cooperation forums that advance those
principles in spirit and in letter.

22-2594717/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

16/02/2022

We are in favour of sharing best practices and
exchanging views with various regional organizations
engaged in matters of peace, security and cooperation
among countries. We therefore welcome today’s
discussion under Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter, on the understanding that all regional
organizations should work in a transparent manner,
following clear rules and principles. We support the
idea that any country must be able to decide in full
freedom on the regional body it wishes to join or not
join, in accordance with the aims and aspirations of
its people.

Guterres and the Secretary-General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), Stanislav Zas,
for their insightful presentations.

From that perspective, it is not without concern
that we followed the recent deployment of the CSTO
in Kazakhstan. We understand that those forces have
left the country, but transparency about such a critical
matter is needed in order to create a climate of trust
and understanding. It is important that such operations
be conducted in full respect for human rights and
fundamental rights. All regional organizations need
to adhere to international law and international
humanitarian law when engaging in activities of peace
and security. The work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia is
crucial in that respect, and we commend the Centre for its
activities in the region pertaining to counter-terrorism,
border demarcation, transboundary water management
and the women and peace and security agenda.

The United Arab Emirates supports the principle
of regional solutions to regional problems. Regional
mechanisms impart the local context and the knowledge
that are essential for supporting sustainable solutions.
In some cases, regional issues have international
consequences, and the context provided by regional
organizations can critically inform the work of the
Security Council. From this perspective, we are pleased
to see the United Nations strengthen its relationships
with various regional and subregional organizations,
including the Collective Security Treaty Organization.

There are excellent examples to learn from, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) — one of the largest regional security
organizations in the world. In 2020, while chairing
the OSCE, we devoted particular focus to seeking
solutions through negotiations and diplomacy. Doing
so and acting in good faith in several regional and
international organizations in the Western Balkans,
Europe and beyond has produced tangible results in
our case with regard to building good-neighbourly
relations, promoting the rule of law and human
rights, in particular the rights of the children, women
and minorities.
In conclusion, let me emphasize once again that
regional organizations are important players and serve
their purpose when they reflect the goals and aspirations
of all their members.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank the Russian Federation for organizing
this meeting. I also thank Secretary-General António
18/24

The United Arab Emirates attaches great importance
to prioritizing regional views in conflict resolution, as
well as peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We are a
member of a wide range of regional and subregional
organizations, including the Gulf Cooperation Council,
the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, and we value those organizations
for the coordination and synergy that their platforms
offer to jointly address common challenges.

Building on such relations, the United Arab
Emirates also hopes to see the enhanced inclusion and
participation of regional actors in the discussions of the
Security Council. Today’s debate is a good manifestation
of how voices from the region can inform the Council’s
deliberations on security challenges impacting Central
Asia. The United Nations and the CSTO have a number
of overlapping objectives, including peacebuilding,
countering terrorism, combating trafficking in persons
and combating illegal trafficking in narcotics and arms.
The Council should encourage enhanced
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and regional actors, as well as the sharing of best
practices. In that regard, we also note the regular highlevel and working-level contacts between the CSTO and
the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Department
of Peace Operations. Cooperation between the CSTO
and the United Nations, as well as other subregional
organizations in Central Asia, is all the more warranted
in the light of recent developments in Afghanistan.
The challenges resulting from the radical shift in
the political, security and humanitarian environment
in Afghanistan pose risks with regional implications
for Central Asia, including in relation to transnational
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

crime, drug trafficking, terrorist activities and refugee
flows. We welcome regular contacts between the CSTO,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to coordinate
approaches for addressing the threats of terrorism
and extremism in the region, as well as other crossborder challenges.
With regard to recent events in Kazakhstan, the
United Arab Emirates closely followed the stabilization
of the situation. We expressed our support for the
Government of Kazakhstan’s efforts to maintain
stability and security within its borders and fulfil the
aspirations of its people. Such steps are critical to
maintaining stability in neighbouring countries and the
region, as a whole.
The Council must ensure that regional perspectives
are systematically included in its consideration of items
on its agenda. Factors of conflict, like terrorism or
drug trafficking, are neither easily contained within
State borders, nor can they be addressed by one State
alone. Taking into account the experience, knowledge
and perspectives of neighbours will be vital for creating
comprehensive strategies for conflict prevention
and resolution.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): We welcome today’s
debate organized by the Russian Federation and the
presence of Your Excellency Deputy Minister Vershinin
presiding over the Security Council today. We thank
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) for their briefings.
Norway welcomes strengthened institutional
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in order to make the most of our
combined resources in both the prevention of conflicts
and peacebuilding. We support developing partnerships
between the Security Council and relevant regional and
subregional organizations and efforts to achieve the
pacific settlement of local disputes through regional
arrangements, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Through peace operations and efforts to prevent,
mitigate and resolve conflicts, regional organizations
are important partners of the Council. Traditional
political-military threats are not the only security
challenges we face today. Rather, there are multiple
security challenges. They range from instability and

S/PV. 8967

armed conflict to the deprivation of human rights.
There are also transnational threats, such as violent
extremism, terrorism, organized crime and trafficking
in arms, drugs and human beings. Regional and
subregional cooperation is one important way of
handling those challenges.
We believe that good governance, the rule of law,
gender equality, respect for human rights and fostering
democratic institutions are essential components of
maintaining peace, security and prosperity. A case in
point is the situation in Kazakhstan. As the country now
deals with the aftermath of the recent events in January,
we believe that political reform and the observance of
human rights will be of key importance.
Norway appreciates regional efforts in Central
Asia to improve counter-terrorism cooperation and
ensure the implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Norway supports
the United Nations and the countries of the region in
those efforts. We also believe that regional cooperation
in Central Asia could contribute to reducing conflict
levels in the wider region, especially in Afghanistan.
We appreciate the engagement of regional countries in
supporting the peace process in Afghanistan.
Regional and international cooperation is necessary
in dealing with the variety of transnational challenges
of today. That must be firmly based on democratic
principles, respect for human rights and the rule of law.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia) (spoke in Russian): At
the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the
Russian Federation for organizing this Security Council
meeting on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO). I
thank Secretary-General António Guterres and CSTO
Secretary-General Stanislav Zas for their detailed
briefings on developing dialogue and cooperation
between the two organizations on various international
and regional security issues, as well as prospects for
greater cooperation.
Armenia attaches particular importance to
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security and preventing and responding to traditional
and new challenges and threats, in line with the

22-2594719/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
Expanding cooperation between the CSTO and
the United Nations, including by stepping up dialogue
between the various Secretariat bodies of the two
organizations on global and regional security issues,
is one of the priorities of Armenia’s chairmanship
of the CSTO. We note the considerable potential
for cooperation in such key areas as early warning,
peacekeeping, preventing and combating terrorism and
countering international crime.
Of great significance is cooperation between the
CSTO Secretariat and departments of the United Nations
Secretariat on matters of the participation of the CSTO
peacekeeping forces in peacekeeping activities, the
study of practical experience of CSTO member State
national contingents participating in peacekeeping
operations under the auspices of the United Nations,
and the coordination of training CSTO peacekeeping
forces, harnessing the potential of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.
Developing the potential of a collective CSTO
peacekeeping force is also bolstered by experience
gained at the national level. Further, we note the
importance of the exchange of practical experience
at the field level. For example, late last year, CSTO
representatives visited the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, in which an Armenian peacekeeping
contingent was also involved.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of
the Collective Security Treaty and the twentieth
anniversary of the establishment of the CSTO. Since
the signing of the Collective Security Treaty, the CSTO
has evolved into a multifunctional organization capable
of responding to a wide range of challenges and threats
within its area of responsibility.
One of the organization’s key areas of cooperation
is the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, including countering
the use of foreign terrorist fighters to destabilize the
situation in various regions and their deployment into
areas of armed conflict.
In early January, the CSTO’s rapid response to the
tragic events in Kazakhstan helped to stabilize and
normalize the situation in the country, demonstrating
the high effectiveness of the organization’s collective
peacekeeping forces, which were deployed for a
20/24

16/02/2022

limited period of time based on the official request of
the Republic of Kazakhstan, in accordance with the
provisions of the Collective Security Treaty and the
Charter of the United Nations.
During its chairmanship of the CSTO, Armenia will
contribute to further deepening cooperation between
the United Nations and the CSTO in preventing and
resolving conflicts and crises, combating terrorism,
extremism and other cross-border threats in order to
maintain global and regional peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Ilyassov (Kazakhstan): Let me start by
expressing my gratitude to the Russian Federation
presidency of the Security Council for placing a
very important spotlight on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO).
We thank United Nations Secretary-General António
Guterres and CSTO Secretary-General Stanislav Zas
for their detailed statements and constructive proposals
to further strengthen joint collaboration between the
United Nations and the CSTO.
I am taking the floor to inform the Council of the
tragic events that took place in January in my country,
Kazakhstan, which required the short-term yet prompt
involvement of the CSTO peacekeeping contingent for
the first time in the history of the organization.
On 2 January, protests started in western
Kazakhstan, triggered by a sharp increase in the price
of liquified gas. Despite the timely steps taken by the
authorities to meet the demands of the initially peaceful
protesters and engage in a meaningful dialogue with
them, criminal elements and religious extremists,
including foreign fighters, hijacked the protests and
deliberately escalated them into coordinated, violent
armed riots in 11 out of the country’s 14 provinces in
order to destabilize constitutional order. As a result
of the plot, many people were injured throughout
Kazakhstan, including law enforcement officers, and,
unfortunately, lives were lost.
At the special meeting of the National Security
Council of Kazakhstan on 5 January, the situation in the
country was qualified as a terrorist threat to national
security and an act of aggression. The Charter of the
United Nations recognizes the right of every State to
individual or collective self-defence in such events.
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

In that regard, and in accordance with article 4 of the
Collective Security Treaty, the President of Kazakhstan,
Mr. Kassym-Jomart Tokayev, officially requested the
CSTO to provide to provide peacekeeping assistance in
order to maintain stability in the country. The request
was promptly met and supported by all members of
the organization. The United Nations was properly
informed in a timely manner about the intention of the
CSTO to send a peacekeeping contingent composed of
all five member States to Kazakhstan to the situation.
The deployment of the peacekeeping troops, which
started on 6 January, turned out to be extremely timely
and effective. I would like to underline that, during
the mission in Kazakhstan, the peacekeepers were
providing security for strategically important facilities
and infrastructure and did not engage in any counterterrorist operation or direct combat. There is no single
registered event in which the peacekeepers had to use
their weapons during the mission in Kazakhstan.
On 11 January, the President of Kazakhstan
announced that the CSTO peacekeepers’ mission
had been successfully completed. Their withdrawal
started on 13 January and, by 19 January, the CSTO
peacekeeping contingent had been completely
withdrawn from Kazakhstan. By that time, the situation
in my country was under control and the plot to seize
power through violent armed riots had failed.
During those tragic days in January, Kazakhstan
experienced the most dramatic events in its 30-yearlong history of independence. The results of the ongoing
investigation will be shared with the international
community in due time. But we also witnessed firsthand the relevance and effectiveness of the CSTO as
a recognized regional security organization. It has
proven to be a well-functioning collective mechanism
for ensuring the stability and security of its member
States, while strictly adhering to the rules and norms
of the Treaty.
Therefore, the Republic of Kazakhstan advocates
comprehensive and close cooperation between the
United Nations and regional structures, like the CSTO,
that are ready to make a significant contribution to
strengthening global and regional security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kyrgyzstan.
Mrs. Kasymalieva (Kyrgyzstan): At the outset,
let me first welcome Deputy Foreign Minister of

S/PV. 8967

the Russian Federation, Mr. Sergei Vershinin, and
acknowledge the Russian presidency of the Council
for the month of February. We would like to express
our appreciation for the convening of today’s debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).
Kyrgyzstan also welcomes the participation of United
Nations Secretary-General António Guterres and
CSTO Secretary-General Stanislav Zas.
The CSTO is a regional international organization
that seeks to coordinate military and military-technical
cooperation among its member States and to counter
current challenges and threats. It is also symbolic
that this year is an anniversary for the organization,
marking 30 years since the Collective Security Treaty
was signed and 20 years since the organization itself
was established.
A lot of work has been done over the years. The
organization has had great opportunities to create
conditions for ensuring the national security of all CSTO
member States. Kyrgyzstan, as a member of the CSTO,
has a shared interest with the CSTO in its development
and effectiveness in responding to possible crisis
situations that affect it, which is also in the interest of
each member State. We must consolidate our efforts
and consistently strengthen the development of regional
cooperation in all aspects of the CSTO’s mandate.
The international situation continues to deteriorate,
remaining poorly predictable. That requires the
collective approach and efforts of all parties concerned,
based on the universally recognized principles and
norms of international law.
Today, as Afghanistan is faced with different
kinds of challenges, the situation in that country is
characterized by the consolidation of the difficult
socioeconomic challenges in the country.
Kyrgyzstan, as a country traditionally friendly
with Afghanistan and located in the same region, is
interested in a stable and prosperous Afghanistan, has
always made efforts to establish peace in that country
and sincerely seeks to provide all possible assistance to
the Afghan people. We were among the first countries
to deliver humanitarian aid by plane to Kabul, as well
as by land transport to the ethnic Kyrgyz of the Little
and Great Pamir valleys, in Badakhshan province,
Afghanistan. It is essential to ensure the safety and
well-being of ethnic Kyrgyz living in the Little and

22-2594721/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Great Pamirs and a safe corridor for the delivery of
humanitarian aid to them.
The events that took place in Kazakhstan showed
the presence of so-called sleeper cells of international
terrorist organizations in the Central Asian countries,
which can intensify their activities in the presence of
any conflict situation, both within the States and in the
border areas.
The initiative of Kazakhstan to activate the
mechanisms of the collective security system of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) with
respect to the situation in Kazakhstan confirmed the
collective opinion of the CSTO member States on
the existing challenges and threats to security. The
fundamental principles of the establishment and
functioning of the Organization, its foreign policy
and military components made it possible, given their
accumulated potential, to respond in a timely manner to
the appeal of Kazakhstan.
Today, we can state that the Collective Security
Treaty Organization has become one of the key
international organizations in the field of security in
Eurasia. At the same time, we can say with confidence
that, during this period, the CSTO has become an
influential structure that has gained authority in the
region and in the international arena. It is clear that,
to solve the tasks facing the international community
in countering challenges and threats to security, it is
necessary to consolidate the capabilities and efforts of all
countries and international and regional organizations.
Since the CSTO was created, cooperation
with international and regional organizations and
associations has been expanding, primarily with
its closest partners — the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States — and contacts with the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
have been developing.
In conclusion, Kyrgyzstan, as an active member
of the CSTO, is interested in developing the potential
of the Organization. I am confident that, through joint
efforts, we will be able to strengthen the cooperation
between the United Nations and the CSTO in order to
maintain regional and international security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belarus.
22/24

16/02/2022

Mr. Rybakov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): On
the eve of the thirtieth anniversary of the Collective
Security Treaty and the twentieth anniversary of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) itself,
we consider the discussion of the topic of cooperation
between the United Nations and the CSTO to be
very relevant.
In recent years, the CSTO has made significant
and difficult strides to transform from an inherently
defensive alliance into a multifunctional security
organization with effective tools and collective
mechanisms to combat a wide range of modern threats
and challenges.
As a regional organization within the meaning of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, the
CSTO makes a significant contribution to ensuring
security and stability in the European and Eurasian
areas. The principles of the United Nations, including
the right to collective self-defence enshrined in
Article 51 of the Charter, form the basis of the CSTO.
We view developing cooperation between the two
organizations in areas of mutual interest as a natural
and logical process.
Belarus welcomes the positive and proven practice
of the regular delivery of statements on behalf of the
CSTO on United Nations agenda items, as well as the
dissemination of the CSTO’s statements as official
documents — not only of the General Assembly, but
also of the Security Council.
We believe that it is important to continue the practice
of preparing periodic reports of the Secretary-General
on cooperation with regional and other organizations,
as well as the General Assembly’s practice of adopting
relevant resolutions on a biennial basis. In our view, the
fact that the work on such resolutions often takes on a
political hue only confirms that the CSTO is a strong
organization, whose significance some States would
rather ignore.
Practical cooperation between the United Nations
and the CSTO is based on a Joint Declaration on
cooperation between the two Secretariats dated
18 March 2010 and a number of memorandums of
understanding between the CSTO Secretariat and the
relevant structures and departments of the United
Nations Secretariat. We are pleased that the ad-hoc
communication in the organizations is shifting to
systematic cooperation.
22-25947

16/02/2022

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

Belarus is in favour of the development of practical
cooperation between the CSTO and the relevant United
Nations structures in the area of the maintenance of
international peace and security.
As part of the CSTO’s work in that connection,
special emphasis is being placed on the situation in
Afghanistan, which is just outside the Organization’s
borders. Belarus will continue to support the initiatives
of the CSTO partners within the United Nations to
foster security in Afghanistan and the bordering
regions and to neutralize the threats and challenges
linked to terrorism and extremism. In that context,
the establishment of systematic cooperation between
the CSTO Secretariat and the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism is of particular importance. The
basis for that cooperation can be found in the relevant
memorandum dated 9 November 2018.
One promising area is peacekeeping. In 2011,
Belarus put forward an initiative to develop cooperation
between the CSTO and the United Nations in this area.
As such, my country places great value on the ongoing
dialogue between the two organizations on this topic.
The collective peacekeeping forces of the
CSTO were activated for the first time in January in
Kazakhstan upon the request of the President of the
country, in full compliance with the Charter of the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty. The
member States of the CSTO and international experts,
including United Nations representatives, commended
the timeliness and promptness of the decision to conduct
a peacekeeping operation. At the recent extraordinary
session of the CSTO Collective Security Council,
Mr. Lukashenko, President of the Republic of Belarus,
noted that the actions of the collective forces made it
possible to disrupt the plans of clients and executors of
the provoked conflict in the country and to normalize
the situation, as well as to demonstrate the viability and
potential of the Organization.
The high potential of the CSTO in the field of
peacekeeping can be extremely useful to the United
Nations peacekeeping system, where there is a large
shortage of specialists, equipment and infrastructure.
We believe that the dispatch of mobile hospitals,
military medics or demining units, as well as equipment
and infrastructure, is a potential avenue of participation
of the CSTO in United Nations peacekeeping within the
mandates of the Security Council.

S/PV. 8967

There are also other areas of joint work that are not
directly linked to the activities of the Security Council
but are important from the point of view of preventive
diplomacy. International information security is
particularly pertinent given the sharp increase in
the frequency of security incidents in the area of
information and communications technologies. These
incidents are not only becoming more disruptive and
diverse, but are also significantly undermining trust
between countries.
As a candidate for non-permanent membership of
the Security Council for 2024-2025, Belarus confirms
its readiness to promote all joint initiatives of the United
Nations and the CSTO for the cause of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in Russian): I give the floor
to the representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Hikmat (Tajikistan): I congratulate the
Russian Federation on presiding over the Security
Council and thank it for having organized today’s
debate on “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization”. I wish to
thank also Mr. António Guterres, Secretary-General of
the United Nations, and Mr. Stanislav Zas, SecretaryGeneral of the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO), for their comprehensive briefings.
In today’s environment of growing international
tensions and emerging new conflict zones, the activities
of regional organizations in many respects complement
the efforts of the United Nations. The CSTO has an
important role to play in that area.
One of the fundamental principles of the foreign
policy of all CSTO member States is their recognition
of the central role of the United Nations in the system
of international relations. Cooperation with the United
Nations and international organizations operating in the
field of security is an important direction of the work of
the CSTO aimed at ensuring reliable peace and security
in the region within the framework of its responsibility.
That principle is enshrined in the CSTO Charter.
The registration of the CSTO Charter with the
United Nations Secretariat and its being granted
observer status in the General Assembly laid the
legal basis for the interaction between the United
Nations and the CSTO. The 2010 Joint Declaration on
Cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO
defined the long-term goal of the relationship, which

22-2594723/24

S/PV.8967

Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations

is to make a substantial contribution to addressing the
emerging challenges and threats encountered by the
international community.
Central Asia is one of the regions of CSTO
collective security. In that regard, potential security
threats make it necessary to bring cooperation between
the United Nations and the CSTO to a qualitatively new
level. An analysis of the development of the militarypolitical situation in Central Asia confirms its adverse
impact on the existing collective security system. That
adverse impact is primarily related to the situation
in Afghanistan. Unfortunately, the challenges and
threats emanating from the territory of that country are
increasing day by day. Of particular concern to us is the
threat coming from drug trafficking. With the Taliban
takeover, opium production in Afghanistan increased
by 6,800 tons, equal to 320 tons of pure heroin. For
comparison, in the first seven months of 2021 the
relevant authorities of Tajikistan seized 484 kilograms
of drugs, whereas in the last four months of Taliban
rule alone, the seizure amounted to around 3 tons. That
is almost six times as much.
In that context, we deem it necessary to develop
mechanisms for interaction between the CSTO and the
United Nations in countering drug trafficking. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime should be
actively involved in that work as well.
Cooperation within the multilateral framework of
the United Nations, the CSTO, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States could also strengthen regional anti-drug security
in Central Asia, with the goal of eradicating drug
trafficking, the non-medical consumption of drugs and
smuggling in the CSTO area and beyond.
The activities of terrorists and extremist
organizations and transnational crime are a serious
challenge to the international community. That issue is
also at the centre of the attention of the United Nations.
Since early September 2021, there has been an increase
in the number of terrorist groups in the provinces of

24/24

16/02/2022

Afghanistan bordering Tajikistan, with additional
militant forces and military equipment being pulled
together. In the north-eastern provinces of Afghanistan,
there are more than 40 camps and terrorist training
centres with more than 6,000 fighters.
Guided by the need to counter a potential threat,
the CSTO member States conducted eight large-scale
military drills in 2021 alone, of which five took place
in Tajikistan, near the Tajik-Afghan border.
Given the current situation in Afghanistan, the
possibilities of strengthening the southern borders
of the organization are being discussed within the
framework of the CSTO.
In that regard, it is appropriate to recall the timely
proposal of the President of the Republic of Tajikistan,
His Excellency Mr. Emomali Rahmon, to create a
security belt around Afghanistan. It is necessary
to involve the United Nations and its entities and
other international and regional organizations in the
implementation of that initiative.
The recent events that took place in Kazakhstan
in early January and the involvement of the CSTO
peacekeeping forces in eliminating the threat of
a terrorist attack demonstrated the organization’s
capacity to quickly respond to an emerging security
threat on the territory of one of its members.
Those are all additional reasons to bring the issue
of integrating CSTO peacekeeping forces into United
Nations peacekeeping operations to a new, practical
level. Our hope is that the institution of a CSTO Special
Envoy for Peacekeeping Activities, established in
2021 as a result of the CSTO summit in Dushanbe, in
cooperation with the United Nations, will contribute to
the intensification of activities in that field.
In conclusion, let me wish the Russian Federation
a successful presidency of the Security Council
this month.
The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.

22-25947
