General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

264

3. Requests the Special Committee at its next session:
(a) To accord priority to its work on the proposals
regarding the question of the maintenance of international peace and security, with a view to listing and examining all proposals, including those relating to the
functioning of the Security Council;
(b) To consider proposals made by Member States
on the question of rationalization of existing procedures of the United Nations and, subsequently, any
proposals under other topics;
4. Further requests the Special Committee, in the
l~ght of the progress it has achieved concerning the ques~1on of the peaceful settlement of disputes, to continue
its work on this question with a view to developing and
recommending a means of bringing the work to an appropriate conclusion on the basis of the list prepared by
the Committee in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 33/94;
5. Also requests the Special Committee to continue
the elaboration of the draft Manila declaration on the
peaceful settlement of international disputes with a view
to submitting it for consideration to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session;
6. Requests the Special Committee to be mindful of
the i!llportai:ice_ ?f reaching general agreement whenever 1t has s1gntf1cance for the outcome of its work:
7. Urges members of the Special Committee to participate fully in its work in fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to it;
8. _Invites Governments to submit or to bring up to
date, 1f they deem it necessary, their observations and
proposals in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX);
9. Requests the Secretary-General to render all
a~sistance to the Special Committee, including the provis10n of summary records; 14
_10.. Requests the Secretary-General to give high
pnonty to the preparation and publication of the suppleme~ts to the Repertoire of the Practice of the Security
Council _and the Repertory of Practice of United Nations
Or$ans m order_ to bring those publications up to date as
quickly as possible and to submit a progress report on
the _matter to the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth
session;
11. Requests the Special Committee to submit a
r~port on_its work to the General Assembly at its thirtysixth session;
. 12.. De~ides to \nclude in the provisional agenda of
its t~1rty-s1xth ~ess1on the item entitled "Report of the
Special Committee on the Charter of the United
Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role of the
Organization".

95th plenary meeting
I 5 December 1980

35/165.

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country,"

Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations 30 and the Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of
America regarding the Headquarters of the United
Nations, n
Recalling further that the problems related to the privileges and immunities of the missions accredited to the
United Nations, the security of the missions and the
safety of their personnel are of great importance and
concern to the Member States, as well as the primary responsibility of the host country,
Having noted with deep concern the recent increase in
acts of terrorism against the premises and personnel of
missions accredited to the United Nations, noting the
assurances given by the competent authorities of the
host country and recognizing that effective measures
should be taken in view of recent developments, in particular to avoid any acts violating the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Expressing its sympathy for the victims of the acts of
terrorism perpetrated against accredited missions and
their personnel,
I. Endorses the recommendations of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country contained in
paragraph 31 of its report; i;
2. Strongly condemns the acts of terrorism perpetrated against missions accredited to the United Nations
and their personnel:
3. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects of host country relations
with the United Nat ions, in particular with regard to
the need for effective measures to be taken by the host
country in view of recent developments, and to follow
deve_lopments in these areas in co-operation with the
Chairman of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country;
4. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to continue its work, in conformity with
General Assembly resolution 28 I9 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971;
_5. pecides t~ include !n the provisional agenda of its
th1rty-s1xth session the item entitled "Report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / I 66.

Consolidation and progressive development of
the principles and norms of international economic law relatin~ in particular to the legal
aspects of the new mternational economic order

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter
of the U_ni_t~d Natio~s, the General Assembly is called
upon to m1tiate studies and make recommendations for
the purp_ose of ~ncouraging the progressive development of mternat1onal law and its codification,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of I May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic

"See sect. VIII, resolution 35/10 B. para. 2 (e).

'' Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirty-fijih Session.
Supplement No. 26 (A/35/26).
·

"' Resolution 22 A (I).
·· Resolution 169 (II).

IX.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international eco11omic co-operation,
Recalling its resolution 34/150 of 17 December 1979,
entitled "Consolidation and progressive development of
the principles and norms of international economic law
relating in particular to the legal aspects of the new international economic order",
Noting the report of the Secretary-General3 8 and the
views submitted by some Governments in response to
resolution 34/150,
Recognizing the urgent need for a systematic and
progressive development of the principles and norms of
international law relating to the new international
economic order,
l. Requests the United Nations Institute for Training and Research:
(a) To prepare a list of the existing and evolving
principles and norms of international law relating to the
new international economic order concerning the
economic relations among States, international organizations and other entities of public international law,
and the activities of transnational corporations, as contained, inter alia, in the following texts:
Declaration on Principles of International Law
concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;3'
(ii) Declaration and Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order; 40
(iii) Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States; 41
(iv) General Assembly resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16
September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation;
(v) International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade; 42
(vi) Set of Multilaterally Agreed Equitable Principles and Rules for the Control of Restrictive
Business Practices; 4 '
(vii) Final Acts of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development 44 and declarations
adopted by all United Nations conferences
relevant to the new international economic order;
(b) To prepare an analytical study, on the basis of
the list referred to in subparagraph (a) above, on the
progressive development of the principles and norms of
international law relating to the new international
economic order;
(c) To complete the study referred to in subparagraphs (a) and (b) above in time for the Secretary-

General to submit it to the General Assembly at its
thirty-sixth session;
2. Urges Member States to submit relevant information with respect to the study not later than 31 July 1981;
3. Requests the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the regional commissions, the United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations and other relevant intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations active in this field, as
determined by the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research, to submit relevant information and to cooperate fully with the Institute in the implementation of
the present resolution;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Asst:mbly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the study made by the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research for its consideration on a priority basis, under an item entitled "Progressive development of the principles and norms of international law
relating to the new international economic order" to be
included in the provisional agenda of that session.
95th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

(i)

" A/35/466.
" Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
"' Resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-Vl).
41
Resolution 3281 (XXIX).
"See sect. V, resolution 35/56, annex.
"TD/RBP/CONF /10.
" Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, vol. I, Final Act and Report (United Nations publication, Sales
No. 64.II.B. l l); ibid., Second Session, vol. I and Corr. I and 3 and
Add.I and 2, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.68.II.D.14); ibid., Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E.73.11.D.4); ibid., Fourth
Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.76.11.D. IO and corrigendum); and ibid., Fifth Session, vol. I.
Report and Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.79.II.D.14).

265

35/167.

Observer status of national liberation movements recognized by the Organization of
African Unity and/or by the League of Arab
States

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the resolution of the United Nations
Conference on the Representation of States in Their
Relations with International Organizations relating to
the observer status of national liberation movements
recognized by the Organization of African Unity and/or
by the League of Arab States,"
Noting that the Vienna Convention on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International
Organizations of a Universal Character"" regulates only
the representation of States in their relations with international organizations,
Taking into account the current practice of inviting the
above-mentioned national liberation movements to participate as observers in the sessions of the General
Assembly, specialized agencies and other organizations
of the United Nations system and in the work of the
conferences held under the auspices of such international organizations,
Convinced that the participation of the national liberation movements referred to above in the work of international organizations helps to strengthen international peace and co-operation,
Desirous of ensuring the effective participation of the
above-mentioned national liberation movements as observers in the work of international organizations and of
regulating, to that end, their status and the facilities,
privileges and immunities necessary for the performance of their functions,
'' See Official Records of the United Nations Conference on the Representation of States in Their Relations with International Organizations, Vienna. 4 February-14 March 1975, vol. II (United Nations
publication. Sales No E.75.Y.12), p. 201. document A/CONF67/l5.
annex.
'"Ibid., p. 207, document A/CONF.67/16.
