S/PRST/2004/4

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
26 February 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4917th meeting of the Security Council, held on 26 February 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The question
concerning Haiti”, the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses deep concern in regard to the
deterioration of the political, security and humanitarian environment in Haiti.
It deplores the loss of life that has already occurred, and fears that the failure,
thus far, to reach a political settlement may result in further bloodshed.
Continued violence and the breakdown of law and order in Haiti could have
destabilizing effects in the region.
“The Security Council commends the Organization of American States
(OAS) and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) for their lead role in
promoting a peaceful solution and for trying to re-establish confidence among
the parties, in particular through their Plan of Action.
“The Council supports the CARICOM and OAS as they continue to work
towards a peaceful and constitutional solution to the current impasse. The
principles outlined in the CARICOM/OAS Plan of Action represent an
important basis for a solution to the crisis. The Council calls upon the parties
to act responsibly by choosing negotiation instead of confrontation. An
accelerated timetable now seems necessary.
“The Security Council is deeply concerned with the prospect of further
violence in Haiti and acknowledges the call for international involvement in
Haiti. The Council will consider urgently options for international
engagement, including that of an international force in support of a political
settlement in accordance with the United Nations Charter.
“The Council calls upon all sides in Haiti’s conflict to facilitate the
distribution of food and medicine and ensure the protection of civilians. It
calls upon all sides to respect international humanitarian personnel and
facilities and to ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches those who need it.
“The Council calls upon the Government and all other parties to respect
human rights and to cease the use of violence to advance political goals.
Those responsible for human rights violations will be held accountable.

04-25210 (E)

260204

*
0
4
2
5
2
1
0
*

S/PRST/2004/4

“The Security Council supports the Secretary-General’s decision to name
a Special Advisor for Haiti.
“The Security Council will continue to monitor closely the situation in
Haiti and remains seized of the matter.”

2
