UNITED NATIONS

1 SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

~-HIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1885’”

MEETING:

30 JANUARY

1976 U:N []:$$&&Rj’

JUN 2 9 1984

NEWYORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1885) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. .. .. ... .. ... .. ... .. .. ... ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .. .. ..

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11918). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement of the President concerning a telegram from Mr. Ali Soilihi, head
of State of the Comoros . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

Adoptionoftheagenda

S/PV. 1885

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
!
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The. date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1885th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,

30 January

President: Mr. Salim A. SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).

Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. Ramphul (Mauritius),
Mr. Harriman
(Nigeria),
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland), .
Mr. Baroody (Saudi Arabia), Mr. Botha (South Africa),
Mr. Driss (Tunisia) and Mr. Petri& (Yugoslavia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber;
Mr. Kamana
(President
of the United
Nations Council for Namibia) and the members of the
delegation took places at the Security Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
Adoption

2.

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1918)
The meeting

2. The PRESIDENT:
The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
first speaker is the representative of Cuba. I therefore
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

agenda (S/Agenda/lSSS)

1.

of the agenda

3. Mr. ALARC6N
(Cuba) (interpretation from Spanish): I have here a Secretariat document prepared for
the United Nations Council for Namibia
which is
28 pages long and which confines itself to an account
of the recent action of the Security Council on Namibia.
A similar document reflecting what the Assembly has
done on the matter would be much more volumirious,
since the Assembly has been dealing with the subject
for many years over which it has reached a verdict
which is well known and reflects the opinion of the
overwhelming
majority
of the international
community. But let us revert to the shorter document.
It contains the texts of 14 resolutions adopted by the
Council in the period from 25 January 1968 to 17 December 1974, when the Security Council last adopted
a resolution on Namibia.

was called to order at 3.55 p.m.
Adoption

1976, at 3 p.m.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 16 December 1975 from the SecretaryGeneral addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/11918)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken previously
[/88&h-1883rd
meetings],
I
invite the representatives
of Algeria, Bangladesh,
Burundi,
Cuba, Egypt, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Nigeria, Poland, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, Tunisia and Yugoslavia to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the usual understanding that they will be invited to
take a place at the Council table whenever they wish
to address the Council. I also invite the President and
members of the delegation of the United Nations
Council for Namibia to take their places at the Council
table.

4. This means that about two resolutions on Namibia
are’ adopted a year+ne
every five months-by
this
body entrusted with-maintaining
international
peace
and security, resolutions whose texts .contain various
provisions which it would be useful to recall at this
stage. Repeatedly
these resolutions
state that the
members of the Council condemn the illegal presence
of South Africa in Namibia, that they recognize the
inalienable
right bf the Namibian
people to selfdetermination
and independence and the principle of
the national unity and territorial integrity ofthat people,
that they consider also that the continued occupation
of Namibia by South African forces could result in
situations which might jeopardize peace and security
in southern Africa; and that they request those Members of the United Nations which have special relations
with the Government of Pretoria, to do their best to
persuade it td adopt a line of conduct more compatible
with the principles laid down by the Organization.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr.
Karim
(Bangladesh),
Mr.
Mikanagu
(Burundi), Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Camara (Guinea), Mr. Jaipal (India),
Mr. Marpaung
(Indonesia),
Mr. Hall (Jamaiqa),
Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. Minikon (Liberia), Mr. Kant& (Mali),
1

5. I will not, of course, proceed to read out these
resolutions because I know that members of the Council are well aware of them and that they will bear them
in mind as they once again consider the subject of
Namibia. I do want to recall some of the decisions taken
by the Security Council, as, for example, the decision
contained in paragraph 9 of resolution 301 (1971)
adopted on 20 October 1971, that is, over four years
ago. Therein the Council declared that any further
refusal on the part of the South African Government
to withdraw from Namibia could create conditions
detrimental to the maintenance of peace and security
in the region.
6. There is another reference in resolution 323 (1972),
adopted on 6 December 1972, in paragraph 2 of which
the Council pointed out that the overwhelming majority
of the opinions of those consulted by the representative of the Secretary-Genera1 in Namibia categorically
rejected the policy of bantustans, demanded their
immediate abolition,
demanded the immediate withdrawal of the South African administration
from
Namibia, and further demanded the accession of that
Territory to national independence and the preservation of its territorial integrity. The Council also pointed
out that, accordingly, the opinion of the vast majority
of the Namibian
people was consistent with the
repeatedly expressed position of the United Nations on
the matter.
7. The last resolution, as the Council well knows,
resolution 366 (1974) of 17 December 1974, demanded
that South Africa make a solemn declaration that it
would comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
United Nations and the advisory opinion of the Intemational Court of Justice... that it recognize the territorial integrity of Namibia as a nation, such declaration
to be addressed to the Security Council.
8. The rest is all too well known to members of this
body. Members all well know what the reply of the
South African regime was. They know further what the
unfortunate circumstances were which made it impossible for this United Nations body to discharge its
duty, preventing it even from being consistent with
its previous decisions. By virtue of the triple veto
[see 1829th meeting] the Council was hindered from’
adopting the appropriate measures and continuing to
consider and deal with the question of Namibia in
keeping with the Charter and the duties of this United
Nations body.
9. We are meeting, then, once again to consider
a situation which was described by the Security Council more than once as one that generated threats to
peace and security in Africa. And the Council meets
once again after long awaiting a South African reply
which has not yet come and conciliatory action which
some Members of the United Nations are in a position
to carry out. At this meeting of the Council there is
only one new procedural element. This is nothing
other than the surprising reappearance in the chamber

of Mr. Botha, the representative of the racist minority
of South Africa. This spokesman of the South African
racists and colonialists appears, but not exactly to
bring us the reply that the Security Council has been
expecting since 17 December 1974, not even belatedly
to state that he appeared in the chamber because he
recognized, even to some degree, the role of this
United Nations body regarding the Territory that South
Africa has usurped; nor did he come to announce that
his Government was in a position to amend a policy
which has met with the most categorical repudiation
by the world public.
10. On the contrary, he has come. to remind the
Security Council that the situation in Namibia is a
grave threat to international
peace and security., He
has come to tell the Council that the South African
regime is far from harbouring the least intention of
changing its well-known policy. He has come to place
on record once again that the racist minority
of
Pretoria continues to flout international
opinion. That
it persists in perpetuating its oppression not only of
the African masses in South Africa but also of the
oppressed people of Namibia and it is doing so as
brazenly as the colonialists and racists who organized
and promoted the slave trade from the earliest times
of the Cape colony, as though the world had not
progressed an inch since the colonialists began their
massacres of the population
of former South-West
Africa, since they began their senseless depredation of
that Territory,
plundering their land and their livestock, indiscriminately
murdering
the indigenous
African population.
11. Very seldom has the Council or the Organization witnessed a more revealing statement than the
one it had the opportunity
to hear on 27 January
[1881st meeting] from the South African representative. He began by saying that the Security Council,
the International
Court of Justice, the Genera1
Assembly and all mankind were wrong and maintained
an unrealistic unilateral attitude, which was contrary
to the interests of what he called “the peoples” of the
Territory.
Moreover,
he described his Government
as if it were absolutely innocent of the history and of
the problems of what he still insists on calling SouthWest Africa and he came again, like the old colonialists,
to play a Messianic role, as it were, by presenting his
regime as accomplishing
a historic and paternalistic
mission among the African peoples.
12. Let us just look at a quotation
revealing statement:

from Mr. Botha’s

“As no homogenous people exists in South West
Africa, progress towards self-determination
must
necessarily proceed, if it is not to be imposed,
along the lines of agreement between the different
peoples concerned. The role of South Africa thus
becomes obvious:
it is to promote agreement
between the peoples of the Territory
without
imposing a solution on them.” [Ibid., paya. 96.3’

“2

.
.’

.:

13. Since the first slave-trader came to the shores of
the Namibian
Territory
the European colonialists
have attempted
to present that Territory
as one
populated by a series of conflicting tribes, peoples
incapable of governing themselves, who have to wait
for the white man in his bounty to lead them along
the path of peaceful and harmonious development.
That was the inspiration of the colonialists since the
far-off time when Mr. Heiruich Goering, the father of
the notorious Nazi, began the colonization
of that
Territory. That was the attitude of other racist and
colonialist leaders, some of whom bore the same name
as the gentleman who spoke before the Council,.and
this continues to be the attitude and the excuse of the
South African regime in denying the people of Namibia
their right to self-determination
and independence.
The historical experience of all African peoples and
of all peoples anywhere in the world who have been
victims of colonialism attests precisely to the contrary.
The essential precondition
for the people of Namibia
to organize itself into a progressive and democratic
society is the immediate withdrawal of the oppressors,
of those who are assailing and plundering that Territory, those who have oppressed that population for
too long a time for the international
eommunity
to
admit that we shall confine ourselves merely to
continuing to adopt resolutions which are not implemented in practice.

The cable gqes on to explain that previously, before
being able to cross the South African border, the
military
personnel of that country had to submit
papers showing that he did so voluntarily.
It goes on
to say that this Bill was submitted by the Defence
Minister, Mr. Peter Botha, and that it is hoped that it
would become law at the end of next month. The
defence service of the Republic is defined in the cable
as including:
“the suppression of any armed conflict outside the
Republic which, in the opinion of the State President,
is or may be a threat to the security of the Republic”.*
I repeat that the geographical definition given in this
Bill by the other Mr. Botha in regard to what would
from now on be South Africa is “Africa south of the
equator”.
16. ’ So as not to be unfair to the representative
of
South Africa, I was curious enough to look at a document [S//l948 and Add.11 he distributed which features
a map bf the African continent, on which members of
the Council will be able to see the equator line. Out
of curiosity, I looked at the trajectory of that line and
at how far the powers of the South African army
would reach in establishing the law and order of the
racists, according to this new legislation.
On the
basis of the map distributed
by the South African
delegation, the area in which the troops of the racist
regime could intervene freely, by the end of next
month, according to Reuters, would include 20 African
countries of which 19 are sovereign and independent
States-the
other one is Namibia-almost
all of them
States Members of the United Nations, some of which
are present in this chamber.

14. Mr. Botha made other comments in his statement
on other African problems, to which I will refer briefly
later on, since I fully share the opinion you expressed,
Mr. President, when you urged the members of the
Council to keep to the subject of Namibia, which is
sufftciently important and striking in itself to merit
ourexclusive consideration. Of course, my delegation,
at any time if members of the Council so wish it,
would be ready to debate here the situation in Angola
.or any other subject that the Council may want to
consider. However, I think it is worth reflecting in the
records of the Council what another spokesman for
South Africa, whose surname, coincidentally,
is the
same as that of the representative who spoke here,
was saying in Cape Town, South Africa at virtually
the same time as Mr. Botha in the Council was
expatiating on the virtues of South Africa policy and
even venturing to speak of its readiness to wc5rk in
peace and co-operation with other African States.

17. It is no accident that today an important African
newspaper, the oui/y News of Dar es Salaam, features
on its first page a strong editorial reply to the proposed
amendment to the law submitted to the South African
Parliament.
The Daily News editorial rightly stresses
the threat that that South African declaration contains
for all African States, from Zaire, Kenya and Gabon
all the way down to the south, and calls upon the
peoples of the continent to redouble their vigilance in
view of that threat and to continue and intensify their
struggle against the uparthcid regime.

15. I have before me a cable from the British ,news
agency Reuters, dated Capetown, 28 January last. I
shall read it out:

18. The fact that the existence of the racist regime
in South Africa is a constant threat to peace, to
international
security and to the independence
and
freedom of Africa cannot be denied by anyone. It has
imposed on the masses of South Africa the most
cruel exploitation
and racial oppression. South Africa
has extended that exploitation
illegally, despite the
repeated demands of the international community, over
the Territory of Namibia,
which it has utilized and
continues to utilize as a base for aggression against

“The South African Government today introduced
legislation empowering the armed forces to cross
the country’s borders to counteract any threat to
security. The legislation, Defence Amendment Bill,
defines South Africa as ‘Africa south of the
equator’.‘**
* Quoted

in

English

by the

speaker.

* Quoted

3

in English

by the

speaker.

other neighbouring territories, and specifically at this
time against the People’s Republic of Angola. Moreover, according to what I have just mentioned, there
are no limits to that South African aggressive action
until it reaches the equator.

the Council, the United Nations and world opinion
and to try to divert your attention from the important
task at hand. I shall only say that our support for
and our diplomatic,
political,
moral and material
solidarity with the people of Angola are a direct consequence of an international policy based on principles
which we have always consistently maintained.
Our
assistance to that country has been given upon the
request of its legitimate Government, the Government
presided over by Comrade Agostinho Neto, which
has been recognized
by most members of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) and by dozens
of States Members of the United Nations.

19. Moreover, that has been the official, publicly
acknowledged policy of the racist regime. I draw the
attention of the members of the Council to another
reference also from British sources, namely The
Guardian of London of 11 April 1973, quoting the
White Paper on Defence published that year by the
South African Defense Ministry.
At that time this
South African document
referred to the national
liberation struggle of the peoples of Angola, Mozambique
and
Guinea-Bissau
against
Portuguese
colonialism,
and recognized the role that the South
African troops were already playing in repressing that
liberation struggle of the then Portuguese colonies and
of the oppressed people of Rhodesia. These were the
words of the Minister of Defence of South Africa,
according to The Guardian:

22. We must, however, thank the representative of
Pretoria for his long anti-communist
lecture, because
it is a good lesson for all. The anti-communist
and antiSoviet hatred felt by Mr. Botha precisely confirms
the fact that the Soviet Union, the socialist countries
and, in general, the forces of the world defending
socialism are the firmest and most loyal allies, the
staunchest support and the sincerest friends of national
liberation
movements.
The States of Africa, the
peoples of Africa, will not be hoodwinked by the lies
of the racists and professional slanderers, who cannot
deceive anyone. They know where their friends are,
those who have shown themselves
to be such
throughout
the long struggle against colonialism.
Among them they have always relied and will continue
to rely on our country.

“I do not wish to spread alarm, but I must state
unambiguously
that for a long time already we have
been engaged in a war of low intensity and that this
situation will probably continue for some considerable time to come.“*
20. It would be an endless task to list the record
of aggressive activities by South Africa against the
African peoples-it
would be endless but it would also
be unnecessary, because, as you can see, the leaders
of Pretoria have not really been discreet in revealing
to the world their plans for enslavement not only of
the African peoples whom they now oppress, but
even of the African continent as a whole. That is why
we believe it is high time for the Security Council to
take stock of the action it has taken so far on Namibia
and to take note of what has happened since 17 December 1974, or rather, of what has not happened, and
consequently
adopt vigorous measures to put into
practice the repeated decisions of the Council with
respect to Namibia. It is high time that this’united
Nations body expressed clearly and unambiguously
its support for the .Namibian people who led, by the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO),
is waging a heroic and difficult struggle to win its
sacred right to independence. It is high time for the
Council to act in accordance with the General
Assembly’s repeated pronouncements
and it is high
time for the Council to act in a manner consistent
with its own decisions, in particular resolution 366
(1974) of 17 December 1974.

23. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Jamaica. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
24. Mr. HALL (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
express our warmest congratulations
to you, Sir, on
your performance as President of the Council for the
month of January 1976. We hope that under your
guidance the Council will deal effectively with the
current grave international situation with which we are
confronted.
25. The Security Council is now meeting once again
to discuss the question of Namibia and my Govemment is grateful for being given this opportunity
to
participate in the debate on this matter. A few months
ago, on 6 June 1975, three of the permanent members
of the Security Council, namely, the United States, the
United Kingdom and France, vetoed a draft resolution on this subject. It was the second time in the
history of the United Nations that a draft resolution
in the Security Council was subjected to a triple veto.
The first such phenomenon occurred on 30 October
1974 [see 180&h meeting]. In both instances, the triple
veto was exercised by the same countries on matters
relating to the activities of that pariah of the intemational community,
the Government of South Africa.

21. There were other comments in the statement
made by the representative of South Africa which do
not deserve any special reply on our part because it
is obvious that the purpose of his statement was to
reveal once again the contempt of his Government for

26. Many resolutions on the question of Namibia
have been adopted by various United Nations bodies,
and indeed the Security Council, by unanimous vote,

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

4

Africa on the activities of his Government’s
illegal
occupation of Namibia.
That statement shows the
contempt of the South African Government
for the
Council as well as the United Nations and, indeed,
for the international
community
as a whole. It is a
statement which reflects the paranoia which permeates
the racist regime of Pretoria.

adopted its resolution 366 (1974) in December 1974
which, inter alia, demands South Africa’s withdrawal
from the Territory and its recognition of the territorial
integrity and national unity ofNamibia.
In that resolution the Security Council also decided to remain seized
of this matter for the purpose of reviewing South
Africa’s compliance with the terms of the resolution,
with a view to considering the appropriate measures
to be taken under the Charter in the event of noncompliance
by South Africa. The result was the
reafftrmation by South Africa of its refusal to comply
with the resolutions of the Security Council and-of the
General Assembly, and the subsequent display of
impotence by the Security Council in mid-1975 to
deal with this intransigence.

32. The General Assembly has recognized for some
time that the situation in Namibia constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. The validity of that
recognition has been forcefully brought home by the
invasion of the independent State of Angola by South
Africa. And the representative of that racist regime
of Pretoria has the temerity to come here to justify
the invasion of Angola by South African troops on
9 August 1975 as an exercise by a platoon designed
for the holding of discussions-I
repeat: to hold discussions-so
that workers on the Calueque Dam
could return to work. This constitutes a gross insult
to us all. My Government
strongly condemns this
action by the Pretoria regime, which is an attempt to
expand its influence over southern Africa, and we
denounce all those who support this military manceuvre. We welcome the recent news that South African
troops, under military and political fire, are scurrying
out of Angola, and we look forward to the day when
we shall hear of their eviction from Namibia under
similar circumstances-if
necessary.

27. Undaunted by the outcome of the consideration
of this matter by the Security Council, the General
Assembly,
by an overwhelming
majority,
adopted
resolution 3399 (XXX) on 26 November
1975: a vote
of 110 in favour, none against, and 7 abstentions.
Those countries abstaining were Belgium,
Canada,
France, the Federal Republic of Germany,
Italy,
the United Kingdom and the United States. On that
resolution, which deals with the effective enslavement
of indigenous
people by a racist minority,
those
countries abstained.
28. Where is the moral outcry in the international
communications
media against those countries which
abstained? And yet many countries have recently
been subjected, and indeed are still being subjected,
.- -to an intense campaign of vilification
in the intemationai media for having abstained in the voting on
other issues which are less clear-cut in their ramifications. Such is the degree of impartiality
and objectivity
of those who would mould international
opinion and
seek to impose international
standards of morality.

33. The real intentions
of South Africa are to
perpetuate its control over Namibia, and we are given
a clear illustration
of this by the reference to the
Namibian
town of Walvis Bay as a South African
port in a statement by the Foreign Minister of South
Africa [see S/11948 and Add.1, annex, footnote a].
What is the purpose of the militarization
of Namibia
by South Africa? What is the purpose of the military
base at Grootfontein
in Namibia,
if not to launch
acts of aggression against neighbouring
States? The
Declaration of Dakar on Namibia and Human Rights
[S/11939, annex], adopted earlier this month, clearly
points out the purpose of this militarization
as a means
of consolidating
the illegal occupation
of Namibia
and of repressing tlie legitimate
resistance of the
people of Namibia, as well as using Namibia as a base
for intervention
in the internal affairs of African
countries.

29. The granting of fundamental human rights to the
people of Namibia, the eradication of their exploitation
by a minority racist regime, the cessation of the reign
of terror imposed on those suffering people-all
these
are sacrificed on the altar of greed resulting from
massive investments
by transnational
corporations,
these merchants of death and destruction which wield
such influence and power over the policies of the
abstainers.
30. Both the United Nations Council for Namibia and
the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation
of the Declaration
on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples are to be congratulated
on their continued
efforts to bring to the attention of the international
community
the current situation in Namibia.
Under
the glare of this spotlight the activities of South Africa,
aided and abetted by its allies, cannot be concealed
from the international
community.

34. Several speakers have called for the holding of
free national elections in Namibia under the supervision and control of the United Nations for the entire
Territory as a single political entity, and it is the hope
of my delegation that steps will be taken by the Security
Council to compel the South African Government
to accede to this demand. Draft resolution S/11950,
which was introduced yesterday by the representative
of Guyana constitutes,
in the view of my Govemment, the minimum position that can be expected at
this time, and it is our hope that the Security Council
wit1 unanimously adopt the draft resolution.

31. The Security Council heard a few days ago an
incredible statement by the representative
of South
5

35. The past two decades have witnessed the success
of national liberation movements in their relentless
fight to secure the freedom of their peoples from
foreign, colonial and racist domination.
In this regard
Africa constitutes a shining example to oppressed
peoples throughout
the world. Indeed, we recently
saw the victory of the indigenous peoples of Africa
over a colonial Power that had existed for 500 years.
SWAP0 is following in the footsteps’of those successful liberation movements, and my Government
fully
supports the activities of that organization
in the
pursuit of its war of liberation.
36. My Government
is convinced that the independence of Namibia is an historical inevitability
and that
this will be achieved under the leadership of SWAPO,
which is the authentic representative of the Namibian
people. But the international
community
has a legal
obligation
to hasten the establishment
of an independent Namibia with the preservation of its national
unity and territorial integrity. The current situation in
that region of Africa demands action by the Council
to set in train those measures which are called for in
General Assembly resolution 3399 (XXX).
37. Whatever the outcome of this series of meetings
of the Security Council on the question of Namibia,
my Government
will continue to give moral and
material support to the people of Namibia and their
representative, SWAPO, and will continue to denounce
the Pretoria regime and all those countries which
collaborate with that regime by maintaining
military,
diplomatic,
economic, consular and other relations
with it.
38. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Mali. Accordingly,
I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
39. Mr. KANTE (Mali) (inte~~re~ationfrom
French):
Mr. President, I should like fist of all to take this
opportunity through you to thank the members of the
Security Council for having given my delegation a
chance to participate
in their, deliberations
on the
question of Namibia,
a painful problem which distress so many African States. It is.also a pleasant’duty
for my delegation, Mr. President and dear brother,
to congratulate
you on your assumption
of the
presidency of the Security Council. We are particularly
pleased because you are a worthy son of a brotherly
country which has excellent relations with mine. The
remarkable results obtained by the Security Council
on the question of the Middle East are a measure of
your ability and your sincere militant commitment
to defend the lofty principles of the Charter. We are
assured in advance that the debates you preside over
will make it possible for us to take an important
stride forward in the liberation of Namibia.
40. The question under consideration today is one of
the most serious problems with which the Organization has had to deal since it was created. Indeed,

the dispute between the racist regime of South Africa
and the United Nations over Namibia’goes
back to
1947, when the ,United Nations was informed of South
Africa’s categorical refusal to place that Non-SelfGoverning
Territory-then
known as South West
Africa-under
the international
Trusteeship System.
Since that time, the authorities in Pretoria have heaped
nothing but a revolting scorn on the decisions and
recommendations
of the Security Council and the
General Assembly. We shall not here dwell on the
impressive
number of decisions adopted on the
question by the competent
bodies of the United
Nations. We would however wish to bring up some
important events which, have occurred in the evolution of the question in various United Nations bodies.
41. On ‘27 October 1966, faced with the obstinacy
of South Africa, the General Assembly felt compelled
to adopt a resolution to terminate
South Africa’s
Mandate over South West Africa and to place that
Non-Self-Governing
Territory under its direct trusteeship, in accordance with the Charter.’ By creating
in 1967 the United Nations Council for Namibia,*
charged with the administration
of the Territory and
with the subsequent appointment of a United Nations
Commissioner
for Namibia,
the international
community
intended to, underscore its determination
effectively to carry out its mandate over South West
Africa.
42. However, in spite of all the recommendations
and admonitions
of the Security Council and of the
General Assembly, and notwithstanding
the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice of
2 1 June 197 1,3 which declared the continuing presence
of South Africa in Namibia to be illegal, the racist
regime of Pretoria none the lesss continuesto
occupy
that Territory which is under international
administration. What is even worse, it is carrying out blind
repression there. The odious policy of bpartheid has
systematically
been extended to the Territory, while
bantustanization
of the Territory, which is intended to
destroy the unity and national identity of the Namibian
people, is being frantically pursued.
43. .The delegation of Mali forcefully denounces the
so-called
constitutional
conference
convened in
Namibia by South Africa as being contrary to the
real interests of the Namibian people. By organizing
this masquerade by way of a plebiscite the Fascist
regime of Pretoria has sought to deceive the world
public, its sinister design being, as we are well aware,
to set up puppets so as to allow it to continue
indefinitely
its subjugation
of the people of that
Territory.
44. It is clear today to everyone that the occupation
of Namibia by the racist regime of Namibia constitutes
a serious threat to international
peace and security.
The apprehensions of independent Africa are therefore
justified. Indeed, quite recently there were threats by
Pretoria against the territorial integrity of Zambia. Now

6’

there is open aggression by South African troops
against the young, independent Republic of Angola, an
agrgression for which Namibia constitutes the primary
staging area. Africa has unanimously condemned this

armed the Expeditionary
Corps of Salazar and
Caetano, of grim memories,
against the Angolan
people. Moreover, we can safely say that since the
Second World War the Soviet Union, the People’s
Republic
of China and other socialist countries,
including,
of course, Cuba, as well as democratic
organizations
in Western Europe, have not spared
their -selfless and effective support for the peoples
who are fighting against colonial domination
throughout the world. In so doing they have made an inestimable contribution
to the liberation of the peoples
of the world, to the universality of the United Nations
and to the maintenance and safeguarding of intemational peace and security. We call the entire world
to witness.

invasion.

45. The effrontery and brazenness of the advocates
of uparrheid are due to the refusal of the Organization to have recourse to the relevant provisions of
the Charter to subdue their stubborn determination
to perpetuate their domination of Namibia. The allies
of paleface power in southern Africa will surely agree
with us today that fighter planes, heavy helicopters,
tanks and other so-called conventional
weapons,
which they have supplied under unofficial agreements
and in disregard of the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, serve not to defend the country, as
they would have had us believe each time we protested,
but to violate the territorial integrity of the independent States of Africa, to slaughter the civilian population in the name of so-called Christian and Western
civilization.

49. One cannot honestly compare that legal and
moral assistance, which, what is more, is in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Organization
on
the emancipation
of the peoples of the world,. with the
deliberate
aggression which the racist regime in
Pretoria has perpetrated against the ‘Angola people.

46. Those terms, incidentally,
are the terms used
by the authorities in Pretoria themselves to justify their
craven and barbaric aggression against the young
People’s Republic of Angola. No one in those circles
has spoken out to denounce, to blast and to condemn
this further act of defiance. Is there this conspiracy
of silence because the victims are Africans? We
would not like to believe that, but we cannot but
recall the audacious Stanleyville
airlift carried out
in the 196Os, supposedly to save the lives of a few
dozen Europeans who were allegedly threatened by
fighting-which,
nevertheless, was going on far from
that town.

50. Has not the Organization,
in a number of its
resolutions, committed
its Member States to giving
assistance of all kinds to the national liberation
movements?
Would the independent
Republic
of
Angola exist today had it not been for MPLA and the
support provided
by the socialist countries
and
progressive forces throughout the world? That is a.
question that one is bound to ask in the face of the
allegations and the assertions of certain circles.
51. Let us not fall into believing that there are those
who pull the strings behind South Africa, which,
however, seems to be saying just that in a number
of its speeches, at least in so many words. I believe
that these parenthetical
comments
were certainly
necessary so as to bring out once again the dangers to
the security of African States and therefore to peace,
posed by the continuing occupation of Namibia by
South Africa.

47. We should prefer not to acknowledge complicity
on their part, for we are reluctant to believe that they
identify with the brand of Christian, Western civilization preached by Pretoria and reflected only in the
odious policy of crpartheid which, at least in their
speeches before us, they condemn. Their silence,
however, .has not been complete.
Some in those
circles have spoken out, loudly to be sure, but only
to equate the armed aggression of South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola with the valuable and
effective assistance which the Soviet Union and Cuba
have given Angola in its struggle to safeguard its
independence under international agreements properly
concluded. Their admonitions,
if that is what they can
be called, were intended solely to create a certain
amount of confusion to justify and, to foster the
colonial reconquest of Angola.

52. Today we have seen one way in which the
situation has escalated. After decreeing a general
mobilization,
the authorities at Pretoria on 28 December 1975 enacted a law authorizing
them to extend
their “military
operations”
beyond their boundaries.
That, we must admit, is a unique example in the annals
of history. Even Hitler’s fascism did not arrogate
such licence unto itself, either under national law or in
its proclamations.
53. In the meantime, the other regime, which is an
outcast of the international
community
and an
immediate neighbour of South Africa, the rebel clique
of Ian Smith, is at its wits’ end trying ,to foster a
state of armed tension in Southern Rhodesia in order
to lend a helping hand to its cousins at Pretoria in the
racial confrontation
which they are planning to bring
about in southern Africa.

48. But the worid will not be duped, and fortunately
has recognized with us that the Soviet Union and
Cuba have provided, since the outbreak of armed
fighting in Angola, that is, since 1961, their constant
material, political and moral assistance to the patriots
of MPLA
[Movimento
Popukr
& LihertqGio
de
Angola];
whereas those who today criticize them
7

ear for close to 30 years to all appeals to reason, to
all recommendations
and warnings of the Organization. Today the facts are clear and events overwhelming.
Our interminable
hesitations
and compromise resolutions have only emboldened Pretoria.
Indeed not content with maintaining
its domination
over Namibia,
it uses it for the conquest of other
African countries. It uses the Angolan problem as a
pretext in order to set itself up as a censor or a
policeman in southern Africa. Yet it should realize that
the African peoples are able to assume responsibility
for their own destiny, just like all other peoples.
The Angoian problem is exclusively within the competence of the Government of the People’s Republic
of Angola.

54. Is it not a paradox that the last redoubt of
colonialism in Africa is precisely Namibia, a Territory
under international
administration?
Is it not paradoxical that it is the representative of apartheid who
calls upon the United Nations to take control of the
situation in the People’s Republic of Angola, whereas
his abject regime, which is an outcast of the intemational community and which has been refusing for the
past 30 years to withdraw from a Territory under the
administration
of the United Nations? Is it not a
paradox that, according to the advocates of upartheid, the heterogeneity
of the population in Namibia
is an obstacle to the political emancipation
of the
Territory?
But are the inhabitants of South Africa
homogeneous? In what country of the world, can one
find such homogeneity,
today? The peoples of the
entire world, in all countries without any exception,
are made up of different races, ethnic groups and
tribes. That is true not only of Africa. However,
enough of paradoxes.

58. Chou En-lai, the prestigious former Premier of
Council of State of the People’s Republic of China,
said in 1968, after a visit to east Africa, that Africa
was ripe for revolution.
I would say, to confirm the
words of that great statesman that Africa has come of
age and cannot allow outside forces to choose its
options, not even through the intermediary of puppets
or Trojan horses. Yesterday the peoples of Mozambique and Guinea-Bissau to mention only them, made
their choices under the banners of FRELIMO
[Frente
de Lihertqiio
de Moqurrzbique]
and PAIGC [Purtido

55. The Security Council must purely and simply
reject the dilatory arguments of the Pretoria authorities.
We were expecting something other than this from the
representative of that country, pleading his case, as
he has done, in such poor taste. We had thought
that Pretoria would have used its suspension from the
Organization to examine its conscience. It would then
have come to us to say: we shall abandon our obstinacy
regarding the question of Namibia, and we are prepared
to withdraw for the benefit of the United Nations.

Africano

du IndependZnciu

da Guinh e Cubo Verde].

Today the Angolan people under that of MPLA, headed
by their prestigious leader, Mr. Agostinho Neto, have
in turn just made theirs. Tomorrow the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe will make their choices, under
the African National Congress (ANC) and SWAPO.
This is not a romantic notion; this is the law of history.
However, Africa is not therefore either racist or
sectarian; it is humanistic and accordingly, open to
the entire world. It remains devoted to the moral
values which make the strength of mankind and of
peoples.

56. However, as in the past, wisdom has yet again
not prevailed in the minds of the advocates of upurtheid. If it had, we should have been surprised. The
allies of Pretoria must resolve to understand that their
circumspection
has only served to encourage Pretoria
to pursue its disastrous policies. We concede and
acknowledge that the good faith of some must have
been betrayed by their friends in South Africa, but
now that the pressures that they have brought to bear
bilaterally
have proved ineffective in lessening the
obstinacy of Pretoria, they must change their minds
and take it upon themselves to co-operate actively
with the United Nations to liberate Namibia. It is time
for them to prove to their African friends, not in
proclamations
this time, but in concrete deeds, that
international
security is one and indivisible,
that the
detente which they advocate for Europe cannot be
strengthened while peace continues to be deliberately
broken by paleface power in Africa. Interdependence
and our common destiny make it compelling. The hour
is grave; it is no time for hesitation, for rumblings
of war are already heard in southern Africa. This is
an appeal which we make to our friends in Western
Europe in the name of justice and in the name of that
friendship, which they claim.

59. The aggression of South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola launched from Namibia
gives a new dimension to the problem before the
Security Council. The Council’s decision must take
into account the dire consequences of the illegal
occupation of that Territory under international
trusteeship by the advocates of apartheid.
You bear
weighty responsibilities,
because it is up to you to
defuse a racial confrontation
for which the racists of
Pretoria have taken the initiative.
The martyred
peoples of Namibia, Zimbabwe and Azania have their
eyes on the Council today. You are their final recourse,
before they reach the point of no return. Their expectation is that you will reach a firm decision commensurate
with the grave menace of paleface power to the lives
and security of millions of men, women and children
living in that part of the continent. Furthermore,
the
expansionism of South Africa, if not contained in time,
would engulf southern Africa in a virulent racial war
with unpredictable implications.

57. The fight against communism
cannot justify any
alliance with South Africa nor constitute extenuating
circumstances in its breaches of the peace. W,e are
faced with a rebel Member which has turned a deaf

60. We do not doubt that the members of the Security
Council fully appreciate the gravity of the current
8

situation in that part of the world and we are sure
that their decision on the question of Namibia will be
adopted solely in the light of the interests of peace,
excluding ail other considerations,
even emotional
ones, and that it will meet the expectations of the
peoples of Africa and in particular of the peoples of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and Azania.

statements they showed how inadequate was the reply
of the racist regime. Yet it was not only the reply
which was inadequate, for none‘of the demands which
had been spelled out in resolution 366 (1974) had been
implemented.
Consequently,
political prisoners continued and still continue to languish ‘in the racist
prisons. The racially discriminatory
and politically
repressive laws and practices continued
and still
continue to run rampant in Namibia. The Namibians
exiled for political reasons continue to be threatened
and kept out of Namibia. Free expression of political
views has long been and .continues to be a dream. for
a distant future. Meanwhile, the abominable
policy
of the Bantustanization
and the so-called homelands
is being implemented.
South Africa has sought to
whitewash its image in a big cover-up by the institution of the so-called constitutional
conference
between various races of the Territory.

61. The PRESIDENT:
As there are -no further
speakers inscribed for the general debate I should
like to make a statement as representative
of the
UNITED
REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA.
62. I should like to begin by expressing the particular
satisfaction of my delegation at the participation
in
our deliberations
of the delegation
of the United
Nations Council for Namibia
led by its illustrious
President, my good friend, colleague and brother,
Mr. Kamana of Zambia. We a11 know the important
role played by the United Nations Council for Namibia
in this question, and the participation
of Mr. Kamana
and his colleagues
has certainly
enriched
our
deliberations.

66. In those circumstances,
we were surprised that
the triple veto was used to block the necessary enforcement measures. At that time we were told that there
were signs of change in Namibia. We were told that
our differences were on the methods rather than the
objectives we sought in Namibia.
We were further
told, therefore, that the best way would be to encourage a movement for a change through negotiations
between the racist regime and the United Nations.
Yet, we had heard these arguments before. In 1971
a chance was given to those arguments to take effect.
Unjustified
hopes were raised in the minds of the
people of Namibia that their aspirations were at last
going to be realized. Those hopes were dashed.
Nothing came out of the contacts because South Africa
never accepted the basic position of the United Nations
to withdraw.

63. I should like also to take this opportunity
to
express the appreciation
of the Government
of the
United Republic of Tanzania for the devoted and
outstanding services to the cause of the Namibians
rendered by the United Nations Commissioner
for
Namibia,
our friend, Mr. MacBride.
It is also selfevident that the statement made by our brother,
Mr. Garoeb, Administrative
Secretary of SWAPO,
at the beginning of the meetings on this question has
tremendously
assisted the Council to gain a proper
perspective of the developments
in that international
Territory.
64. When my Minister for Foreign Affairs spoke
before the Council in June last year [1826rh meeting],
he did so against the background of the statement
issued by the racist ,regime of South Africa with regard
to Namibia. He made clear the position of the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania on the
question of Namibia. At that time, he pointed out the
arrogance of the racist regime and the cynicism that
characterized the reply of that regime to Council resolution 366 (1974). It was the conclusion of the United
Republic of Tanzania then that no change had occurred
in the defiant position of that regime and that what
remained was for the Council to take enforcement
measures against that regime with a view to getting
it to comply with the decisions of the Council.

67. It is now more than six months since we witnessed
the sorry sight of the triple veto cast in the Council.
Those who cast those vetoes had a moral obligation
to apply pressure on the racist regime to accept the
position of the United Nations.
And we are not
unaware of the initiatives they have taken. The most
recent welcome initiative in this direction is the one
taken 26 January 1976 by two of those members,
namely, the United Kingdom and France jointly with
their European Economic Community
partners [sre
S/11945].
68. But, in spite of such initiatives,
during these
six months we have seen no movement in Namibia for
the better, In fact, oppression is growing worse. South
Africa is turning Namibia
into a staging area for
aggressive purposes against independent neighbouring
States contrary even to the terms of the Mandate of
1920, which South Africa itself accepts. Populations
are being forcibly evicted from their areas of residency
in attempts to thwart the growing tide of freedom
struggle. Political
trials have continued to be the
corner-stone of the racist regime and the purging of the
African population of a political view which differs
from that of the racist regime continues to be an

65. To that end, the Tanzanian delegation, together
with other African delegations,
sponsored a draft
resolution [S/11713] which was reasonable, with a
. view to enabling the Council to take the necessary
enforcement
measures. Much to our regret, that
reasonable draft resolution
was vetoed by three
Western permanent members of the Council. At that
time, none of those members thought that South Af&a
had complied
with resolution 366 (1974). In their
9

important
instrument
of the
South
African
Government.
Everything
has demonstrated
the
emptiness of the so-called constitutional
talks. In-this
exercise detentions have played an important role of
frustrating all voices which dissent from the racist
views. In this context, it is not only political leaders
who have fallen victims to detention, but also church
leaders. These leaders have been the subject of such
detention too, as has been the case of Pastor Zephania
Kameeta, Principal of the Lutheran Paulium Theological College at Otijimbigwe.
Would it surprise
anyone, therefore, that it is out of concern for their
Christian doctrine that some of them write pastoral
letters for which they are arrested?
69. In the letter of Mr. Kameeta,
which speaks for itself, appears:

the following

enable that regime to continue enjoying some form of
political- respectability.
Of immediate relevance, we
call for all disruption-of diplomatic and other political
relations with the South African regime in so far as
Namibia is concerned.
,
72. Similarly,
there must be a severance of all
economic relations with South Africa in so far as it
relates to Namibia. My delegation is disturbed at the
role of foreign firms in Namibia. Those firms continue
relentlessly to exploit the economy of that Territory.
The South African Weekly Financid
Muil has
characterized the economy of the Territory as being
“operated
in a colonial style, with South Africa
playing the imperial Power and most of its spoils of
fishing and mining sucked by foreign firms”. Thus
over one third of the new wealth generated is
expatriated.
All this is done with the sweat of the
exploited black masses, who serve under a labour
system which denies even their basic elements of
human rights. Those who profit from the benefits of
the activities of these firms cannot, therefore, be
absolved from the evils which the South African
system has established in Namibia.

point,

“The struggle on our hands has not only to do with
the liberation
of Namibia,
but goes ‘further .and
deeper than. that. The presence of South ,Africa ,is
not just a political question, but it is a threat to the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Thus I see it as a task
of every Christian to work for the bringing down of
this Government.
In this country, which claims to
be Christian, you can be a Christian 10,000 times
over, but if you are not white you are treated like
a dog.”

73. Elucidating on the effects of economic collaboration with South Africa, my President, Julius Nyerere,
at a recent address at Oxford University on 19 November 1975;had the following to say:

Nor should it surprise members of the Council that the
effect of this letter was to ensure Mr. Kameeta’s
detention.

“Yet all those who invest in South Africa, or
otherwise treat it as a respectable member of the
international
community,
are giving support to
upurtheid
and everything which follows from it.
Institutions
do not invest in a foreign country out
of philanthropy.
They invest to make a profit or to
get an interest on their money. And by investing for
these purposes, they have bought (together with
the stocks or shares), an interest in what is called
‘political
stability’ -which
in this case means the
maintenance of apartheid. Their interest in this will
be the greater, the larger the amount they invest and
the greater the return on their investment. And the
stronger the South African economy, the larger the
resources which the South African Government can
devote to upholding racial privilege.”

70.. Thus apartheid continues to reign rampant in
Namibia.
Should the international
community
close
its eyes to what is happening there? Surely, the Security
Council could not be indifferent to the flagrant violation of the rights of,the people of Namibia without
failing in the lofty tasks that the Charter places on it.
For the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia
poses a threat to international
peace and security.
The basic objective of the Councils is-to get South
Africa to leave Namibia.
That is why the General
Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa in
its resolution
2145 (XXI). It was because of the
recognition of the rights of the people of Namibia
that the International
Court of Justice, on 21 June
1971, ruled that South Africa was under the obligation
to withdraw from the Territory. The Security Council is, therefore, duty bound to take the necessary
measures to get the apurtheid regime to comply with
the decisions of the Organization. We cannot wish this
responsibility
away.

74. Thus it should be equally obvious that to have
any economic relations with, the South Africans in
Namibia is to support South Africa’s political presence
there. We appeal, therefore, to those who sit and
condemn South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia
to follow. these verbal condemnations
with action.
One such action is certainly to disrupt all economic
relations with Namibia.

71. One ofthe most important measures that must be
taken is completely
to isolate South Africa from all
international intercourse of every kind. In the political
field South, Africa must be isolated. There has been
important progress to that end. But a more concerted
international
action is needed. For example, the time
is long overdue where there must be a complete
severance of all diplomatic and other relations which

75. South Africa has defied the international
community for too long. It is high time that South Africa
was ,made to accept the authority, of the United
Nations over Namibia. For our part, in the United
Republic of Tanzania, we shall continue to support the
struggle of the people of Namibia till victory is won.
10

79. Nevertheless, we are now throwing out another
challenge to that regime to accept a free expression of
the views of the people of Namibia through an election
supervised and controlled by the United Nations. And
for those who still harbour doubts about the intention
of South Africa, we can only say that this is a splendid
opportunity.
Let South Africa accept this challenge if
it is to give any semblance of respectability
to the
arguments of its international
apologists.

Our objective remains the achievement
of independence for Namibia as a whole. We reject any attempts
by South Africa to hoodwink the world by cosmetics
and rhetorics.’ We oppose any attempt to divide the
Territory, and we reject any so-called constitutional
talks calculated simply to maintain South Africa’s
occupation
and promote
bantustanization
of the
Territory. Our intention still remains the achievement
of a solution by peaceful means, or, to be more precise,
to achieve a solution of a less violent nature. We
have proclaimed this intention in world forums, as
well as within OAU. As the Dar es Salaam Declaration
on Southern Africa clearly asserted, Africa continues
to believe that if South Africa wanted a peaceful
solution it should have implemented.
resolution 366
(1974), thus accepting the authority of the United
Nations and respecting the right of Namibians to selfdetermination
and independence, as well as refraining
from undermining
the unity and territorial
integrity
of Namibia as a nation.

80. It is, however, important to understand that we
do not intend to associate ourselves and the United
Nations with a farcical exercise of elections. It is our
intention that such elections be the result of a real
free expression of views. We see it therefore as an,
important part of such exercise that all exiled political
leaders of the people of Namibia be allowed to return
without any restriction, and that they be allowed to
exercise their right to political expression freely, as
well as to propagate their opinions without let or
hindrance. We see it as a necessary condition that the
South African regime adhere strictly to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the repeal of
all restrititive laws. In short, it is necessary that South
Africa adhere to the demands of the Security Council
as expressed in resolution 366(1974), in all its aspects.

.76. But since South Africa refuses to abide by the
demands of the Council, we have no alternative but
to call for the necessary measures to be taken against
it. On our part, we shall continue to support the gallant
freedom lighters of Namibia under the dynamic leadership of SWAPO. For this we make no apologies, for
it is the right of every people everywhere to fight for
freedom. A person ceases to be human if he does not
fight for his freedom. And in-that fight he must demand
support from other -human beings for the sake, of
greater freedom for all. For, however much we may
regret ,the need for war, we can no more refuse that
support than the Allies could have refused support for
the resistance movements of Europe during the 1940s.
In this matter we have no alternative.
The ball is
certainly in South Africa’s court. The bitterness that
is caused against the people there as .a result of
bloodshed is the responsibility-the
sole responsibility-of
the racist regime. It is for South Africa to
choose between peace and war.

81. We ‘in Africa want peace. Yet we cannot deny
the right of Namibians
to self-determination
and
independence.
We cannot, therefore, remain indifferent to their plight. Namibia must be free. Whether
that freedom comes through the ballot or the barrel
of a gun is not our choice. That choice belongs to,
South Africa. And, on both those choices, the role
and responsibility
of the allies of South Africa are
grave indeed.
82. -Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I would say that
the Council has concluded its discussion, and I take
it that the time has come to take up the draft resolution
submitted yesterday in document S/11950. Does any
member of the Council wish to speak now in connexion
with the draft resolution?

77. Yet, there may still be some who still ‘harbour
illusions about South African intentions with regard to
Namibia.
As I have indicated, we in the .United
Republic of Tanzania do not have such illusions.
During the current debate, we were once again subjected to the rhetoric of arrogance by the representative
of the racist regime.

83. Mr. VINCI (Italy): My delegation fully supports
and will vote in favour of draft resolution S/11950,
which has been submitted by eight members of the
Council.
I wish to pay a high tribute to you,
Mr. President, and to the original drafters of the
working paper who have acted with an outstandingly
constructive spirit-which
is the main quality of statesmanship-in
order to accommodate
the other detegations represented on the Council.

78.. In the exercise of my right of reply on 27 January
[see 188,lsr /neeting], I ,remarked on .the hollowness
of South Africa’s statement before the Council, and
I need not abuse the patience of members to make a
further exposure of that statement. It is sufftcient to
assert that the statement clearly demonstrates South
Africa’s continued defiance of the authority of the
Council and the international
community.
It is also
sufficient to assert that, from South Africa’s point of
view, truth becomes truth only when it is recognized
as such by the South Africans. Mr. Botha’s statement
clearly confirmed that South Africa has still to accept
contemporary
realities.

84. My delegation
is particularly
grateful to the
sponsors for having produced a final text which fully
reflects our views and recommends a course of action
for Namibia which we feel is the most appropriate at
this stage. We cannot better show our appreciation
than by stating that we have no reservations to express
‘on the provisions contained in the draft resolution.
I will simply recall for the record that Italy abstained
11

.

on General Assembly resolutions 3295 (XXIX) and
3399 (XXX), referred to in the third paragraph of the
preamble.

91. Members of the Council are aware that one of the
main difficulties in this matter is to define the role of
the United Nations in the process of seifdetermination and, above ail, to have it accepted by South
Aft-ma. My delegation deems it necessary to give its
interpretation
of the role the Organization should play
in the possible general elections.

85. As I stressed in my statement yesterday [188&h
meeting], a unanimous decision by the Council on
the subject of Namibia is of paramount importance,
and I hope that will be the result of our vote today.
It is only by acting with one voice that the Council
may produce an impact on the Government
and
people of South Africa, thus bringing closer the
elimination of an illegal situation we have been facing
for so long. I therefore warmly welcome today’s draft
resolution and commend it to the positive vote of
our colleagues in the Council.

92. During the consultations
vou have undertaken.
Mr. President, we have listened-with the utmost atten:
tion to the arguments advanced to justify as wide a role
for the United Nations as the sponsors of the resoiution would wish. We believe for our part that the role
of the United Nations should be effective and precise.
It seems to us, however, that supervision should not
result in the creation of a machinery incompatible
with the presence of an administration
which will
obviously
not have left the Territory
before the
elections are held. As we said in our statement [see
1883rd meeting], when the time comes the Council
should determine how to ensure that these elections
are held in conformity with the normal requirements of
genuinely democratic balloting.

86. Before concluding,
Mr. President,
I wish to
express our sincere appreciation for the firm, courteous
and enlightened way in which you have conducted
our deliberations.
You have managed to focus the
attention of the Council on the subject which we were
meant to deal with, without dispersing our efforts in
the consideration of matters not strictly pertinent to
the Namibian question. This achievement has certainly
facilitated our work and its final positive outcome.

93. One last comment seems necessary to us on
paragraph 3 of the resolution. We are here discussing
-the problem of Namibia, .not the situation prevailing
in another country. We condemn any foreign interference in the affairs of an independent country, on
any basis or under any pretext. In this context we do
not believe it is fair unilaterally
to condemn certain
military actions carried out in a country which is a
neighbour of Namibia.

87. The PRESIDENT:
Since no other member wishes
to speak at this stage, I shall now put to the vote the
draft resolution sponsored by Benin, Guyana, the
Libyan Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania,
Sweden and the United Republic of Tanzania, which
is before the Security Council in document S/11950.

The draft resolution

94. Mr. President, at the time of the conclusion of
this debate on Namibia, I should like to congratulate
you on the way in which in a particularly heavy month,
you have conducted the work of the Council. We have
appreciated both your authority and your sense of
realism. Our congratulations
go also to the to the
United Nations Commissioner
for Namibia, Mr. Sean
MacBride.
We are aware of his untiring efforts to
find a solution to the problem of Namibia in keeping
with justice and with the dignity of the population of
that Territory.

was adapted unanimowly.4

88. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
representatives
who have asked to be allowed to
explain their votes after the voting.
89. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): In voting in favour of the resolution on
Namibia which was just adopted unanimously. by the
Council, my delegation wanted to furnish proof that
the French Government unreservedly supports actions
taken whenever they are aimed at enabling the popuiation of Namibia to exercise its right to seif-determination and independence. It congratulates the sponsors
of the resolution for the constructive proposals they
have made in having the essence of this text bear on
the organization of general free elections in Namibia.

95. Mr. SAITO (Japan): My delegation voted in
favour of draft resolution S/l 1950, which the Council
has just adopted. It is a source of satisfaction to my
delegation that the Council has taken a unanimous
decision on the question of Namibia.
It is a most
significant fact of which we are proud.

90. The French delegation
would, however, like
to make a few brief comments. The text on which the
Council has just taken a decision refers to certain
resolutions on which we abstained. The reservations
we put forward on them still stand, as well as those of
a strictly legal nature which relate to the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice. These
few comments, however, I should like to stress, in no
way detract from the political position of France on the
problem of Namibia.

96. In my statement before the Council two days ago
[see 1882nd meeting], I expressed my conviction that
we have to put an end to the present stalemate and
address ourselves to the most pressing action-the
need to hold free and democratic
elections under
United Nations supervision-and
at the same time
enable the Council to take a unanimous decision,
thus strengthening
the Council’s
position on the
question of Namibia.
The present resolution meets
12

102. MY delegation believes that the uositive votes
which all 15 members of the Council have just cast
will give added authority to the resolution before us.
We whole-heartedly
endorse the call -for United
Nations supervision of free elections throughout the
whole Territory of Namibia, which is the main feature
of this resolution. We do so the more willingly because
of our own commitment
to the democratic process.

this requirement,
and it is the main reason why my
delegation voted for it.
97. I hope that the Government of South Africa will
not fail to respond to the resolution, which reflects the
unanimous and strong will of the Council, and thereby
enable the Council to take further steps to implement
it. For our part, we are fully aware of our unavoidable responsibility
for the implementation
of the
resolution we adopted unanimously.

103. At the same time, my delegation would like to
express its reservations on a number of aspects of the
resolution for which we have just voted. The resolution recalls, in its preamble, a number of earlier resolutions both of the Security Council and of the General
Assembly for which my delegation did not vote. More
specifically,, I must reserve our position on the fifth
and sixth paragraphs of the preamble concerning the
advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice
and the legal responsibility
of the United Nations for
Namibia. Our views on these matters are well-known.
In brief, it remains our position that General Assembly
resolutions have the status of recommendations
and
are not mandatory in effect.

98. Before concluding, I wish to express my delegation’s .appreciation
to the sponsors of the resolution
for their untiring and arduous efforts in formulating
the text in a spirit of accommodation,
taking into
account the divergent views, including those of my
delegation.
99. In particular, I wish to take this opportunity
to
express my delegation’s gratitude, as well as my own,
to you, Mr. President, for the way you have conducted both the informal and the formal proceedings
of the Council which led to this constructive decision.
1 am happy also to see that the Special Committee
re-elected you its Chairman this morning for the fifth
consecutive time, thus demonstrating
its confidence
in those high qualities of leadership and personal
integrity from which the Council has benefited during
its consideration
of the question of Namibia,
in full
co-operation with Mr. Kamana, the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, who also greatly
contributed
to the settlement of the knotty question
of Namibia.

104. As for what the resolution has to say about the
constitutional
processes, we believe it to be both
right and proper for the Security Council to call for
elections in Namibia, and to see that they are carefully
supervised. But for the reasons set out in my delegation’s statement in the general debate, we continue to
have reservations about the use of the word “control”
in relation to the future task of the United Nations in
Namibia. I need only say that we have been encouraged
in the past few ‘days to find that there seems in fact
to be a broad identity of views among Council members about the way in which the United Nations could
best carry out the supervisory role contemplated for it.
We also take note of the intention in paragraph 8 of
the text before us to have the Security Council revert
to this question in a more detailed way at the appropriate time. There are, as we indicated earlier, a
number of important matters relating to the conduct
of the electoral
process which deserve closer
consideration,

100. Mr. LAI Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation has voted in favour of
draft resolution S/l 1950. However, we wish to state
that we have reservations on the relevant contents
about free elections in the draft resolution. We hold
that when the Namibian
people are still under the
domination and repression of the South African troops,
police and administration,
the holding of the so-called
free elections is completely out of the question. There
is a danger that such a practice may be utilized by
the South African racist regime to continue its occupation and domination
of Namibia in a disguised form.
We also hold that it is imperative to maintain vigilance
and guard against the South African authorities’
attempt to capitalize on the so-called “dialogue”
to
deceive the world public and delay their withdrawal
from Namibia.

105. With reference to paragraph 3, which condemns
the South African military build-up in Namibia and any
utilization
of the Territory as a base for attack on
neighbouring countries, I wish to make it clear that my
delegation deplores any utilization
not only of the
Territory of Namibia.as
a base for attacks on neighbouring countries. We deplore the utilization of any
territory, ‘in or outside Africa, as a base for attacks
on African countries. We are, of course, discussing
Namibia and not Angola, but my delegation wishes
to emphasize that it is not prepared to accept any
one-sided condemnation
of the use of force. My
Government’s
position is well known and was reaffirmed by my Foreign Secretary only two days ago.
We are opposed to any external intervention
in
Angola. We continue to call for a cease-fire and for a
political settlement which would enable the people of

101. Mr. MURRAY
(United Kingdom):
This has
been a useful, and I believe, important debate which
has revealed a considerable
degree of agreement
around this table as to how we should best proceed.
The intensive consultations
which you, Sir, have
held with all Council members and the pains which you
have been at to take account of the points of view of
all members have contributed greatly to this SUCC&ful conclusion.
13

Angola to determine its own future freely. ,In this
context we do not think that the reference to South
Africa’s aggressive military build-up in the area, in the
eighth preambular paragraph, reflects the facts of the
situation fully and fairly.
106. Finally, in supporting the demands in paragraphs 11 (b) and 11 (d) for the release of all Namibian
political prisoners and for the return of all Namibians
currently in exile for political reasons, we have in mind
those Namibians who have not been convicted of or
charged with criminal offences.
107. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Mr. President, in response to your appeal and to the
superb example
of leadership .and constructive
development which you have shown throughout this
debate, my delegation limited our statement yesterday
to a discussion of developments in Namibia and South
African policies there. I want to make clear that it is
in the context of Namibia, and in that context alone,
that the United States has decided to vote affirmatively
on the resolution which the Council has just adopted.
108. In precisely the spirit of the statement just made
by my colleague, the representative
of the United
Kingdom,,let
me say that it goes without saying that
had we been discussing Angola, as some of our
colleagues have sought to do in spite of your discouragement,
Mr. President,
it would have been
incumbent upon the Council to examine all foreign
intervention,
including the non-African forces which
are currently fighting there.
109. The resolution we have adopted reflects. the
view long held by my Government regarding South
African presence in Namibia and the view that the
Namibian people, under United Nations supervision,
must promptly be allowed to exercise. their right to
self-determination.
The United States believes that
the correct interpretation
of paragraphs 7, 8:and 9,
concerning the means of “United Nations supervision
and control” of the free elections in Namibia, must
be based on a reading of those three paragraphs
together, as would be proper.
110. It is clear that the Council is leaving open the
exact form of United Nations supervision of these
elections, leaving it to be worked out subsequently
by the United Nations. We believe that in this way the
Council wisely avoids prejudging the’exact nature of
the United Nations role until this matter can be
specifically considered.
111. ‘In conclusion, as I am evidently to be the last
speaker, I should like to join all my predecessors and
what I cannot but assume to be all .my colleagues on
the Council in congratulating
you, Mr. President, for
having brought us to a unanimous
conclusion-a
rare event in many of the proceedings of the Council,
,rarer yet with respect to this subject-a
unanimous
conclusion concerning what the responsibilities
of the

world community
are to the people of Namibia.
I
would like to congratulate
you, Sir, for the rare
patience with which you have endured our drafting
and our other antics over the last month. It has been an
example which I shall hope to emulate to the extent of
my abilities, as any of us would wish to do.
1’12. Finally,-1 wish to express once againthe admiration of my Government for the superb moral leadership
and executive direction which we have had, which the
United Nations has had,. from the United Nations
Commissioner for Namibia, Mr.. Sean MaCBride.
1 Ij:. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call ,on the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia.’
114. Mr.‘KAMANA
(President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia):, I do not wish to, impose on
members of the Security Council any longer than is
necessary. I merely asked to speak to’say, on behalf
of the United Nations Council for Namibia, how much
we appreciate the very skilful and enlightened manner
in’ which you, Mr. President, have conducted these
deliberations. We wish to pay a tribute to you, Sir.
115. We also wish to thank the sponsors of the resolution which has just been adopted unanimously for the
work they put into its preparation as well as into the
necessary consultations that have culminated
in the
significant result we have just witnessed this afternoon.
116. We also wish to commend all members of the
Security Council for the realistic manner in which they
have discussed this all-important
question of Namibia.
We are grateful to them for allowing us, as representatives of the United Nations Council for Namibia, to
participate in the debate.
117. It .is our hope that South ‘Africa will heed its
isolation and take ‘immediate steps to relinquish its
illegal occupation of Namibia., We trust, too, that the
resolution just adopted will not be just another resolution, but that, as is our hope, it will be implemented.
11% The PRESIDENT:
The last speaker
is
Mr. .Moses Garoeb, Administrative
Secretary for
the South West Africa, People’s Organizat.ion
of
Namibia. I invite him, accordingly, to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
119. .Mr. GAROEB: The only reason my delegation
takes the floor at this time is to express our profound
thanks to the members of the Security Council for the
unanimous vote they have just cast which ensured the
adoption of draft resolution S/11950. For us this is an
indication that, in spite of the differences of opinion,
in spite of the reservations on the resolution, the Council is at least unanimous on one thing, and that is that
South Africa is illegally present in Namibia and must
withdraw and that the people of Namibia must exercise
their tight to independence. And for this we are indeed
very thankful to the members of the Council.

120. Secondly, we should like to take this dpportunity
to express si&lar
thanks to, the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, our good brother,
Mr. Kamana, and to Mr. MacBride, the Commissioner
for Namibia,
for they are, as it were, the ones
immediately
associated with us in the day-to-day
and direct prosecution of the liberation
struggle of
our country.

1976. Mayqtte is an integral part of Comorian
territory under ‘the French laws which have recognized the de facto and de jut-e unity of the archipelago
ever since 1912. On 12 November 1975, the United
.Nations admitted the Comorian State consisting of
the four islands of Anjouan, Mayotte, MohCli and
Grande-Comore.
In view of this flagrant aggression,
I have the honour to request you to convene the
Security Council urgently in order to maintain peace
in the ,archipelago and to take all necessary action
to safeguard the integrity of our country. Ali Soihili,
head of the Comorian State.” [S/11953.]

121. We believe that the vote that has been cast
here today puts the Security Council firmly on the road
to asserting its authority to ensure that South Africa
withdraws from Namibia. We believe also that it is an
endorsement
of our right to selfdetermination
and
independence but, most importantly,
for us it is an
indication
that the Council is our partner in the
exercise of the liberation of our country. We should
like also to thank all those Members of the United
Nations that are not members of the Council but that
have taken up their precious time to participate in this
debate.
-’

126. In’ accordance with the .u&al practice, t’he
President of the Security Council-which
means both
myself and my successor-will
approach members
of the Council in order to enable the President to
decide what appropriate further steps shduld be taken.
127.,, Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
The
problem of the Comoros is not new. In fact, since the
Comoros acceded to independence on 6 July 1975
it has had a problem with the former colonial Power.
The former colonial Power, France, tried and is still
tryitig to maintain under its authority Mayotte, an
integral part of the Comoros. It undertook retaliatory
measures which had the effect of paralysing the
functioning of the technical services of the administration in the new Republic. These measures, whose
consequences are very serious for the Comorian
people, are all the more condemnable and injustifiable
since the difficulties
of every nature faced by the
Comorian Republic are the consequences of a long
colonial administration.

122. Last but not least, Mr. President, I should like
to thank you personally and the Government
of the
United Republic of Tanzania for the work you have
done to ensure the unanimous passage of the resolution. I have seen the efforts you have put in, the time
you have spent and the energy you have dispensed in
seeing to it that the Security Council should come to
a unanimous agreement on this resolution. If I may
say so, on behalf of my delegation, I have always had
confidence in you personally. I have seen you preside
over very important
conferences and I have never
doubted that you have always worked for consensus
and a constructive approach. In your work, young as
you are, you have gained the respect of persons of all
ages.

128. Mayotte is an integral part of Comorian territory,
under French law itself-as
the telegram
tells
us-which
has recognized the de facto .and de jure
unity of the archipelago ever since 1912. On 12 November 1975 the United Nations admitted the Comorian
State consisting of the four islands of Anjouan,
Mayotte, Mohtli and Grande-Comore.
The General
Assembly in its resolution-

123. Finally, I should like to take this opportunity
to thank the Security Council on behalf of SWAPO,
and indeed on behalf of the people of Namibia, for
the vote it has just cast. It is our sincere ‘hope that
the Council will ensure that the resolution will be
i
implemented.

129. The PRESIDENT:
I apologize to the representative of the Libyan Arab Republic, but I should like
to triake an appeal to him. Since the item is not yet
on the agenda of the Council, perhaps it would not be
appropriate
for him to go into the details of the
question.

124. The PRESIDENT:
We have now concluded the
present stage of the discussion of the item on our
agenda.
Statement by the President c0ncerning.a telegram from
Mr. Aii Soihili, head of State of the Comoros

130. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
I am
not going into the details of the problem. I have a
demand, but I have to explain why. I want to ask for
action from the Council, I have to say why it is urgent
to take action. I am not going into the details of the
problem. I know that we have not yet decided to put
it ,on the agenda of the Council, but, since this
telegram has been distributed to all the members and
since also a press communiqui
has been distributed
by the French delegation, I think I have to e’xplain
why I am asking that the Council take urgent actio’n.

125. The PRESIDENT:
Before we adjourn; 1, wish
to inform members that I have received the foilowing
telegram from Mr. Ali Soilihi, head of State of the
Comoros:
“I have the honour to inform you of a new development in the French aggression against the territory
of the Comoros. Flouting international
law and
morality,
the French Government
interids to
organize a referendum ‘in Majrotte on 8 February
15
,’
.’

131. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of France on a point of order.

137. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the representative
of France on a point of order.

132. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): I’m raising a point of order. It is not the
practice of the Council to discuss a text or a question
before deciding to put the text or the question on its
agenda. Mr. President, you stated a moment ago that
you had received a telegram. You indicated that the
President of the Council, yourself or your successor,
would organize consultations
to determine
what
should be done about the telegram. I request that the
usual procedure be followed. I should like to raise a
formal objection to the statement by the representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic on this subject. He may
request a meeting of the Council, but before the
question is put on the Council’s agenda he cannot
start discusing it. When it is put on the agenda of
the Council, I am prepared to speak on the question,
even if it is put on the agenda today. My purpose is
not to.delay the debate, but I cannot accept the discussion of a subject which is not on the agenda.

138. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
from French): Mr. President’, the question which is on
the Council’s agenda is worded as follows: “The
situation in Namibia”.
There is no other item on the
agenda.
139. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
The
Libyan delegation requests that this problem be placed
on the agenda of the Council.. .
140. The PRESIDENT:
With all due respect to my
Libyan colleague, I should like to state that his request
will be taken into account. But I do not think that, as
the representative
of France has correctly said, we
can discuss the item now. The representative of the
Libyan Arab Republic has already made his request
and that request will be taken into account. The
President of the Council will certainly take into
account the specific proposal made by our colleague
from the Libyan Arab Republic that in view of the
urgency of the matter this question should be considered as soon as possible. I would therefore appeal
to him and to all the members of the Council to agree
that there is no point in holding a procedural discussion
now on whether or not a delegation can speak on this
item.

133. The PRESIDENT:
I must say that the representative of France is right in this connexion. If the
representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic wishes
only to make a proposal, then he can make that
proposal. But to go into the discussion of the merits
of the proposal would not be fair to the Council,
particularly
since the item is not on the Council’s
agenda.

141. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
I am
not speaking on the item. I wanted to say that the
question was urgent and to propose that a meeting
be held. I do want to finish my statement. I wanted
to suggest that we hold a meeting tomorrow or Monday.
That is all. That is my precise suggestion.

134. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic): I should
like to ask the Council to take urgent action and to
convene a meeting to discuss this matter, and I think
it is appropriate to explain why it is urgent. General
Assembly resolution 3385 (XXX)...
135. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to appeal to
my colleague from the Libyan Arah Republic, because
I can see that we may have a proliferation
of points
of order. I think he has made his point that he wants
a meeting of the Council to be convened urgently.
Certainly I, as President af the Council, will take into
account the fact that at least one member of the
Council desires that this matter should be considered
urgently. In the conduct of the consultations,
either
by me or by my successor, that particular request will
be taken into account. I therefore appeal to him not to
continue with a substantive discussion.

142. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative
of the Libyan Arab Republic. Again, as I said at the
beginning of this discussion, in the normal consultations that will be undertaken by the President of the
Council the specific suggestion made by our colleague
from the Libyan Arab Republic will be taken into
accounf.

136. Mr. KIKHIA
(Libyan Arab Republic):
Sir,
I am not saying anything substantive. I am saying that
the problem is urgent, because there is to be a
referendum on 8 February...

’ Legal Caaseqitances
for States of the Cantinaed
Presence
of
Soath Africa
in Namibia
(Sauth
West Apica)
nutwithstanding
Security
Cwmcil
Resolutian
276 (1970). Advisar?,
Opinion,
I.C.J.
Reparts
1971. p. 16.

The meeting

rose qt 6.05 p.m.
Notes

1 See General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI).
* See General Assembly resolution 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967.

’ See resolution 385 (1976).

16

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations publications
may lx obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.

COMMENT

UNITED

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAK

IIO;IYUIITb

COMO

CONSEGUIR

MBAAHIllI

OPrAHZi

PUBLICACIONES

3AUMEl

OWbEARHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUHH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas e&r en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoms
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00400

83-60801-May

1984-2.200
