58

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

5. Further invites the administering Power to report
to the Special Committee and to the General Assembly
on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Special Committee to keep the
question of the Territory of Mauritius under review
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
twenty-first session.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2067

(XX). Question of Equatorial Guinea
(Fernando Poo and Rio Muni)
The General Assembly,
Having examined the situation in the Territories of
Fernando P6o and Rio Muni,
Having heard the statements of the administering
Power and the petitioners,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Taking particularly into account the conclusions and
recommendations of the Special Committee on the
Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of I ndependcnce to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the aforesaid
Territories,1 7
Noting that the Territories of Fernando P6o and
Rio Muni have been merged and named Equatorial
Guinea,
1. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Equatorial Guinea to self-determination and independence;
2. Requests the administering Power to set the
earliest possible date for independence after consulting
the people on the basis of universal suffrage under the
supervision of the United Nations;
3. Invites the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to follow the progress of the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session.
1398th plenary meeting,
16 December 1965.

2068 (XX). Question of Fiji
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Fiji,
Having studied the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to
the Implementation of the Declaration on the Gr::.:iting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
relating to the Territory of Fiji, 18
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1654 (XVI) of 27 November 1961, 1810 (XVII)
of 17 December 1962 and 1951 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963 and the resolution adopted by the Special
Committee on 5 November 1964,19
Noting with regret that the administering Power has
not yet taken effective measures to implement the
resolutions of the General Assembly,
1 7 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter IX, parn. 111.
1 8 Jbid., chapter XIII; ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes.
addendum to agenda item 23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapter XII.
19 Ibid., Nineteenth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part I)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter XIII, para. 119.

Taking into account the fact that any further delay
in the implementation of those resolutions would create
further hardships for the people of the Territory,
Considering that the constitutional changes contemplated by the administering Power would foment
separatist tendencies and stand in the way of the
political, economic and social integration of the people
as a whole,
l. Approves the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory of Fiji, and endorses the conrlusions and recommendations set forth therein;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Fiji to freedom and independence in conformity with
the provisions of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
3. Invites the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the administering Power, to implement immediately the resolutions of the General Assembly ;
4. Requests the administering Power to take, as a
matter of urgency, measures to repeal all discriminatory
laws and to establish an unqualified system of democratic representation based on the principle of "one
man, one vote" ;
5. Further requests the administering Power to
report to the Special Committee and to the General Assembly on the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Invites the Special Committee to keep the question under consideration and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session;
7. Decides to include the question of Fiji in the
provisional agenda of its twenty-first session.
1398th plenm-y meeting,
16 December 1965.

2069 (XX). Question of American Samoa, Antigua, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos
(Keeling) Islands, Dominica, Gilbert and
Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam, Montserrat,
New Hebrides, Niue, Papua, Pitcairn, St.
Helena, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia,
St. Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands,
Tokelau Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands
and the United States Virgin Islands
The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of American Samoa,
Antigua, Bahamas, Barbados, Bermuda, British Virgin
Islands, Cayman Islands, Cocos (Keeling) Islands,
Dominica, Gilbert and Ellice Islands, Grenada, Guam,
Montserrat, New Hebrides, Niue, Papua, Pitcairn, St.
Helena, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia, St.
Vincent, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, Tokelau Islands,
Turks and Caicos Islands and the United States Virgin
Islands,
Having examined the chapters of the reports of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to these Territories, 20
20 Ibid., chapters XIV-XVII, XIX XX XXIV and XXV ·
ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, ~dden<lum to agenda iten;
23 (A/6000/Rev.1), chapters XIII-XVI, XVIII, XIX, XXIII
and XXIV.
