A/69/929–S/2015/422

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
10 June 2015
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-ninth session
Agenda item 37
The situation in Afghanistan

Security Council
Seventieth year

The situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to General Assembly resolution 68/11
and Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), in which I was requested to report
every three months on developments in Afghanistan.
2.
The report provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in
Afghanistan, including significant humanitarian, development and human rights
efforts, since the issuance of my previous report, of 27 February 2015 ( A/69/801S/2015/151). It also provides a summary of key political and security developments
and regional and international events related to Afghanistan.

II. Relevant developments
3.
The appointment of all cabinet members brought the formation of the National
Unity Government to near completion. With a cabinet all but in place, efforts were
reinvigorated for advancing the reform agenda of President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah Abdullah. Implementation of socioeconomic policies remained a
pressing concern, however, and additional appointments, including at the provincial
level, were still pending. While the establishment of the Special Commission on
Electoral Reform provided a mechanism for advancing towards the agreed goal of
enhancing electoral integrity, the Commission has yet to start its work, and the
electoral calendar has yet to be announced. Efforts by the Government continued with
regard to commencing a process for peace and reconciliation, including the
mobilization of backing by regional partners. Conflict-related violence increased as
the Afghan National Security Forces sought to contain insurgent activity who se
intensification resulted in record high levels of civilian casualties.

15-09022 (E)

120615

*1509022*

A/69/929
S/2015/422

A.

Political developments
4.
Since my previous report, the formation of the National Unity Government
was completed, after the 16 ministerial nominations announced by President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah on 21 March were confirmed by the lower house of
the National Assembly on 18 April, and President Ghani a nnounced the nomination
of a candidate for Minister of Defence on 23 May. Of the 24 ministers confirmed to
date, four are women. Other important positions remain to be filled, including the
Governor of the Central Bank, the Attorney-General and the Chief Justice of the
Supreme Court. On 25 April, the lower house of the National Assembly approved
the appropriation of a budget for the Office of the Chief Executive and a Secretariat
of the Council of Ministers, which had been created by presidential decree. On
26 April, Chief Executive Abdullah appointed the Head of the Secretariat of the
Council of Ministers.
5.
On 7 April the President announced an initiative to establish a social contract
between the Government and citizens of the country, in keeping with the reform
agenda presented at the London Conference on Afghanistan. In the first meeting of
the cabinet, on 23 April, President Ghani instructed ministers to formulate strategies
for their first 100 days in office. On 26 May, at an extraordinary cabinet meeting,
President Ghani announced the launch of those plans by the ministries. The President
stated that the plans would be presented by each minister publicly in order to promote
accountability and would be reviewed at the end of the period. He also stres sed the
importance of coordination by the ministries to improve service delivery.
6.
On 27 April, the Office of the President announced the appointment of the
Head of the Independent Directorate of Local Governance, as well as the governors
for Kandahar and Herat Provinces. As at 27 May, governors were appointed for
12 out of 34 provinces, leaving 22 provinces led by acting governors. Consistent
with the ministerial appointments process, President Ghani excluded incumbents
from reappointment.
7.
From 22 to 25 March, President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah visited
Washington, D.C., where President Ghani met with the President of the United
States of America, Barack Obama. In a joint statement issued on 24 March, they
announced a new development partnership, in which up to $800 million in bilateral
economic assistance would be earmarked for Afghan development and reform
priorities; the United States would maintain its posture of 9,800 troops through the
end of 2015; and the outcome of any Afghan-led peace process would include the
Taliban and other armed opposition groups ending the violence, breaking ties with
international terrorist groups and accepting Afghanistan’s Constitution. On
26 March, I met with President Ghani and underlined the steadfast comm itment of
the United Nations to the development of a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.
8.
In their 21 September 2014 agreement to establish a National Unity
Government, President Ghani and Chief Executive Abdullah agreed to undertake
electoral reforms. Limited progress has been made in that regard. On 21 March,
President Ghani issued a presidential decree establishing a 15 -member Special
Commission on Electoral Reform. A member of the lower house of the National
Assembly was selected to lead the Commission. The process for fully
institutionalizing the Commission remained unclear owing to ongoing discussions

2/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

between the offices of the President and the Chief Executive about the chairmanship
and confirmation of its operational modalities.
9.
According to the Constitution, Parliamentary elections should have taken place
between 21 April and 21 May 2015. The current mandate of the lower house of the
National Assembly expires on 22 June. On 1 April, the Second Vice -President,
Mohammad Sarwar Danish, announced a delay of the Parliamentary elections until
2016, citing the need to allow time for the implementation of electoral reforms.
Asserting that the mandate to announce and manage the electoral calendar rested
solely with the Independent Election Commission, the Chair of the Commission,
Ahmad Yousuf Nuristani, argued that postponing the vote was contrary to Afghan
law and noted that proposals had been sent by the Commission to the Government
on possible electoral dates. In the absence of an electoral calendar and concrete
steps towards electoral reform, and citing the need for greater government funding
of elections, international donors announced the scaling down of funding for the
Afghan electoral institutions. As a result, the Independent Election Commission and
Independent Electoral Complaints Commission began the process of reducing staff
and assessing ways to lower monthly running costs, while seeking a supplementary
budget through the Finance Ministry to maintain core capacities.
10. On 11 March, the Independent Electoral Complaints Commission released a
final report on alleged fraud during the 2014 presidential and provincial council
elections. As a result, 9,887 temporary Independent Election Commission staff
members (out of a total 107,479) at 3,189 polling stations (out of a total of 22,778)
were barred from re-employment by the Commission. In addition, three permanent
Election Commission staff members were dismissed, as were eight permanent
Complaints Commission staff members.
11. On 4 March, President Ghani issued a decree restoring the oversight powers of
provincial councils over local government departments. That action ended a strike
by provincial councils that had commenced after the lower house of the National
Assembly had voted to remove the oversight powers on 28 January.
12. President Ghani continued to engage with Afghan and regional interlocutors to
promote national reconciliation. On 30 April, during his visit to India, President
Ghani took the opportunity to express openness to the Taliban and other
anti-Government groups playing a role within the political landscape of
Afghanistan, as distinct from “foreign terrorist fighters” whom he stated had no
place in Afghanistan’s future. In a joint press conference on 12 May during the visit
to Kabul of the Prime Minister of Pakistan, Nawaz Sharif, President Ghani
underlined that the two countries faced common enemies, a statement echoed by
Prime Minister Sharif. In his domestic outreach, President Ghani publicly assured
Afghan society, including political parties, religious scholars, tribal elders and civil
society activists, that a potential peace process would be conducted in an inclusive
and transparent manner. In that regard, it was emphasized by government officials
that any negotiations with the Taliban would preserve the achievements of the past
14 years, including women’s rights, and would reaffirm Afghanistan’s national
interests, also in relation to its neighbours. On 2 and 3 May, a “track-two” meeting
was convened in Qatar by a non-governmental organization. A diverse group of
Afghans attended in their personal capacities.
13. In support of a rights-based approach to a durable peace process, the civil
society-led Afghan People’s Dialogue on Peace commenced its third phase of

15-09022

3/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

activities, focusing on convening policymakers and civil society organizations to
assist in the implementation of national and provincial road maps for peace.
Facilitation is provided by the United Nations Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
14. The joint secretariat of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme
reported that as at 30 April 2015 a total of 10,240 individuals, including
949 commanders, had joined the programme, and 7,813 weapons had been collected,
since the inception of the programme in August 2010. In addition to drawing
low-level fighters off the battlefield, the programme continued to support livelihood
and reintegration opportunities to support former combatants and their communities.

B.

Security
15. The security situation in Afghanistan deteriorated, as anti -Government
elements continued to test the capability and resolve of the Afghan National
Security Forces across the country. In the week after the 22 April announcement by
the Taliban of the start of the spring offensive there was a 45 per cent increase in
recorded armed clashes, compared with 2014.
16. As mentioned above, the United States and Afghanistan announced in their
joint statement that the United States would maintain its current posture of
9,800 troops through the end of 2015. The non-combat Resolute Support Mission of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) continued to train, advise and assist
the Afghan National Security Forces. At a meeting held in Antalya, Turkey, on
13 May, NATO Ministers for Foreign Affairs endorsed a set of guidelines and
principles for NATO post-2016 support to the Afghan National Security Forces.
Following the closure of the Resolute Support Mission at the end of 2016, the
NATO-Afghanistan enhanced enduring partnership will be civilian-led but will
maintain a military component. The Taliban condemned both developments.
17. Between 15 February and 30 April, the United Nations recorded
5,033 security-related incidents across the country, representing a 6 p er cent
increase against the same period in 2014 and a 45 per cent increase against the same
period in 2013. The southern, south-eastern and eastern regions continued to
account for the majority of security incidents in the country, with 71 per cent of the
total incidents recorded during the period. The northern and north -eastern regions
showed an increase of 12 per cent in security incident levels compared with the
same period in 2014.
18. In the 22 April announcement of the spring offensive, named “Azm”, the
Taliban declared that targets would be “foreign occupiers especially their permanent
military bases, their intelligence and diplomatic centres”, as well as government
officials and Afghan security forces. Although attacks were recorded on several
international military bases, they amounted during the period to less than 1 per cent
of recorded incidents. As seen in past offensives and during the period as a whole,
the Afghan security forces and government personnel and facilities were the main
target of Taliban operations.
19. The security situation in the northern province of Kunduz deteriorated
significantly with the launch on 25 April of a major assault by anti -Government
elements, comprised of the Taliban, and, most likely, foreign fighters pushed into
Afghanistan from their bases in North Waziristan following counter -insurgency

4/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

operations by the Pakistani military. This necessitated the deployment of
reinforcements by Afghan security forces to contain the situation and ensure the
security of the provincial capital, Kunduz City, as well as the district administrative
centres. With the deployment of additional security forces, the situation reportedly
stabilized. Anti-Government elements launched additional operations, aimed at
undermining the credibility of the security forces, in other provinces including
Badakhshan, Badghis, Faryab and Kunar.
20. Responding to heightened concerns over the security situation, the
Government underlined to the public and members of the National Assembly the
efforts of the Afghan security forces. Since assuming the responsibility for security,
the Afghan security forces continued to plan and launch operations countrywide.
After undertaking a large scale operation in Hilmand Province between
mid-February and mid-April, Afghan security forces conducted similar scale
operations in Faryab, Kunduz and Nangarhar. Additional operations took place in
other areas that had long been under the control of insurgents, such as the Nawa
District in Ghazni Province.
21. Attrition rates for both the security forces and anti-Government elements
reportedly increased as the fighting intensified. The Ministry of Interior confirmed a
significant increase in casualties sustained by the security forces in the first
15 weeks of the year, while both government and independent estimates indicated
that insurgents suffered similarly high losses.
22. Established trends in the typology of reported security incidents remained
unchanged, with armed clashes accounting for the majority (54 per cent) of secur ity
incidents, followed by improvised explosive devices accounting for 28 per cent of
total incidents. Anti-Government elements also sought to exert influence through
intimidation, including targeted killings. In total, from 15 February to 30 April,
160 assassinations and 40 failed assassination attempts were recorded, representing
a 10 per cent increase against the same period in 2014. In addition, 91 abductions
were recorded across the country during the reporting period, representing a
21.3 per cent increase, compared with the same period in 2014. Suicide attacks
decreased from 25 to 23 compared with the same period in 2014. There were several
high-profile incidents during the reporting period in Kabul City, including the
assassination of the Chief of Police of Uruzgan on 18 March, two suicide car bomb
attacks on international military forces on 26 February and 10 April and an attack on
a private guesthouse on 13 May. The Taliban claimed responsibility for all four
attacks. Responsibility for an unsuccessful suicide attack on a member of the
National Assembly on 29 March has not been claimed by any insurgent group.
23. In May 2015, the Ministry of Interior estimated that there were some
7,180 foreign fighters across Afghanistan, the majority associated w ith Tehrik-eTaliban Pakistan and the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. There was continued
speculation on the presence of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
affiliated groups. On 31 March, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan reportedly
pledged allegiance to ISIL, and there were further unconfirmed reports of several
extremist insurgent groups also joining ISIL. However, despite the initial attribution
of several attacks, most notably a suicide attack on a bank in Jalalabad on 18 April,
there remained a lack of clarity on any operational presence by ISIL.
24. During the reporting period there were 27 security incidents involving United
Nations personnel, including 12 incidents of intimidation, 3 detentions, 8 criminal -

15-09022

5/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

related, 3 attacks with small arms fire on United Nations convoys in the provinces
of Balkh, Herat and Nangarhar and 1 brief abduction of a United Nations national
staff member in the south-eastern region.

C.

Regional cooperation
25. Afghanistan’s National Unity Government continued its active engagement
with regional partners. On 19 and 20 April, President Ghani visited the Islamic
Republic of Iran. After meetings with Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei and
President Hassan Rouhani, the two countries pledged greater cooperatio n in the
areas of security information sharing, counter-narcotics, the sharing of water
resources, and refugees and migrants. From 27 to 29 April, President Ghani
travelled to India, where he met with Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President
Shri Pranab Mukherjee. India reiterated its readiness to join the Afghanistan Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement. On 11 May, the lower house of the National
Assembly ratified a strategic partnership agreement with Turkey, aimed at
promoting further cooperation in the fields of governance, and social, economic and
political affairs.
26. Discussions on Afghanistan, including on security and economic issues,
continued in multilateral cooperation forums. Activities under the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process included two regional technical group meetings on
confidence-building measures, namely, counter-terrorism on 11 March in Ankara
and counter-narcotics on 29 April in Baku. On 25 May, a meeting of Heart of Asia Istanbul Process senior officials was held in Islamabad. The disc ussions centred on
regional cooperation to address security challenges and the Afghan peace process,
including the role of the region, as well as regional priorities for economic
connectivity. On 21 May, the International Contact Group on Afghanistan met i n
Kabul to consider issues related to security, the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, human rights, elections and regional dialogue.
27. At meetings of the Collective Security Treaty Organization on 2 April and the
Commonwealth of Independent States on 3 April, ministers for foreign affairs
discussed the situation in Afghanistan. Central Asian representatives expressed
increasing concern at the spread of violent extremism from Afghanistan and agreed
to strengthen their southern borders. Similar concer ns were expressed during the
14 April meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization in Moscow, at which
Afghanistan was represented for the first time as an observer.
28. From 4 to 6 March, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia and
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force held a workshop
in Ashgabat on counter-terrorism and a border security workshop. Participants
agreed that securing borders required a multidimensional approach incorporating
development and technological aspects, backed by political will. United Nations
entities and the Governments of Afghanistan and Tajikistan also organized a
conference on counter-terrorism in Dushanbe on 14 and 15 May. Participants shared
views on lessons learned from the development of an action plan for implementation
of the United Nations counter-terrorism strategy in Central Asia, for possible use in
the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.

6/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

29. On 9 and 10 April in Dushanbe, experts from the three countries finalized the
draft Afghanistan-Pakistan-Tajikistan Trilateral Transit Trade Agreement. On
24 April, the Ministers of Water and Power of Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan
and Tajikistan signed the final pending documents for the Central Asia-South Asia
Electricity Transmission and Trade Project. Construction is scheduled to begin in
September 2015, with completion planned for 2018. Afghanistan is to receive 300 of
the 1,300 MW of electricity delivered from Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, as well as
revenue from transit fees.
30. A number of high-level contacts between Afghanistan and Pakistan took place
towards improving their bilateral relationship and demonstrating the will of both
countries to enhance their political and military cooperation. During his visit to
Kabul on 12 May, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif of Pakistan reiterated his country ’s
support for the National Unity Government and for an Afghan -led and Afghanowned peace process. Visits to Kabul were made by Pakistan’s Chief of Army Staff,
the Head of Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence, former President Asif Ali Zardari
and former Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani. On 18 May, the Afghan National
Directorate of Security and the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence signed a
memorandum of understanding on counter-terrorism cooperation. The memorandum
sparked intense discussions within the Afghan National Assembly and political
sphere, with the National Directorate of Security subsequently issuin g a statement on
24 May in which it noted that the memorandum would be finalized only after wider
consultations. On 26 May, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Afghanistan, Hekmat
Karzai, and the Foreign Secretary of Pakistan, Aizaz Chaudhry, met in Islamabad t o
discuss a number of issues pertaining to peace and stability, counter -terrorism,
border security, economic cooperation, Afghan refugees and regional cooperation.

III. Human rights
31. Between 15 February and 30 April, UNAMA documented 2,126 civilian
casualties (669 killed and 1,457 injured), reflecting a sharp increase of 23 per cent
over the same period in 2014. The trend of record high numbers of civilian
casualties continued. UNAMA attributed 1,545 civilian casualties (534 killed and
1,011 injured) to anti-Government elements, accounting for 73 per cent of total
civilian casualties. UNAMA recorded 302 civilian casualties (74 killed and
228 injured) attributed to pro-Government forces (11 per cent to Afghan National
Security Forces, 2 per cent to pro-Government militia and 1 per cent to international
military forces), an 88 per cent increase, accounting for 14 per cent of total civilian
casualties. Eight per cent of all civilian casualties resulted from unattributed
crossfire between pro-Government forces and anti-Government elements while 5
per cent were mainly from unattributed explosive remnants of war. Ground
engagements continued to be the leading cause of civilian casualties, causing 617
civilian casualties (150 killed and 467 injured), followed by improvised explosive
devices, accounting for 503 civilian casualties (162 killed and 341 injured).
32. Large-scale attacks by anti-Government elements deliberately targeting
civilians continued during the reporting period. On 18 April, a suicide attacker
detonated his explosive vest at the entrance of a bank in Jalalabad City, Nangarhar
Province, targeting civilian government officials who were collecting their salaries
and killing 30 civilians and injuring 123 others. The Taliban claimed responsibility
for the 13 May attack on a Kabul guest house, at which a cultural event was being

15-09022

7/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

hosted, resulting in 14 civilian deaths and injuries to several others. Civilian
casualties attributed to pro-Government forces included an incident on 24 April in
Alingar District, Laghman Province, in which a mortar round fired by the Afghan
National Army impacted a civilian residence, killing seven civilians and injuring
eight. The national army reported that they had fired the mortar following an attack
against an army check post.
33. From 1 January to 10 May, the Taliban claimed responsibility for 11 separate
attacks against legal professionals and courthouses, causing 114 civilian casualties,
with 28 killed and 86 injured, an increase of more than 600 per cent over the same
period the previous year. Figures recorded by UNAMA indicate higher casualty
numbers than those claimed by the Taliban, as well as an additional six incidents of
abductions, threats, intimidations and harassment of judicial authorities. This
included the 9 April attack against the office of the Attorney General in Mazar -eSharif and the two suicide attacks on 4 and 10 May against civilian buses
transporting employees of the Attorney General’s Office in Kabul.
34. On 22 April, under the rubric of the announcement launching their spring
offensive, the Taliban released a statement instructing the group ’s fighters to avoid
civilian casualties. The statement listed a number of protected fac ilities, including
schools, universities and health centres, as well as public welfare projects.
Following the Taliban statement and a series of deliberate attacks on civilians
claimed by the Taliban, UNAMA issued two public statements condemning the
attacks against the Attorney General’s Office on 10 May and against a guest house
in Kabul and the Department of Haj and Religious Endowment in Hilmand on 13
May. Both statements reiterated that international humanitarian law, which binds all
parties to the conflict in Afghanistan, including the Taliban, prohibits attacks against
civilians and civilian locations. On 14 May, the Taliban stated they did not accept
any foreigner as falling under the definition of “civilian”, but did not address the
issue of Afghan civilians killed in any of the recent attacks.
35. The United Nations-led country task force on monitoring and reporting on
children and armed conflict documented 523 child casualties (135 killed and
388 injured) in 254 incidents between 15 February and 3 0 April. Child casualties
increased 2 per cent compared with the previous reporting period. Most child
casualties continued to be caused during ground engagements between
pro-Government forces and anti-Government elements (270 casualties), followed by
improvised explosive devices attacks (124 casualties) and explosive remnants of
war (80 casualties). Children were especially vulnerable in the southern region of
the country, which witnessed 27 per cent of the total child casualties reported,
owing mainly to an increase in ground engagements. Anti-Government elements
were responsible for 46 per cent of the total child casualties, while pro -Government
forces were responsible for 18 per cent. The remaining 36 per cent of casualties
were unattributed. On 14 March, the Government of Afghanistan submitted to the
United Nations its fourth progress report on the implementation of the children and
armed conflict action plan. In its report, the Government highlighted steps taken
during the period from 1 January to 31 December 2014 to advance implementation
of the action plan and the annexes on reporting on killing, maiming and sexual
violence against children.
36. On 19 April, UNAMA and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights launched a report entitled “Justice through the

8/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

eyes of Afghan women: cases of violence against women addressed through
mediation and court adjudication”, featuring documentation of the significant use of
mediation, rather than court adjudication, to resolve cases and re commendations for
reforms to improve women’s access to justice.
37. The killing of a 27-year-old woman on 19 March by a crowd in Kabul City,
over false allegations that she had burned a copy of the Koran, sparked public
outrage and widespread condemnation across Afghanistan and internationally. The
Government condemned the attack and launched an investigation. On 6 May, the
primary court in Kabul convicted 12 civilians of the murder, sentencing 4 of them to
death. All court decisions are currently subject to appeal. On 19 May, the verdict for
the 19 police officers charged was announced, with 11 officers sentenced to one
year in prison for dereliction of duty and the remaining eight acquitted owing to
lack of evidence. Afghan and international human rights a nd legal defence groups
expressed serious concerns about the legal process for all convictions stating that
they failed to comply with Afghan and international fair trial standards.
38. Speaking at a 5 March event ahead of International Women ’s Day, President
Ghani emphasized the commitment of the Government to bringing fundamental and
sustainable change for Afghan women, including for participation in decision making, economic empowerment, education and health. The United Nations
supported outreach activities across the country around International Women’s Day,
on the global theme “Empower women; empower humanity”. From 9 to 20 March,
the United Nations supported the participation of a Government of Afghanistan
delegation to the fifty-ninth session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
which was held at United Nations Headquarters.
39. During the reporting period, the Government outlined a proposal for a national
plan for elimination of torture as part of its response to a UNAMA report, released
on 25 February, on the treatment of conflict-related detainees in Afghan custody.
The proposed national plan, to be overseen by the Office of National Security
Adviser and the Second Vice-President, includes regulatory reforms, prevention
measures and training. The Second Vice-President informed UNAMA and Afghan
civil society organizations on 29 April that a committee with their participation
would be formed to draft an action plan and monitor its implementation.

IV. Implementation of the Kabul process and coordination of
development assistance
40. During the period under review, President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah engaged directly on the development agenda, requesting presentations
from major donors, international financial institutions and the United Nations on
their current development portfolios. The review of the portfolios and the annual
Ministry of Finance-led development cooperation dialogue process are expected to
inform the future development strategies and policies of the Government. On
8 March, the United Nations submitted its portfolio review to the Office of the
President. It is expected that the proposed United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2015-2019, endorsed in principle by the former administration on
6 May 2014 but pending approval by the new Government, will be informed by the
current deliberations. Thus far, the Government has expressed its intention to
consolidate the current 22 national priority programmes.

15-09022

9/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

41. On 3 April, the Cabinet approved the proposed plan of the M inistry of Finance
for reform implementation and monitoring. Drawing on the paper entitled
“Realizing self-reliance”, which was shared at the December 2014 London
Conference, the plan consists of 52 measures, of which 26 are identified as priorities
for action within six months. The Ministry of Finance engaged with line ministries
to advance the plan.
42. The economic and fiscal situation in Afghanistan remained challenging.
According to World Bank data, Afghanistan achieved a 2 per cent growth rate in
2014, with a rate of 2.5 per cent forecast for 2015. As a consequence of poor
economic performance, fiscal vulnerabilities were likely to remain high in 2015.
According to World Bank analysis, there was a need for dramatically improved
revenue performance relative to 2014 in order to avoid a higher than budgeted fiscal
gap in 2015. Furthermore, it was emphasized that economic recovery required the
implementation of reforms to address revenue and corruption and governance
concerns, particularly those affecting confidence in the economy.
43. On 20 March, the International Monetary Fund announced a nine -month staffmonitored programme, aimed at addressing fiscal and banking vulnerabilities,
preserving international reserves and low debt, maintaining low inflation and
strengthening competitiveness. In response to the programme, the Government
significantly increased some customs duties and the enforcement of income tax
laws. The Ministry of Finance indicated that initial revenue projections were 4 per
cent above the targets agreed with the International Monetary Fund and that the
Government was able to cover its planned expenditures, including salaries and
operational costs.
44. The Government of Afghanistan continued to pursue the development of
extractive industries as a significant economic opportunity. In response to an
8 February request by the Government, the United Nations provided support in the
areas of policy development, regulatory capacities and public consultations. It also
supported the Ministry of Commerce and Industries in conducting an archaeological
screening in Hajigk, a priority area for exploration. At the board meeting of the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative in Brazzaville, Republic of the Congo,
on 14 and 15 April, Afghanistan was granted an 18-month candidacy extension to join
the Initiative, in keeping with a commitment to the Government ’s reform agenda.
45. Regarding the Government’s efforts to address illicit land usurpation, on
19 March, the United Nations released a report with recommendations on developing
oversight and accountability in the land distribution framework, including a
centralized land management system. In April, the Supreme Court and the Second
Vice-President agreed that responsibility for land titles would be transferred to the
Afghanistan Independent Land Authority. Established by presidential decree on 8
April, the High Council on Land and Water convened for the first time on 5 May,
chaired by President Ghani. President Ghani expressed his commitment to addre ssing
land usurpation as a factor having an impact on socioeconomic development. The
Ministry of Commerce and Industries was assisted by UNAMA in developing
proposed legal amendments aimed at strengthening the environment for business and
trade.
46. On 26 April, the Independent Joint Anti-Corruption Monitoring and Evaluation
Committee released its seventh biannual report, covering the period from July to
December 2014, and a compendium of the status of implementation of its

10/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

323 recommendations, covering an array of anti-corruption issues of relevance to
both the Government and the international community. In the report, the Committee
noted that 53 recommendations had been completely implemented,
149 recommendations were under implementation or had been partially implemented,
33 recommendations had not yet been implemented and 88 recommendations had
been recently issued, their implementation status not yet reviewed.
47. At a 12 March meeting of the International Police Coordination Board, the
Minister of Interior launched a strategy for the professionalization of the police,
including measures for increased accountability and improved relations between
police and communities. During the reporting period, the United Nations continued
to advocate for accountable policing, to build capacity and to support the
professionalization of women officers. As at 28 April, 52 police women councils
were established, 12 of which were within the Ministry of Interior directorates, 10
in Kabul police districts and 30 in the other provinces. The Ministry of Interior was
assisted by the United Nations in the provision of literacy classes to the police, with
4,989 officers, including 202 women, currently enrolled in programmes across
19 provinces.

V. Humanitarian assistance
48. The humanitarian situation remained challenging owing to a combination of
conflict and extreme weather conditions, with continued population displacement
and increased vulnerability levels among affected communities. Relief operations
reached some 8,827 families affected by natural disasters, and progress was made in
key areas, such as immunization programmes. However, acute food insecurity and
access to vulnerable populations, as well as the safety of humanitarian workers,
remained major sources of concern. At meetings in Islamabad and Tehran,
significant progress was made on the formulation of comprehensive return and
reintegration strategies for Afghan refugees, whose levels of voluntary return
continued to remain high compared with 2014.
49. At the 25th meeting of the Tripartite Commission for the Voluntary
Repatriation of Afghan Refugees from Pakistan, held in Islamabad on 11 March,
representatives of Afghanistan, Pakistan and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees agreed to support a comprehensive return and
reintegration strategy for Afghan refugees. The strategy would include a process of
voluntary repatriation and reintegration, taking into account Afghanistan ’s
absorption capacity, while Pakistan would agree to register all undocumented
Afghan migrants. As a result, Afghanistan established a high national commission
on migration, chaired by the President, to deal with overall displacement issues,
including refugee returns and reintegration.
50. On 19 May, the fourth meeting of the Quadripartite Steering Committee on the
Solutions Strategy for Afghan Refugees to Support Voluntary Repatriation,
Sustainable Reintegration and Assistance to Host Countries comprised of
Afghanistan, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) was held in Tehran. The role that Iran
(Islamic Republic of) and Pakistan have played in hosting large Afghan refugee
communities was acknowledged and the need for joint planning to include
approaches to the issue of economic migrants was emphasized.

15-09022

11/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

51. The levels of voluntary return of Afghan refugees and undocumented Afghans
continued to remain high compared with the same period in 2014. The overall rate
of undocumented Afghans returning from Pakistan thro ugh the Torkham and Spin
Boldak border crossing points stands at 172 per cent of total returns and
deportations in the same period in 2014. From 1 January to 30 April,
149,555 undocumented Afghans returned from Iran (Islamic Republic of) (84,502)
and Pakistan (65,053), compared with 76,238 during the same period in 2014. A
total of 75,027 undocumented Afghans were deported from Iran (Islamic Republic
of) (68,094) and Pakistan (6,933), compared with 68,619 during the same period in
2014. During the first four months of 2015, 21,505 refugees returned under the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees voluntary repatriation programme,
compared with 3,817 during the same period in 2014, of which 95 per cent were
from Pakistan. It was estimated that 30 to 40 per cent of returnees from Pakistan
were in need of assistance. However, owing to funding shortfalls, only 10 per cent
can be assisted. Beyond short-term needs, assistance with durable livelihoods and
reintegration support is required.
52. Afghanistan continued to host a significant number of refugees in Khost and
Paktika Provinces who had fled North Waziristan, Pakistan, owing to military
operations. Following a United Nations reverification exercise in both provinces, a
15 per cent decrease in the number of registered refugees since 31 January was
recorded. As at 21 April, there were 35,252 families, totalling 243,248 individuals
registered as refugees (175,929 in Khost, 67,319 in Paktika). Humanitarian agencies
have continued to provide them with assistance.
53. As at 30 April, the Task Force on Internally Displaced Persons, co -chaired by
the Ministry of Refugees and Repatriation and UNHCR, recorded 35,800 persons
displaced as a result of conflict in 2015. The highest number of displaced persons
were recorded in Faryab and Hilmand Provinces, with 519 families
(3,206 individuals) and 374 families (2,938), respectively. During the reporting
period, Kunduz Province emerged as the primary area of concern, with conflict
between Government forces and anti-Government elements leading to large-scale
displacement. Humanitarian actors continue to conduct joint assessments of families
who have petitioned the Departments of Refugees and Repatriation for assistance,
with 8,558 families assessed to date, of which 3,640 families have been verified as
conflict-displaced persons in need of assistance. From March to May, the United
Nations used its extensive logistical network to assist approximately
238,000 conflict-displaced persons with an estimated 7,800 metric tons of food.
54. Mine action partners, coordinated by the United Nations, cleared 46 minefields
and three battlefields in 14 Afghan communities in the first quarter of 2015.
Funding may not be sufficient, however, to meet the 2015 targets of the workplan
under the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban Convention. It is estimated that
4,025 minefields and 245 battlefields remain, affecting 1,603 communities across
255 districts, threatening the lives and livelihoods of Afghan civilians. Working with
NATO Resolute Support Mission, the United Nations continued to address explosive
hazard contamination, including firing ranges, from operations of the former
International Security Assistance Force.
55. During the reporting period, 24 out of 34 provinces were affected by extreme
weather, including avalanches, heavy snowfall and flooding. A total of 290 people
were reported killed, 97 injured and 9,009 houses damaged or destroyed. The

12/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

national disaster management committee and humanitarian agencies continued
efforts to respond to the food and non-food needs of all affected populations with
available stocks.
56. Preliminary assessments conducted by the food security and agriculture cluster
during the reporting period indicated that the purchasing power of vulnerable
households had deteriorated by approximately 10 per cent in most parts of the
country in the past five years. This is expected to be compounded by high levels of
acute food insecurity among displaced households owing to conflict or natural
disasters, as well as returning refugees and existing poor households. According to
indications, continued severe food insecurity will affect approximately 1.4 million
people across the country.
57. Polio eradication efforts continued to face access challenges in southern and
eastern Afghanistan, as well as in the south-eastern and western regions. Since the
lifting of a temporary access ban by armed non-state actors in Hilmand Province in
early February, the Global Polio Eradication Initiative conducted supplementary
polio immunization activities. Despite those efforts, the first case of polio in
Afghanistan for 2015 was identified in January in Reg District, Hilmand Province.
Between January and May, one National Immunization Day and seven vaccination
campaigns were held, including in newly accessible areas in Panjwaj District,
Kandahar Province; Barg-i Matal District, Nuristan Province; and Lal Pur District,
Nangarhar Province. During the reporting period, polio campaigners focused on
low-performing districts in southern, eastern, western a nd south-eastern
Afghanistan, leading to successful campaigns in Nanga rhar, Kunar, Laghaman,
Kandahar, Hilmand, Paktika, and Farah Provinces.
58. Despite the increase in security incidents during the first quarter of 2015, the
volume of incidents against humanitarian-related personnel, assets and facilities and
violations against health facilities remained consistent with the same period in 2014.
The United Nations global monitoring framework recorded a total of 74 incidents
between 1 January and 30 April, of which 52 affected non-governmental
organizations. The incidents included the killing of 11 aid workers, with another
10 injured. In addition, 54 aid workers were abducted and 2 arrested. There were
11 incidents recorded against health facilities or workers and 2 against demining sites.
59. As at 30 April, humanitarian funding for Afghanistan reached $172 million, of
which $129.5 million is designated for activities foreseen within the Humanitarian
Strategic Response Plan and $24.6 million for the Inte rnational Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement. As at 1 June the Humanitarian Strategic Response Plan was
27 per cent funded. Ninety-three per cent of the designated funds of the Plan are
allocated to agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system and 7 per
cent to non-governmental organizations. The common humanitarian pooled fund has
received $18.3 million. As a result of funding constraints, shortfalls in available
food supplies are anticipated in June and will have a serious impact on the
humanitarian response to address acute malnutrition. In order for operations to
continue throughout 2015, the World Food Programme is conducting an urgent
appeal for $65.6 million. That funding would serve to support the humanitarian
needs of thousands of people recently displaced by conflict in a number of
provinces, notably Kunduz, as well as other emerging humanitarian needs.

15-09022

13/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

VI. Counter-narcotics
60. On 21 April, the socioeconomic analysis portion of the Afghanistan Opium
Survey 2014 was released by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The
report analysed the opiate economy and the factors and determinants driving opium
poppy cultivation. Despite estimated potential gross value of opiates in Afghanistan
decreasing by almost 9 per cent to $2.84 billion since the previous year, opiates still
account for the equivalent of 13 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product. A
highly attractive crop to farmers, opium cultivation in many rural communities
remains high, accounting for 36 per cent of the income of farmers who cultivate it.
The price decrease in the average farm-gate price of dry opium in 2014 was also
reflected in a decrease in heroin prices both within Afghanistan and across borders,
although existing information does not show a major change in demand in the main
opiate-consuming countries.
61. During the period under review, drug crop eradication led by provincial
governors was reported in nine provinces in Afghanistan, with a total of 3,042 ha of
opium poppy being eradicated as at 10 May. Initial assessments indicate security
incidents during the eradication efforts are lower, compared with previous years,
owing to the efforts of the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics to improve coordination
with the other ministries with a security remit. Five members of the security forces
have been killed and 16 personnel wounded since the start of the eradication
operations in 2015.
62. Afghan law enforcement authorities also conducted a total of 841 counter narcotics operations during the reporting period, resulting in the seizure of
approximately 14,576 kg of narcotics. This included 898 kg of heroin, 8,607 kg of
opium, and 5,071 kg of cannabis. In addition, 504 kg of solid precursor chemicals
and 1,540 L of liquid precursor chemicals were seized. Two heroin manufacturing
laboratories were dismantled, 818 suspects were arrested, and 187 vehicles and
152 weapons were seized. During those operations, two members of the security
forces were killed and three were wounded. The efforts of the border liaiso n offices
that support operations with Afghan, Iranian, Pakistani, Tajik and Uzbek border
police operations collectively resulted in the seizure of 3,027 kg of narcotics within
the overall seizure total.

VII. Mission support
63. UNAMA has continued to ensure effective use of its resources to accomplish
cost-efficient operations in support of mandated activities throughout the country.
UNAMA preparations for the roll-out of the next phase of Umoja are on track.

VIII. Observations
64. The formation of the National Unity Government is nearly complete. After a
long and challenging process, the appointment of all ministers and the formalization
of the Office of the Chief Executive and the Secretariat of the Council of Ministers
are important achievements. The development and implementation of 100-day
action plans for each ministry, now under way, should help to realize shared national

14/16

15-09022

A/69/929
S/2015/422

objectives. With the Cabinet all but in place, it is imperative that the Government
accelerate its reform agenda.
65. The creation of the Special Commission on Electoral Reform demonstrates the
commitment of the National Unity Government to electoral reforms, as provided for
in the 21 September 2014 agreement. Comprehensive electoral reforms will be
crucial for restoring the faith of the Afghan people in the democratic process. That
is a matter of urgency since, as according to the Afghan Constitution, parliamentary
elections, as well as those for district councils, should already have taken place. I
encourage the Government and relevant bodies to launch the electoral reform
process and determine the electoral calendar. It will also be important to provide
certainty on the role of the lower house of the National Assembly after the
conclusion of its term on 22 June. The United Nations looks forward to engaging
with the Commission and stands ready to provide advice.
66. The priority actions identified by the Government under the “Realizing Selfreliance” agenda, including to advance reforms, strengthen public accountability
and promote economic growth are encouraging. In that regard, 100-day action plans
have the potential to build the necessary public confidence and buy -in. Continuing
to provide international assistance to Afghanistan will be necessary in the short and
longer terms. The agreement on the International Monetary Fund programme
represents an important step towards securing longer-term access by the
Government to financial support.
67. The intensification of the conflict across the country hampered progress across
a range of issues and exacted a terrible toll on the civilian population. I am deeply
concerned by the dramatic increase in civilian casualties, despite public
commitments by the parties to protect civilians. Attacks deliberately targeting
civilians are strictly prohibited under international humanitarian law. During the
reporting period anti-Government elements repeatedly attacked civilians working in
the justice system, a deplorable targeting of civilian personnel. The conflict
continues to displace significant numbers of civilians, in addition to those in
Afghanistan displaced by military operations in Pakistan.
68. I am encouraged by the constructive dialogue between the Governments of
Afghanistan and host countries on the formulation of comprehensive return and
reintegration strategies for Afghan refugees. With the growing issue of internal
displacement in Afghanistan, however, there will be a need to ensure national
capacities to manage the volume of returns. The support of Member States to
address the immediate and long-term needs of returnees will be necessary.
69. It is my grave concern that the humanitarian situation will deteriorate further if
fighting intensifies. In order for relief efforts to succeed, the safety of humanitarian
workers and access to vulnerable individuals remain of critical imp ortance. All
parties to the conflict must respect their obligations under international human
rights and humanitarian laws. The generous contributions by Member States have
supported efforts to prevent and alleviate the suffering of thousands of ordinary
Afghans. Nevertheless, I note with concern that humanitarian funding is currently
lower than it was at the time in 2014, while the needs are significantly higher and
continue to increase.
70. I continue to be concerned about violence against women and the management
of such cases by the criminal justice system. The public murder of a woman by a

15-09022

15/16

A/69/929
S/2015/422

mob of men on 19 March in broad daylight in the capital underscored the continuing
threat of violence against women. However, the outrage expressed peacefully in the
wake of the killing by countless ordinary Afghans was unparalleled and spurred
discussions in Afghan society on the necessity of addressing those issues. It is
essential to the credibility of the justice system that allegations of abuse and
mistreatment are thoroughly investigated and appropriately prosecuted so that those
responsible can be held accountable. Securing a robust and transparent criminal
justice system, with due regard to protecting the rights of women , remains vital.
71. Afghanistan continues to deepen its interaction with its neighbours in respect
of building regional confidence and connectivity. The increased engagement during
the reporting period between the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan,
including public declarations stating their commitment to work together for peace
and prosperity, is encouraging. Visits by President Ghani to India and Iran (Islamic
Republic of) pointed to the importance accorded by his Government to those key
partners as well. During my upcoming visit to Central Asia, I will underline the
importance of strengthening trade and exchange with Afghanistan in order to boost
shared economic growth and regional stability.
72. Afghans desperately want respite from the ever-present violence that has such a
damaging impact on their lives. At local events and meetings, they continue to
express their desire for peace and its realization through dialogue. The Government of
Afghanistan has stated its commitment to engage in talks with the Taliban, who have
indicated their interest in a political process. An essential element that is missing,
however, is the willingness of the armed opposition to meet the Government in direct
talks. Without that engagement, no meaningful progress towards a peace negotiation
will be possible. The United Nations will continue to provide support in that regard,
in close consultation with the Government of Afghanistan.
73. In reference to the request by the Security Council that I conduct an
examination of the role, structure and activities of all United Nations entities in
Afghanistan, it was recently agreed to establish a Tripartite Commission, comprised
of representatives of the Government, the international donor community, and
UNAMA and affiliated agencies, funds and programmes. While that disc ussion is at
its early stages, I am confident that it has the potential to be fruitful.
74. Finally, I thank all the United Nations personnel in Afghanistan and my
Special Representative, Nicholas Haysom, for their commitment under challenging
conditions, to support a more peaceful, prosperous and stable Afghanistan.

16/16

15-09022
