68

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

into account the relevant activities already undertaken
by the various organs of the United Nations system,
l. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the appropriate organizations of the United Nations
system and with a view to enabling the United Nations
system to deal adequately with economic emergency
situations and to respond more effectively to the resulting immediate needs of the affected populations in
developing countries, to submit proposals to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-first session, inter
alia, on:
. (a) Th.: elaboration of global criteria for identifying' such economic emergency situations;
( b) The possible establishment of procedures for
periodically reporting relevant information through
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme, in consultation with the Governments
concerned, to a central focal point, to be established where appropriate, which will process such information;
(c) The possible elaboration of procedures for submission, on the basis of such information, of proposals
to the Economic and Social Council for the proclamation, where necessary, of a state of emergency with
economic, social and structural consequences;
(d) The strengthening of the co-ordinating mechanism of the United Nations system within its existing
financial resources;
2. Invites the Economic· and Social Council to consider, as a matter of urgency, the above-mentioned proposals by the Secretary-General and to invite the governing bodies of the United Nations agencies concerned
to provide it with any comments they may have on this
matter.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3511 (XXX). United Nations Conference
on Desertification
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3337 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, in which it decided to initiate concerted international action to combat desertification,
Having considered the progress report of the Secretary-General76 and the,relevant parts of the report of
the Governing Council of the United Nations Environment Programme on its third session77 on the implementation of General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX),
Noting decision 30 (III) of 30 Aprii 1975 of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,78 in which it approved the proposals of the
Executive Director of the Programme on measures to
be taken in implementation of General Assembly reso~
lution 3337 (XXIX),
Noting also Economic and Social Council resolution
1958 (LIX) of 25 July 1975,
Stressing the need for additional research to clarify
a number of fundamental problems of desertification,
for the solution of which the requisite scientific knowledge is not yet available to the international community,
76 E/5689.
7 7 See Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), chap. Ill, sect. B.
78 /bid., Supplement No. 25 (A/10025), annex I.

Stressing further that the preparation of the United
Nations Conference on Desertification should provide
the international community with the basis for an
action-oriented, comprehensive and co-ordinated plan
of action, which should include the building up of indigenous and autonomous science and technology capacity in the areas concerned,
I. Requests the Secretary-General with the assistance of the competent bodies of the United Nations
concerned, particularly the United Nations Environment Programme, to intensify the efforts required to
ensure the appropriate preparation, at the technical
level, of the United Nations Conference on Desertification;
2. Reiterates its request to the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme to provide the financial and technical assistance necessary to ensure the satisfactory
preparation of the Conference, bearing in mind particularly the need to close the gaps in scientific knowledge
aqd technologies in this field;
3. Requests the Committee on Science and Technology for Development, with the assistance of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and
Technology to Development, to include in its programme of work on arid areas, in pursuance of Economic and Social Council resolution 1898 (LVII) of
1 August 1974, proposals to close the gaps in scientific
knowledge,and technologies concerning desertification;
4. Decides that the cost of the Conference will be
borne by the regular budget of the United Nations;
5. Requests the United Nations Fund for Population
Activities to contribute to the financing of the demographic components of the studies prepared in implementation of General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX);
6. Requests the executive heads of the specialized
agencies to authorize their respective secretariats to
provide for their participation in the secretariat of the
Conference and in the ad hoe interagency task force,
in conformity with General Assembly resolution 3337
(XXIX);
7. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Environment Programme to act as the intergovernmental preparatory body for the Conference and
to ~ubmit to the General Assembly at its thirty-first
session, through the Economic and Social Council,
recommendations on th~ organization of the Conference.
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3512 (XXX). Consideration of the economic and
social situation in the Sudano-Sahelian region
stricken by drought and measures to he
taken for the benefit of that region
The General Assembly,
Recalling the relevant resolutions of the Economic
and Social Council and the General Assembly, particularly Council resolutions 1834 (LVI) of 14 May 1974
and 1874 (LVII) of 16 July 1974, and Assembly resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973 and
3253 (XXIX) of 4 December 1974,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1918 (LVIII) of 5 May 1975,
