UNITED NATIONS

SE.CURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

21

lTth

NEW

YORK

COUNCIL
RECOR

YEAR

MEETING:

27 FE~~d~~~V

MAR2 5 1982
CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/21 17/Rev. 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for international peace and
security. [Letter dated 22 February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America to the President of the Security Council (S/13111)] . .

WPV.2117

‘.
+a:
‘.

r

‘,

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
i Yt .‘: ‘: .?Ti f i,~i i ,,I
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly SuppIements of the OflcialRecords of theSecurity Council The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted ‘in 1964, iare published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiry Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

.
. .

.‘.

. .

2117th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 27 February 1979, at 7 p.m.
President:

Mr. Abdalla Yaccoub BISHARA

tives of Angola, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and
Yugoslavia in which they request to be invited to participate
in the discussion. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in conformity with, the provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

(Kuwait).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia, France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Sangsomsak (Lao People’s Democratic Republic) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2117/Rev.l)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in South-East Asia and its implications
for international peace and security. l&etter &ted 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to
the President of the Security Council (S/131 1l)]

3. Mr. HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): Mr. President, I wish to
extend to you the congratulations of the Nigerian delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of February. Your patience, competence and
skill as a diplomat have been amply demonstrated by the
way in which you have conducted the arduous business of
the Council during the last few weeks. I certainly hope that
you will conclude some of these subjects before I take over
in two days’ time.

7Xe meeting was called to order at 8 p.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

4. Naturally I also wish to acknowledge the able manner
in which your predecessor, Ambassador Donald Mills of
Jamaica, handled the affairs of the Council during the
month of January. I hope that he is able to wear his two
hats-in the Group of 77 and in the Security Councilwithout becoming a juggler.

The situation in South-East Asia and its implications for
international peace and security. [Letter dated 22
February 1979 from the representatives of Norway,
Portugal, the United Kingaom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the
President of the Security Council (S/13111)]

5. Once again the Council is preoccupied with the problem of South-East Asia. It was only a few weeks ago that we
dealt with the complaint brought before the Council by
Democratic Kampuchea, a country where outside forces
appeared to have been involved in the overthrow of the
Government. Since then, from all indications, the situation
in that region of the world has deteriorated. Chinese forces
are now in the territory of Viet Nam and the area of conflict
has widened. The conflict itself has become more intense in
nature and more human lives are being lost.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken at previous meetings I invite the representatives of
Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, Cuba, Democratic Kampuchea, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Mongolia, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Singapore, Thailand and
Viet Nam to take the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber.
At the invitation of thePresident, Mr. Anderson (Australia),
Mr. Kostov (Bulgaria)), Mr. Barton (Canada). Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Thiounn Prasith (Democratic Kampuchea),
Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Hollai
(Hungary), Mr. Jaipal (lndia), Mr. Anwar Sani (Indonesia),
Mr. Abe (Japan), Tan Sri Zaiton Ibrahim (Malaysia),
Mr. Dashtseren (Mongolia), Mr. Francis (New Zealand),
Mr. Naik (Pakistan), Mr. Yang0 (Philippines), Mr. Jaroszek
(Poland). Mr. Koh (Singapore), Mr. Guna-Kasem (Thailand)
and Mr. Ha Van LOU (Viet Nam) took the places reservedfor
them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Last month my delegation outlined fundamental principles which we believe must be adhered to in international
relations. We continue to reiterate those principles because
it is necessary to do so, even though they are well documented in the Charter of the United Nations. Since that
time they have become more relevant and more pertinent to
the evolution of a durable solution to the crisis in SouthEast Asia.
7. As enshrined in the Charter, respect for the national
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of States
is a cardinal norm in international
relations. Noninterference in the internal affairs of States is another, while

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
theCouncil that I have received letters from the representa1

the peaceful resolution of contlicts among States is yet
another important principle. It is my Government’s firm
belief that the accepted norms governing the conduct of
international relations-the provisions of the Charter and
the principles of non-alignment-are
not and will never
become elastic codes of convenience to be contracted or
expanded at the whim of any State.

14. With the support
of Soviet social-imDeriahsm. the
Vietnamese author&s have intensified their aggression
against and annexation of Kampuchea while provoking
conflicts along the Sino-Vietnamese border in a rabid antiChina campaign, thus seriously menacing peace and
security in South-East Asia, Asia and the world as a whole.
This has increasingly attracted the attention of world public
opinion and met with universal condemnation. However,
the Soviet representative has openly denied the facts by
confounding black and white and heaped baseless calumnies and slanders on China. I should like to speak again to
expose the lies of the Soviet representative.

8. History is replete with instances of local&d or regional
conflicts leading to wider and even global conflagrations.
For decades South-East Asia has been a hotbed of crisis.
Many conflicts in that region have been resolved but often
at a cost of unimaginable sacrifices of both human and
material resources, affecting the people of that whole area.
Nevertheless, conflicts seem to reappear in one form or the
other. There seems to be a continual cycle of violent conflicts in South-East Asia, a region where peace and stability
have continued to elude the people.

15. The Soviet representative is trying hard to pin the label
of hegemonism and expansionism on China. Who on earth
is really practising hegemonism?
16. The facts are there. In the past year alone-not looking into the distant past-Soviet social-imperialism has
taken more hasty, more drastic and more rabid steps than
ever before in practising hegemonism and expansionism in
various parts of the world, and the means they have
employed have been more despicable and truculent. In
addition to the ceaselessarms build-up and troop reinforcement in Europe, which pose an ever-increasing direct
military threat to the countries in western, northern and
southern Europe, the Soviet Union has quickened its pace
of aggression in Africa, the Middle East, the Red Sea and
the Gulf region, areas flanking Europe. At the same time it
has been stepping up its expansionist activities in SouthEast Asia. In Africa, it deliberately provoked and got
directly involved in the armed conflict in the Horn of Africa,
using Africans to tight Africans. In so doing it hoped to gain
profit and seize a foothold in this area of strategic importance. Subsequently, it flagrantly engineered another mercenary invasion of Zaire, kindling the flame of a second
Shaba war. Playing the jackal to the tiger, Soviet-hired
hatchetman Cuba has now dispatched over 50,000 military
personnel to some countries, playing a role which the Soviet
Union cannot play by itself. The Soviet Union is now using
foreign mercenaries to pull the chestnuts out of the tire as an
important method in its current aggression and expansion
abroad.

9. The Council would be failing in its duty if the results of
our present deliberations attempted to sweep the problems
under the carpet and did not contribute towards peace and
stability in South-East Asia. We must all give of our best
efforts to evolve a meaningful solution to the problems
of South-East Asia. In this connexion, the permanent
members of the Council who, by virtue of their privileged
positions, dangle before us the power of the veto have to live
up to their responsibilities and obligations.
10. Considerations of power politics and historical rivalties should be replaced by the genuine determination of the
world Powers to seek peace and stability in that region. In
the long run it is in their own interest to do so. The wellbeing of the people who, by reason of factors of history and
geography, are compelled to inhabit South-East Asia, must
be our preoccupation. The waste in human and material
resources can be stopped and those resources should be
diverted towards alleviating human suffering and advancing the welfare of the people in that region.
Il. As a member of the Council, which Article 24 of the
Charter charges with primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, we join in the call
for a general cessation of hostilities and the withdrawal of
all foreign forces to within their internationally recognized
borders and we urge all parties concerned to move from the
battlefield to the negotiating table. In this regard, we
acknowledge the offer of the Secretary-General to make his
good offices available. As usual, the Nigerian delegation is
grateful to him for that sacrifice, in view of his very many
preoccupations.

17. In Africa, the Middle East, the Red Sea and the Gulf
region, by military involvement and subversive means, the
Soviet Union has sent military personnel and established
bases to control the Red Sea lanes, using them as a bridgehead for active expansion in the Arabian peninsula and the
Gulf region. To this end, it is whipping up social turmoil
and fostering agents and pro-Soviet forces wherever possible, not even hesitating to resort to subversion by means of
coups d’etat, assassination and other brutalities. It cannot
even tolerate leaders of Asian and African States who show
the slightest tendency towards independence. It tries by
every possible means to remove them and even annihilate
them physically. Such appalling instances are known to all
and cannot be denied. Everyone is aware that Soviet intervention is behind the unrest and turmoil in many countries
and regions.

12. In conclusion, I wish to share with the Council the
words of an eminent African statesman who said: “The
glorious pages of history have been written only in those
moments when men have been able to act to prevent
impending tragedies”. In our view, now is such a time, and
we hope that all those concerned will appreciate that what
we tend to regard as brushfires occurring today in SouthEast Asia could become global conflagrations.
13. Mr. CHEN Chu (China)(inzerprerut
Chinese):
In my statement at the Council meeting held on 23 February /2114th meeting/, I already expounded in a comprehensive way China’s position on the relevant questions under
consideration. Now, I should like to make a further statement on some of the questions referred to in the statements
of the Soviet and Vietnamese representatives.

18. In pursuit of global hegemonism, the Soviet Union is
wilfully trampling upon the independence and sovereignty
of other States, threatening international peace and security. Social-imperialism
is the most dangerous possible
source of a new world war and the most vicious enemy of
the independence and security of the world’s people.
2

19. In reference to the Asian region, it is well known that
as a component of its global strategy the Soviet Union is
redoubling its efforts to use the Vietnamese authorities for
active expansion in South-East Asia and the Pacific region.
The Soviet Union is openly clamouring that the so-called
“security system” can take various forms-for instance, the
conclusion of a non-aggression treaty or the signing of a
multilateral
or bilateral treaty of friendship and cooperation-and
that the security system is nothing other
than the accumulation of similar treaties and linking them
together.

involving the survival of a country and a nation and constitutes a serious breach of peace and stability in South-East
Asia and the whole of Asia, a gross trampling upon the
Charter of the United Nations and the norms of intemational law,‘and a grave threat to international security and
world peace.
26. Last January the Security Council held urgent meetings to consider the question of Viet Nam’s armed aggression against Kampuchea with Soviet support. The
overwhelming majority of the representatives of the Council members spoke in repudiation and condemnation of Viet
Nam’s aggression. This was a severe verdict against the
Vietnamese aggressors and their boss, Soviet socialimperialism. In the end, the Council, by an overwhelming
majority of 13 to 2, called for the withdrawal of foreign
forces from Democratic Kampuchea. The draft resolution
(S/13027] was arbitrarily vetoed only by the negative vote
of the Soviet Union. During the current meetings of the
Council, except for the Soviet Union and a few Sovietdirected countries which have tried to whitewash Viet
Nam’s crimes of aggression, the representatives of various
countries have denounced in varying degrees Viet Nam’s
aggression against Kampuchea and demanded the complete, unconditional and immediate withdrawal of its
aggressor troops. Their positions are entirely just.

20. World opinion has pointed out that the Soviet leadership takes the strategy of the treaties of friendship and
cooperation as the core of its long-term global strategy and
that the Soviet umbrella of friendship and co-operation
treaties conceals the strongholds ranging from South-East
Asia to the Middle East and the African continent. A vivid
proof is the so-called treaty of friendship and cooperation
concluded between the USSR and Viet Nam last November. This treaty has directly abetted and supported the
hegemonistic acts of the Cubans of Asia. At the same time,
it has turned Viet Nam into an outpost for Soviet expansion
and a source of war in South-East Asia.
21. Are not the Vietnamese authorities brazenly and
ambitiously clamouring that they are the third strongest
military Power next to the Soviet Union and the United
States? And the Soviet Union has used the militarism and
regional hegemonism on the part of the Vietnamese authorities as a tool for pushing its global hegemonism. In fact, the
bloody war of aggression against Democratic Kampuchea
launched flagrantly by the Vietnamese authorities and the
armed conflicts provoked by them on the Sine-Vietnamese
border are dirty wars fought by the Vietnamese with the
money and weaponry supplied by the Soviet Union.

27. With reference to the Sino-Vietnamese border conflict, it is a self-defensive counter-attack which the Chinese
frontier troops have been forced to make in defence of the
border of their own country after being driven beyond
forbearance by the Vietnamese authorities which have been
wilfully encroaching upon and nibbling at Chinese territories, making armed provocations, killing and wounding
Chinese personnel and creating incidents of bloodshed in
the Chinese border areas in disregard of the repeated advice
and warnings of the Chinese side. This is a necessary
measure that would be taken by any sovereign State in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter. The Soviet
representative tries to use the question of the SinoVietnamese border conflict to cover up the Vietnamese
authorities’ crime of aggression against Democratic Kampuchea. But this only serves to reveal that Soviet socialimperialism is the behind-the-scenes boss of the Vietnamese
authorities in this dirty war of aggression.

22. Soviet social-imperialism is the arch-criminal in all
this; its strategic objective is to seize South-East Asia, then
to control the strategic lanes of the Pacific and Indian
Oceans and the surrounding areas, in co-ordination with its
aggression and expansion in Europe, Africa, the Middle
East, the Red Sea, the Gulf region and other areas, and
finally to achieve world hegemony.
23. In view of the foregoing, is it not crystal clear who is
really practising hegemonism and expansionism? This is the
very reason why the Soviet Union becomes furious the
moment it hears the word “hegemonism” or finds the term
“anti-hegemonism” in any document.

28. In view of the distortion made by the representative of
Viet Nam and the calumnies and slanders heaped on China
in his statement, we deem it necessary to make a, few
remarks to set forth the facts and put the record straight. As
to the so-called private conversation attributed to Chinese
leaders as invented by the Vietnamese representative, it is SO
preposterous and grotesque that it can only be called a
fantastic fairy tale which is beneath refutation. He even
quoted an American journalist’s abusive remark about
China to justify himself. This only shows that he is desperately short of arguments.

24. In his statement, the Soviet representative time and
again used the question of the SinoVietnamese border
conflict to hurl venomous slanders and abuse at China. His
purpose is to divert attention and justify the naked aggression against Democratic Kampuchea committed by the
Vietnamese authorities with the support of the Soviet
Union.

29. First, the representative of Viet Nam asserted that it
was China, and .not Viet Nam, that had provoked the
Sino-Vietnamese border conflict. Who provoked the
border conflict? Let the facts speak. In my last statement I
pointed out that the Vietnamese authorities harboured
hatred for us simply because we were opposed to their
aggression against Kampuchea and their pursuit of regional
hegemonism, and I limited myself to citing a few incidents
that have occurred since the beginning of this year alone. In

25. We have repeatedly pointed out that Viet Nam’s
aggression against Democratic Kampuchea and the SinoVietnamese border conflict are two questions which are
entirely different in nature. The massive armed aggression
against and military occupation of Democratic Kampuchea
by the Vietnamese authorities are an attempt on the part of
the Vietnamese authorities to swallow up a sovereign State
and annihilate the Kampuchean nation. This is a question
3

i

fact, in the past year or two, there have been innumerable
grave incidents of armed provocation committed by the
Vietnamese authorities with Soviet support along the SinoVietnamese border, killing and wounding our border inhabitants and personnel and encroaching upon our territory
and sovereignty. If I were to go into further detail, I should
not be able to finish in 24 hours. From 1974 to midFebruary this year, the Vietnamese authorities committed
armed provocations and incursions along the Chinese
border on 3,535 occasions. In order to save time, I shall not
bother to elaborate on them one by one here. In a word,
there is an abundance of undeniable personal and material
evidence showing that it was the Vietnamese authorities
who deliberately provoked the border conflicts in disregard
of repeated advice and warnings from the Chinese side. This
is a fact known to the whole world, includiig the Vietnamese people. It is clearly the Vietnamese authorities who
have resorted to most brutal and avaricious means to persecute, plunder and expel Chinese nationals and Vietnamese
of Chinese origin who have shared weal and woe with the
Vietnamese people over the years. Up to now, over 200,000
have been expelled to China. Yet the Vietnamese representative has kept on accusing China of inciting those people to
return to China. How can such forced arguments convince
anyone? As a matter of fact, it is not difiicult to ascertain the
truth. Things will be crystal clear if one makes some investigation among the large number of refugees who are still
being forced to leave Viet Nam and wander abroad, and
listens to what they have to say about their own experience.
30. Secondly, the Chinese Government and people have
always cherished the friendship between the Chinese and
Vietnamese peoples. During the Vietnamese people’s wars
for national independence, we saved on our own food and
clothing to provide at our own expense large quantities of
unconditional aid of different kinds to Viet Nam, not flinching from making the greatest national sacrifices in fulfilment of our internationalist duty. After the liberation and
reunification of the whole of Viet Nam, we continued to
provide Viet Nam with various forms of assistance to help it
to heai the war wounds and restore and develop its national
economy. However, what pains us is that the Vietnamese
authorities have not only shown ingratitude but returned
evil for good, “more unkind than winter’s wind”, as the
English saying goes. With Soviet encouragement and abetment, they swiftly embarked on the road of external expansion and wanton activities against China. It was only after
the Vietnamese authorities had persecuted and driven back
to China a large number of Chinese nationals residing in
Viet Nam and thus created tremendous financial and material difticulties for us in providing relief and rehabilitation
for them that we were compelled to cease the assistance to
Viet Nam we had promised during the war. And we feel no
qualms about this. The Vietnamese authorities have no
right whatsoever to blame us on this score.
31. Thirdly, in order to settle through negotiations the
issue of the Chinese residents in Viet Nam, talks were
started between the two countries at the vice-foreign minister level on 8 August last year at the proposal of the Chinese
Government. During the talks, the Vietnamese authorities
continued to create grave incidents in their intensified campaign against China. They had no desire at all to settle the
dispute through negotiations, but attempted to turn the
talks into a forum for their anti-China propaganda. The
Chinese side was not at all responsible for the failure of
the talks to reach any agreement or for their forced suspen-

sion. Yet we wish to reafiirm our desire for a settlement of
the question of Chinese residents in Viet Nam through
bilateral negotiations. The indication at any time of a sincere desire on the part of the Vietnamese side for a settlement of the dispute would be welcome to us.
32. Fourthly, the Vietnamese representative has repeatedly referred in his statement, to the question of the Xisha
Islands, Chinese territory. In fact, it is the Vietnamese
authorities that have made a baseless claim to China’s
territories, and they have sent out armed forces for forcible
occupation. The Vietnamese Government and the Soviet
Government all along recognized publicly that the Xisha
Islands and Nansha Islands belonged to China. This was
confirmed by Viet Nam’s Premier Pham Van Dong in his
official note and by the maps and textbooks formerly published by Viet Nam. It was only after 1974 that Viet Nam
went back on its own words, openly made territorial claims
to these islands of China and sent troops for forcible occupation of some of the Nansha Islands in encroachment
upon China’s territorial sovereignty and in quickened pursuit of national expansionism.
33. Fifthly, in his statement the Vietnamese representative
raised a question: Why should Viet Nam want to carry out
aggression and expansion abroad when it should have been
ready to engage in peaceful reconstruction after experiencing wars over three decades and more? This is a good
question. But what is the answer? At the very beginning, we
also failed to understand why, following reunification,
instead of leading the people of the whole country to rehabilitate and heal the wounds of war and carry out peaceful
reconstruction step by step, the Vietnamese authorities
should embark on a continued arms build-up and militaristic plans and immediately unleash a war of external expansion? Later, we came to understand that this is partly
because the Vietnamese authorities, carried away by their
national expansionism and their victories from the war,
boasted of being the thiid strongest military Power in the
world and thought that the time had come for them to
dominate South-East Asia and that they would not let the
chance slip. It is also because Viet Nam has received encouragement, abetment and instigation from Soviet socialimperialism in various ways. Working hand in glove with
each other, the Soviet Union and Viet Nam, master and
lackey, are making havoc in the Asia-Pacific region. It is
noteworthy that in his statement the Vietnamese representative no longer denies the presence of Vietnamese forces in
Kampuchea and has in fact asserted Viet Nam’s reluctance
to withdraw its forces from Kampuchea. With regard to the
Sine-Vietnamese border contlict, the Chinese Government
has repeatedly made it clear that we do not want an inch of
Vietnamese territory and that our frontier troops will return
and strictly keep to defending the frontier of our country
after fulfilling the task of their forced counter-attack in
self-defence. Our words always count. The question now is
whether or not the Vietnamese authorities can also commit
themselves to withdrawing all their invading forces from
Kampuchea. If they refuse to do so, it will be further
irrefutable evidence that the real aggressors are ‘the Vietnamese authorities and not anyone else. The Security Council
and the people of all countries certainly cannot remain in:
different to this.
34. In short, it has been the frnn and consistent position of
the Chinese Government to uphold the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States and to oppose

encouragement, for ‘the Chinese attack. This is wholly false,
and we strongly resent such an assertion. President Carter
made clear directly to the Chinese Vice-Premier our opposition to any Chinese military action. When our efforts to r
prevent the attack failed, we immediately spoke out against
it and began to ask for these meetings of the Council,
Secretary of the Treasury Blumenthal has reiterated our
opposition to Chinese actions publicly in Peking.

hegemonism and national expansionism. We earnestly
hope that the Vietnamese authorities will treasure the profound friendship between the peoples of China and Viet
Nam, attach importance to the peace and security in SouthEast Asia, the Asia-Pacific region and the world as a whole,
stop on the precipice, retract from the wrong path, immediately stop their armed intervention and military occupation of Democratic Kampuchea and withdraw all their
invading forces from Kampuchea, immediately ceasetheir
armed provocations against China and settle all disputes
between China and Viet Nam through peaceful negotiations so as to restore and develop the friendly relations
between the two countries through joint efforts.

41. The attack on Kampuchean territory heightened the
tensions in the region, leading to the Chinese attack on Viet
Nam. As long as those troops remain in Kampuchea, violating the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
the will of the international community, tensions will
remain high. We believe that the Vietnamese forces should
withdraw from Kampuchea; we also believe that Chinese
forces should withdraw from Viet Nam, since their presence
further increases tensions in the region and the risk of
escalation. In both cases,territorial integrity has been violated and foreign military forces are in the territory of
another country. Both steps are vital to the restoration of
peace in the area. All parties involved are bound to adhere
to their obligations under the Charter, without any linkage,
without any qualification.

35. Mr. YOUNG (United States of America): In response
to some of the comments made in this forum! I should like
very briefly to review the United States posmon, starting
with our 1 November 1978 letter to the Security Council
[S/12911], in which we drew the Council’s attention to the
build-up of forces on the Vietnamese-Kampuchean
frontier.
36. Prior to and following that letter, my Government
publicly and privately expressed its concern that the tensions appeared likely to explode into full-scale conflict
unless something was done to defuse the situation. We
urged efforts directly between the parties involved, we suggested recourse to the United Nations, the Organization
created for precisely this purpose; we urged restraint on all
parties.

42. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
43. Mr. KOMATINA
(Yugoslavia): I should like first of
all to thank the Council for having given me this opportunity to explain my Government’s views on the extremely
serious and complex developments in South-East Asia,
which have an adverse effect on international relations in
general.

37. After the Vietnamese attack on Kampuchea, it
appeared probable that the fears we had earlier expressed
concerning further escalation would prove to be correct.
We immediately contacted the Governments directly concerned, urging an end to the Vietnamese attack and calling
on others not to become involved. My presentation here on
13 January [2ZZOth meetingl warned of the dangers of wider
war and urged restraint on all parties.

44. I am particularly gratified, Sir, to congratulate you
sincerely upon your assumption of the oftice of President of
the Council for the month of February and to wish you
success in carrying out what is perhaps one of the most
delicate diplomatic tasks at the present moment. I am convinced that your dedication to the purposes of the United
Nations, your tested ability and your experience will enable
the Council to fulfil the role assigned to it by the Charter.
My pleasure in emphasizing this is all the greater as you
represent a country with which Yugoslavia is developing
exemplary relations characterized by all-round co-operation and friendship, manifested once again during President
Tito’s recent visit to the non-aligned State of Kuwait.

38. On 9 February my Government issued a statement
which said in part:
“We do not want to see any escalation and we are
seriously concerned that continued combat between
Kampucheans and Vietnamese will lead to an extended
confhct.”
The statement concluded:
“We would be seriously concerned over a Chinese
attack on Viet Nam. We remain seriously concerned
over continued Vietnamese attacks on Kampuchea.?

45. I wish also to stress the outstanding role played during
the month of January by your predecessor, Ambassador
Donald Mills, who made an invaluable contribution
towards the adoption by the Council of stands in keeping
with the difficulty and gravity of the moment.

39. On 17 February, as the Chinese attack began, my
Government appealed for a Chinese withdrawal from Viet
Nam, while reiterating its call for a Vietnamese withdrawal
from Kampuchea. In my own statement last Friday(2114th
meen’ngl I restated that there must be restraint on the part of
those involved, and those who could potentially become
involved, in this con&t. I urged that the Council should
consider actions to slow down the military activities in
South-East Asia and to substitute negotiation and mediation for tensions and threats to peace and security there.

46. ,For almost two months the Security Council has been
compelled to deal with the crisis in South-East Asia. In its
statement of 20 February, my Government adopted a clear
position with regard to these developments, proceeding
from the premise of their exceptional importance to world
peace and security and the need to contribute, for its part, to
the search for a peaceful solution and the promotion of
co-operation among all the countries of that region, on the
basis of the principles of the Charter. The Yugoslav Govemment expressed in that statement its profound regret and
concern at the development of the situation in South-East

40. I have reviewed this record because some here have
stated that the visit of Vice-Premier Teng Hsiao-ping to the
United States served to provide United States consent, if not
5

Asia, which is fraught with very serious dangers. At the
same time, it stressed the need to search for a peaceful
solution of the conflict, based on full respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples and countries to peace, independence, territorial integrity and autonomous development.

ment and regardless of the differences between or similarities in their social systems.
52. Events have again proved that in our interdependent
world peace is indivisible and that any use of force or
encroachment upon the independence, sovereignty or territorial integrity of any country is bound to give rise to a crisis
situation of wide proportions.

47. The escalation of the militarv action of the armed
forces of the People’s Republic of China in the territory of
Viet Nam and the military action of the armed forces of Viet
Nam against Kampuchea clearly show that what is involved
is a complex crisis in South-East Asia, which is worsening
and posing a direct threat to peace in the region and beyond.
That makes it imperative to explore all possibilities for
positive action by the United Nations, with the co-operation
of all factors involved, with a view to finding a way out of
the present situation by means of negotiations. With that
purpose in mind, we appeal to all the parties concerned to
exert constructive efforts towards that end.
,’

53. International developments are constantly contirming
that a selective application of the fundamental principles
governing international relations cannot be accepted and
that the violation of those principles cannot be justified in
any circumstances or under any pretext. That means also
that there exist no reasons justifying any armed intervention, interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States
or the determination of their internal development and
system. For that reason we urge the withdrawal of Chinese
troops from Viet Nam, as we consider that the method of
intervention and use of force is inadmissible. We stood up
for the same principle.during the Council debate on the
military intervention of Viet Nam in Kampuchea. We continue to stand up for that principle now.

48. In this specific case, as well as in its over-all conduct
and activity in international relations, Yugoslavia has been
guided by the well-known principles of the policy of nonalignment, constantly striving for their consistent implementation. We consider, namely, that lasting solutions to
this as well as other problems can be found only on the basis
of strict respect for national independence, sovereignty,
equality, and the free national and social development of
all countries, non-interference in internal affairs, nonintervention, and the inviolability of legally established
international borders. We, as well as the other non-aligned
countries, have always insisted on the necessity of solving all
disputes by peaceful means through negotiations, mediation, good offices and other methods provided by the Charter of the United Nations.

54. Proceeding from those positions of principle, to which
Yugoslavia has been adhering constantly, we are convinced
that only strict observance of the principles of the Charter
and of non-alignment can provide a way out of the present
situation, as it is only through a consistent implementation
of these principles that it is possible to find lasting solutions
to disputes and establish a system of equitable relations
among States, a system, ensuring respect for the right of
every nation freely to determine its destiny.
55. With regard to all this, the United Nations has an
irreplaceable role to play as a forum competent to deal with
all major international issues and contribute towards their
resolution.

49. All those minciules-which regulate relations amone
sovereign Stat& and-constitute the Foundation of intern;
tional co-operation based on equal rights-are embodied
in, inter alia, the Final Act of the Helsinki Conference on
Security and Co-operation in Europe.

56. As was the case in January, when we dealt with the
problem of Kampuchea, we consider, thii time also, that the
search for a peaceful solution can be based only on strict
respect for the sovereign rights of all peoples and countries,
without recourse to pressure or any form of the use of force.
The immediate cessation of hostilities between the belligerents and withdrawal of all troops from foreign territories
should be the first steps taken towards a settlement.

50. The non-aligned countries have been devoting particular attention to all forms of interference in internal atfairs,
which they reject energetically, as they reject any attempts
to justify foreign interference under any pretext whatsoever
from any source. An inseparable part of these principles is
the prohibition of the use of force, the struggle against all
forms of dependence and subjection of peoples and countries, the withdrawal of foreign military forces and bases
from the territories of other States, the overcoming of the
division of the world into aritagonistic military-political
blocs, the rejection of out&ted doctrines such as “spheres
of interest’*, “ balance of terror”, and so on. All these positions and principles have been repeatedly conf3rned at all
the gatherings of non-aligned countries, including the last
Ministerial Conference of Non-Aligned Countries at Belgrade in July last year and the Ministerial Meeting of the
Coordinating Bureau held recently at Maputo. They were
also at the forefront of the debate and of the draft resolution
submitted at the January series of meetings of the Security
Council.

57. With regard to the implementation of these objectives,
we are prepared to support every resolution, initiative or
action. We appreciate, in particular, the constructive and
timely offer of good off%es by the Secretary-General. We
expect that the United Nations, as well as all countries, will
contribute to a peaceful solution of these conflicts, to the
establishment of good-neighbourly relations and normalization of the situation in South-East Asia, a situation whose
further exacerbation could have unforeseeable consequences for peace and security in the world.
58. Yugoslavia will contribute towards thii all the more
because what is involved is a conflict between two countries
with which Yugoslavia maintains friendly relations estab
lished at the time of the heroic national liberation struggle
waged by the peoples of Viet Nam and Kampuchea against
colonialism, imperialism and foreign aggression, a struggle
that enjoyed my country’s constant and all-out support. We
continue to support the present just struggle of these peo-

51. The foregoing principles have proved their validity
and universal importance for the whole international community as the only sound basis ensuring stable relations
among States, regardless of their size or level of develop
6

pies for independence, territorial integrity and the right to
develop freely without outside interference.

threat to the stability of the area and to the security of the
region and the world. Thii encroachment by the Chinese
people upon the independence and territorial integrity of
the sovereign State of Viet Nam is a flagrant contravention
of the principles of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations.

59. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Yugoslavia for the warm sentiments he expressed to me,
and I respond positively to his reference to the cordial
relations that exist between our two countries.

67. What makes the matter all the more distressing and
potentially dangerous is the fact that this armed aggression
should have been perpetrated by a permanent member of
the Security Council, a nation whose own struggle for recognition and entry into the United Nations was supported by
the very peoples against which it has turned today.

60. The next speaker is the representative of Angola. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make a
statement.
61. Mr. DE FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
allow me to extend to you the best wishes of my country and
my delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month.

68. The fact that this armed attack is a violation of the
Charter by a permanent member of the Council is all the
more reprehensible, and it shakes our confidence in the
Council’s espousal of the august doctrines of the Charter, in
the ability of the Council to be the guardian of peaceand in
the credibility of what is supposed to be a bastion of intemational law.

62. The heroic people of Viet Nam hold a special place in
the hearts and minds of the entire third world. For decades
they have symboliied unremitting opposition to imperialism and colonialism and have shown the world what dedication to revolutionary principles and an unflagging struggle
against alien domination can do even in the face of a
super-Power, technological expertise and might and a
gigantic military machine. The people of Viet Nam have
challenged history and won. They have fought the scourge
of colonialism with single-mindedness and courage, with
fortitude and determination, and they have overcome vast
odds to be the free and united nation that they are today.

69. It is a pity that such counter-productive and shortsighted policies as punitive raids and armed thrusts are
being allowed to sabotage the stability of the area.We all
need peace, not war, to rebuild our shattered institutions. A
great Power like China should not have to depend on armed
aggression against a much smaller neighbour to show its
muscle in South-East Asia.

63. And that is why it is all the more shocking that the
nation that has been the symbol of the struggle for liberation, independence and sovereignty, a nation that has made
an immense contribution to the cause of liberation from
oppression and exploitation, a nation whose people and
exploits have given us a new vocabulary for third-world
struggle, should now once more be the victim of atrocities,
aggression, armed invasion and a blatantly hegemonistic,
expansionist policy-only this time not of the same superPower but of another.

70. All the revolutionary militants of the People’s Republic of Angola, led by their vanguard party, the MPLAWorkers’ Party, solemnly pledge support to our comrades
in Viet Nam in their struggle to repel the invaders and
safeguard their sovereignty from this challenge. We consider it our revolutionary duty to stand by our Vietnamese
friends, and in fact it is the duty of all those engaged in
liberation struggles, in the fight against imperialism and its
ally expansionism, to support the Vietnamese people and
strongly to condemn the Chinese invasion.

64. The Central Committee of the MPLA-Workers’
Party, the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola
and all revolutionary militants in my country condemn the
armed aggression by China against the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam. This blatant attack, which is still continuing and ’
indeed increasing in strength, is an attack not only against
the Vietnamese nation but also against all attempts by the
third world to rid itself of all forms of imperialist adventurism and reactionary oppression.

71. At a time when southern Africa is at a crucial stage in
its fight against racism, apartheidand minority rule, we need
all the support we can get from the international community, from our friends in the third world and, especially,
from the group of non-aligned countries. We need to devote
our time and energies to constructive work on the issues of
independence for Namibia, Zimbabwe, Western Sahara,
East Timor, Belii and Palestine and to our continuing tight
against Zionism and against apartheidin South Africa. The
immediate cessation of China’s hostilities against Viet Nam
and the withdrawal of all Chin,ese troops from the territory
of Viet Nam will certainly be a major contribution to the
ultimate successof genuine liberation struggles being waged
in the third world and to the cause of international peace
and security.

65. Almost four years have passed since an imperialist
Power was driven out in defeat, leaving behind death, destruction and chaos in Viet Nam. The heroic Vietnamese
people have painstakingly set about rebuilding their nation.
They have emerged in victory, just as they did after the long
years of their struggle, as an inspiration to the peoples of
Asia, Africa and Latin America. And now, even as they face
enemy guns once more, they continue to inspire us.

72. International peace and security are indivisible. This
small planet can no longer sustain military and economic
warfare in one part and peace and security in another. What
happens in Asia is bound to have repercussions, no matter
how indirectly, on Africa and vice versa. Similarly, the
struggle for liberation in one part of the globe has to be
supported by progressive forces both near and far if we are
once and for all to remove from our lives all the vestiges of
colonialism and imperialism; And it is in this connexion
that 1 wish briefly to refer to the murderous bombing raids

66. The implications of the Chinese invasion of Viet Nam
are not limited to that region alone. It is a definite threat to
the cause of peace and to the unceasing struggle of the
developing nations to move along the path to progress. It is
an attack on territorial integrity, national sovereignty,
socialism and democracy. This deliberate and planned act
of armed aggression by the people of Peking is a serious
7

on the People’s Republic of Angola by the vicious, illegal,
racist minority Smith regime at Salisbury.

Members of the United Nations as well as for all peoples
who prize peace and justice to make decisive and concerted
efforts to assist in settling the conflict and to prevent it from
escalating, so that it will not spread throughout Indochina
and South-East Asia.

73. The Smith clique have intensified their bombing raids
on the black independent States neighbouring Zimbabwe,
seeking to spread and intensify their imperialist activities
across southern Africa. The People’s Republic of Angola
will not tolerate attacks on its sovereignty, nor will we allow
such attacks to deter us from following the path of revolutionary support for all genuine liberation struggles everywhere. Our position is clear and unequivocal; it is in strict
conformity with the Charter of the United Nations and the
Charter of the Organization of African Unity, and commensurate with our responsibilities as a front-line State.

80. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic, which is an
immediate neighbour both of the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam and of the People’s Republic of China, keenly regrets
this aggression which runs counter to the interests of the
Vietnamese people and of the Chinese people, as well as to
those of peace-loving peoples throughout the world.
81. On the basis of our consistent position that any dispute between States must bc settled by peaceful means, the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
represented by my humble person, calls upon the two parties to the dispute peacefully and jointly to settle their
problem through negotiations on the basis of equality and
mutual respect, in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations.

74. The international community would do well to
ponder the fact that this bombing strike against Angolan
territory by an illegal capitalist-supported racist minority
regime that possesses neither national nor international
legitimacy poses a wider threat to the whole security situation in southern Africa and throughout the world.
75. Until final victory, whether on the borders of Viet
Nam or on the frontiers of Angola, the struggle continues.

82. Meanwhile, so as to create conditions favourable to
the opening of such negotiations, it is necessary that all
incidents should cease, that Chinese troops should be
totally withdrawn from the territory and that the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Viet Nam should be
respected.

76. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

83. The delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic will spare no effort to contribute actively to putting an end to the border conflict between China and Viet
Nam so as to safeguard peace and stability in Indochina
and in all South-East Asia.

77. Mr. SANGSOMSAK
(Lao People’s Democratic
Republic) (interpretation from French): Mr. President, first
of all I should like to congratulate you most warmly on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of February and tell you how much we appreciate
the manner in which you have thus far guided the Council’s
debates. I am convinced that your wisdom and great skill
will assist the Council in finding a just solution of the
question that is now before it. I should like to take this
opportunity to address to your predecessor, Ambassador
Donald Mills of Jamaica, our warmest congratulations for
his outstanding presidency of the Council during the month
of January. Finally, I should like to express to you and to
the other members of the Council our sincere gratitude for
having allowed my delegation to take part in the present
debate.

84. Mr. HULINSKP
(Czechoslovakia) (interpretation
from Russian): I should like to say a few words in respect of
the statement made by the representative of China at
today’s meeting.

78. The Security Council is at present considering the
grave situation which prevails in South-East Asia and, more
specifically, in Indo-China where a bloody incident
occurred on 17 February last between the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam and the People’s Republic of China. The world
learned with great anxiety that the Chinese side, combining
several divisions of its territorial army, armoured units and
artillery with the air force, had launched a large-scale attack
against the northern borders of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, which, in the legitimate defence of its territorial
integrity, dealt an energetic rebuff. This attack, which
infringes on the independence, the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, a State
Member of the United Nations, transgresses the Charter
and violates the principles of international relations. It constitutes, in fact, an act of deliberate aggression, which
gravely threatens peace, security and stability in IndoChina, in South-East Asia and throughout the world.

85. First of all, I would speak about Chinese duplicity.
Despite the fact that the present meeting of the Security
Council was called because of the Chinese act of aggression
planned long in advance against the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, the Chinese delegation has done its utmost to
divert the Council’s attention from its priority task, which is
to remove a serious threat to peace and international security and to eliminate a situation that is fraught with the
danger of involving the whole world in a terrible military
tragedy. The Chinese representatives cannot reconcile
themselves to the failure of their callous Maoist experiment
in Kampuchea. They assiduously continue to encourage the
Council to take up discussion on a question that is not
within its competence and is exclusively the internal affair of
the People’s Republic of Kampuchea. Then they resort to
absurd fabrications, unworthy of a great Power, about
so-called Vietnamese provocations against China and to
transparent attempts to disguise their pitiless military
aggression as what they call “a small punitive expedition**
undertaken by China in self-defence against Vietnamese
attacks on Chinese territory-an expedition which is in no
way connected with the so-called Kampuchean question.
.“A self-defensive counter-attack”-these
were the words
used by the representative of China.

79. The delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic believes that there is an urgent need for all States

86. For more than a week now, the Chinese delegation,
from one day to the next, has been gulling Council members
8

,‘..

_.
i’

with false promises to the effect that Chinais on the point of
withdrawing its troops from Vietnamese territory and that
the Council need show no concern about this matter. The
perfidy of such tactics was further clarified in the light of the
statements made by the Deputy Prime Minister of China,
Wang Chen, when he received a member of the United
States Government, Mr. Blumenthal, on 25 February this
year in Peking. They clearly show that China does not
intend to halt its aggressive activities.
I.

tial Brzexinskis to connive at Chinese adventures. Certain
Western circles for a long time now have included Maoist
foreign policy in their strategy. In Peking they know that
anti-Sovietism is the only coin which in certain Western
circles has not been devalued. All those who attempt to play
“the Chinese card”, directly or indirectly encouraging the
Chinese leaders in their irresponsible policies, can seefrom
the example of the recent aggression against Viet Nam that
they are playing with fire and are being short-sighted. They
should remember the peace-makers of Chamberlain’s type
who, for their connivance with the Nazis and their shortsighted designs of pitting Hitler against the Soviet Union,
soon paid the price, as did their peoples.

87. The duplicity of the tactics of the Chinese delegation
at the present meeting of the Council shows clearly that
China is banking on using the possible results of this meeting to further step up their aggression. It is time for those
who, deliberately or not, play into the hands of the Chinese
representatives-those representatives who in their hypocrisy do not call a spade a spade and who virtually equate the
victim of the aggression, Viet Nam, with a war criminal-to
draw the necessary conclusions from the treacherous tactics
of Peking.

93. The Czechoslovak delegation is firmly convinced that
the Council should rebuff the criminal actions of China in
the interests of all countries and peoples of the world. It
should condemn the aggressor and demand the immediate
cessation of Chinese aggression and the withdrawal of Chinese troops from Viet Nam.

88. In the light of those Chinese tactics and in the light of
to&y’s statement by the Chinese representative, there is
something that the authors of the statement submitted by
the countries of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN) [S/13106] should think about. Instead
of a clearly formulated appeal for the immediate cessation
of aggression and the withdrawal of the aggressor’s troops
from Vietnamese temitory, the statement makes general
provisions. That is the purpose of the Chinese tactics, to
seek de facto justification for their aggression against Viet
Nam on any pretext, in order to be able to continue their
armed attacks on the territories of others and against other
countries.

94. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
95. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretationfrom
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank you
most sincerely for having called on me for the second time
to address this august body.

89. In general, all who assert that they are seriously concerned by the aggressive actions of the Chinese military
clique should think very carefully about how to act in the
light of the Chinese tactics of duplicity. The fact is that it
‘may happen that they will find themselves on the same level
as the aggressor.

96. Before providing fresh clarifications in respect of the
situation in our region, I should like to express to all representatives of brotherly and friendly countries throughout
the world, whether or not they have participated in the
deliberations of the Council, our profound gratitude for
their support for and their solidarity with our people and
our fighters who have gone into battle for the defence of our
dear homeland as well as to defend the most elementary
norms which should govern relations among peoples and
States.

90. Secondly, not only the content of the majority of the
statements made in the Council but also the facts which
reach us each day from Viet Nam and the unbridled nature
of the ever new demands by the Chinese leaders show
clearly that the Council should adopt an unambiguous
position vis-&is Chinese aggression against Viet Nam.

97. That support and that international solidarity which
constituted one of the important factors of our victory in
our recent fight against imperialist aggression for our
national well-being, are proving at present to be indispensable for our people in their battle against a new enemy:
international reactionaries in collusion with imperialists.

91. We have also heard a statement to the effect that the
aggressor, after it considers that it has “taught the Vietnamese a lesson”, will be ready to enter into negotiations
with the victim of aggression. But surely from the statement
made here by the representative of the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam, Ha Van Lau, we can understand the position of
the Vietnamese Government, which is that they cannot
agree to any talks with the aggressor while the aggressor’s
troops are stationed on sovereign Vietnamese territory.

98. Nevertheless, it is regrettable to note that during the
course of these deliberations in the Council, apart from the
slanderous and lying allegations of the representative of
China and his lackey, which deserve no attention, some
statements, whether intentionally or not, are couched in the
same terms as theirs concerning the alleged aggression of
Viet Nam against Kampuchea. Starting from this mistaken
interpretation, or from an as yet incomplete understanding
of the true situation, some speakers have called on the
Council to solve the burning problem of the Chinese war of
aggression against Viet Nam by a “withdrawal of foreign
troops from the areas of hostility in Indo-China”, which
would mean an exchange between two problems which are
essentially different in nature: the withdrawal of Chinese
troops from Viet Nam and that of Vietnamese -troops from
Kampuchea1

92. The Chinese aggressor, as we understood from the
statement made by the Chinese representative, does not yet
consider that that “lesson” is over. He has not yet received
the answer that he wanted: has Viet Nam been “punished”
sufficiently so as to be tractable in future dealings with
Peking7 Furthermore, Peking’s attempts to test the practical significance of the treaty of friendship signed between
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and the USSR are no less
dangerous than the attempts of various more or lessintluen-

99. I should like to say a few words on relations between
Viet Nam and Kampuchea.
9

i,

7-.

100. The history of the emancipation struggle during
these last decades of the peoples of the three countries of
the Indo-Chma peninsula-Viet
Nam, Laos and Kampuchea-has demonstrated a truth which has the force of
objective law. It is the following

sages and delegations to express their gratitude for our
a&stance, as w% recalled by my friend the representative of
Cuba, Rafil Roa Kouri, in the statement he made before the
Council on 12 January [2109th meeti@.
101. This active solidarity and this mutual assistance
among our peoples is of great political and moral signilicance, not only for the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and
Kampuchea, but also for the national liberation movement
in Asia, Africa and Latin America. It is precisely on this
political and moral basis and in view of the realities of the
struggle of peoples for liberation during the course of the
last decades that the non-aligned movement adoptedas one
of its purposes and objectives “active support, assistance
and solidarity without discrimination” in the common
struggle against imperialism, expansionism, colonialism,
neocolonialism, racism and so on.

-Fist,
in order to exercise their colonial and neocolonial domination over the three countries of IndoChina, the colonialist and imperialist Powers practised their
traditional policy of “divide and rule”. During the last 30
years+ those Powers utilized Indo-Chinese to tight IndoChinese and Asians to fight Asians; they sought to divide
the peoples of Viet Nam, Laos and Kampuchea so as to
weaken and dominate them, one after the other. In its war
of aggression against those three countries of Indochina,
imperialism used the puppet troops of South Viet Nam to
attack the peoples of Kampuchea and Laos and the troops
of certain countries of South-East Asia, those of the Park
Chung Hee @ime of South Korea and even soldiers from
Oceania to commit aggression against Viet Nam-not to
mention the mercenaries recruited in certain countries in the
western hemisphere.

102. I turn now to another matter: between Viet Nam and
Kampuchea which, then, was the aggressor7
103. During the January meetings of the Council on the
problem of Kampuchea, the delegation of Viet Nam and
other friendly delegations shed light on the facts of the
situation of that country under the bloody Pot Pot-Ieng
Sary clique and at the same time gave a true picture of the
border war between Viet Nam and Kampuchea. It was
made clear that the profound reason for that situation in
Kampuchea was to be found in the big-Power expansionist
and hegemonistic policy in South-East Asia of the Peking
authorities who, through the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique,
sought to exercise their neocolonial type of domination in
Kampuchea, to sow insecurity in the neighbouring countries and, above all, to provoke a border war against Viet
Nam.

-Secondly, confronted with this colonialist and impsrialist policy, the peoples of Indochina, in their struggle for
national liberation and relying fust and foremost on their
own strength, had to, and still have to, unite and give each
other mutual assistance from every point of view, while at
the same time seeking support and assistance from all revolutionary and progressive forces in the entire world. This
militant solidarity and this reciprocal assistance among the
three peoples of Indochina constitute one of the important
factors, a sine qua non condition for victory in their struggle
for national independence and freedom against colonialism
and imperialism, the aggressor. This is an objective requirement in the struggle for the liberation of our three peoples of
Indo-China, a kind of historical law having the value of a
principle in their revolutionary struggle and guaranteeing
their common victory over a common enemy, namely,
colonialism, imperialism and their lackeys of every kind.

104. Accordingly, reality and law are there to prove that,
in this border war between Viet Nam and Kampuchea, the
Pol Pot troops under the command of Chinese “military
advisers” are the aggressors, and that Viet Nam, the victim
of aggression, has the sacred right of legitimate defence in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

-Thirdly, during the second joint resistance of our two
peoples against the United States aggressor, from 1970 to
1975, this active solidarity and reciprocal assistance were
manifest in each campaign, even in each battle. For example, during the campaigns called Chen La I and Chen La II
in 1970 and 1971 in Kampuchea in which units of the
American expeditionary corps, the puppet army of Nguyen
Van Thieu of South Viet Nam and the puppet troops of Lon
No1 took part, at the request of the Kampuchean revolutionary leadership of that time, we gave assistance to the
national liberation forces of Kampuchea to combat and
repel the aggressors and defend the zones of resistance of the
Kampuchean people. To give another example: in their
armed struggle to liquidate the Lon No1 regime which was
supported and supplied by the United States, it was precisely the leading group of that time, including Pol Pot and
Ieng Sary themselves, which cal!ed on us to assist them with
munitions, arms, even with heavy artillery units and
artillery forces which they lacked in their final offerrive
against the last refuge of Lon No1 at Phnom Penh. And that
call came in the course of our intense preparations for our
general offensive against the puppet regime of Nguyen Van
Thieu, an offensive which for us required an important
concentration of fire-power. Yet without hesitation we
came to their aid. Why did they not then call us “aggressors” as they do now7 On the contrary, they sent us mes-

105. The allegation claiming that Viet Nam is the aggressor in Kampuchea is culled from the slanderous propaganda of the Peking authorities and their Pol Pot-Ieng Sat-y
agents and transforms the truth into falsehood so as to
insult Viet Nam. Its aim is to hide from the eyes of public
opinion the expansionist and hegemonistic policy of the
leaders of Peking in Kampuchea and their hostile policy
against Viet Nam. The newspaper l%e Christian Science
Monitor of 11 January affirmed that it was the Pol Pot
troops which attacked us first. Specific proof in our possession shows that the purpose of their offensive in December
1978 was to occupy the province of Tay Ninh and then to
march on to Ho Chi Minh City, there to join with the
subversive movement of Hoa inside that city. One conclusion can be drawn: since Viet Nam was the victim of aggression, responsibility for the escalation of military operations
at the end of December 1978 on the Viet Nam-Kampuchean
border falls squarely and definitely on the shoulders of the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique and their masters in Peking.
106. I turn now to the aid and assistance given by the
people of Viet Nam to the struggling people of Kampuchea.
It would seem that one or two delegations have repeated the
argument used at the previous series of meetings of the
10

.‘

i

Council according to which Viet Nam intervened or intcrfered in the internal affairs of Kampuchea.

mankind has given them during their 30 years of struggle on
behalf of their own cause and the cause of a11mankind.

107. First of all, we feel we have already sufficiently expatiated on the fact of the militant solidarity among the three
peoples of Indo-China in their struggle for independence
and freedom against colonialism and aggressive imperialism. That is why, now that the new common enemy of
the two peoples of Viet Nam and Kampuchea has appeared
in the person of international reactionaries who utilized the
Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime to transform Kampuchea into a
sort of neo-colony and to attack Viet Nam, the peoples of
both Viet Nam and Kampuchea, fully aware of the law of
survival that each must obey, have to make use of the
strength of solidarity, which has already been proved by
history.

112. Thirdly, this aid and assistance provided by the Vietnamese people, within its means and on the basis of mutual
respect for independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, was furnished at the request of the people of Kampuchea in order to permit them to realize their right to
self-determination as enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and against the neocolonial regime installed by the
authorities in China in the person of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary
clique. We believe that this assistance not only has an
undeniable political and moral significance but also constitutes an obligation recognized by the Charter and by many
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, the fmt of
which ,dates from 20 December 1965 and the last from
December 1974, relating to the definition of aggression. It is
also in accordance with the purposes and principles of the
non-aligned movement concerning the struggle against
imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism in&d-,
ing Zionism, expansionism and hegemony.

108. All the slogans of slanderous and insulting propaganda such as “the aggression of Viet Nam against Kampuchea” or “Viet Nam wants to create an Indo-Chinese
federation” empioyed by the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary clique
when, at the instigation of the Peking leaders, it unleashed a
border war of aggression against Viet Nam, have, for the
reactionary authorities in Peking as for the colonialists and
imperialists of the past, the purpose of dividing the three
peoples of Indo-China in order to weaken and subjugate
them one by one.

113. We are convinced that we always have the just cause
and the progressive law of the Charter and the General
Assembly on our side. Thus, the relations between the
peoples of Viet Nam and Kampuchea have never been those
between an aggressor and the victim of aggression or
between a “Power of regional hegemony*’ and the victim of
that hegemony, as is claimed by the lying propaganda of
Peking. They are relations of militant solidarity and reciprocal assistance between two fraternal combatants in their
common task of national emancipation against the policy
of big-Power expansionism and hegemony carried out by
the Peking authorities.

109. Secondly, the fraternal people of Kampuchea have
been the victim of a monstrous policy of genocide by the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique, that clique which was the product of
the neocolonial r&ime of the Peking authorities, who must
bear forever before history the inescapable responsibility of
that crime against the people of Kampuchea. Forty per cent
of the population of Kampuchea have been massacred in
the three years of the rule of the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime,
the lackeys of Peking. The massacres were committed by
medieval methods. Three out of the 7 to 8 million inhabitants of that country, a people proud of its Angkorian
civilization, 3 million from all social milieux, from the cities
and the countryside, ranging from military revolutionaries
to clergy, from peasants to intellectuals, from simple office
workers to diplomats-all
were victims. As the information
of the crimes filtered through the barriers of the Pol PotIeng Sary infernal tigime, the entire world raised a huge cry
of indignation and horror.

114. The Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Co-operation
which was signed between the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam and the People’s Republic of Kampuchea on 18 February last [WZUOZ] fully reflects the special spirit of solidarity between the peoples of Viet Nam and Kampuchea. The
Treaty constitutes a sure guarantee for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Viet Nam and Kampuchea and a source of strength ensuring for each of our
two peoples the solid safeguard of their fundamental
national rights against the expansionist and hegemonistic
policy of the reactionaries in Peking in collusion with the
imperialists. The relations of solidarity, friendship and cooperation between the two peoples established in theTreaty
will contribute not only to the interests of each people but
also to stability and peace in the region. The clauses of the
Treaty clearly state that it does not prejudice any third
neighbouring State in the region. That is why the signing of
the Treaty was received with the warm approval by the
forces that love peace and justice throughout the world.
Only the authorities in China and the remains of the Pol
Pot-Ieng Sary clique, who were seized with fright .have
taken refuge in Peking, have done their utmost to slander
and debase it.

110. But there is another side to the internal situation of
the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime, the lackeys of Peking, on
which the world has been insufficiently informed. I am
referring to the uprising of the people of Kampuchea
against the Pol Pot-Ieng Sary regime that has been going on
since April 1975, in all ways-economically, politically and
by force of arms. How can one humanely think that a
people which has heroic traditions of struggle against colonialism and imperialism would remain inactive when confronted by that monstrous regime of Peking’s neo-colony,
which could proceed to the massacre,of an entire nation?
That would do an injustice to that heroic people which has
such a long history.

115. The People’s Revolutionary Council of Kampuchea,
the sole authentic and legal representative of the people of
Kampuchea, has become and will continue to be the master
of the People’s Republic of Kampuchea. Any attempt to
interfere in the internal affairs of that country and to
weaken it will certainly be doomed to failure.

111. How could one think that, given this heroic, this
almost sublime struggle to survive waged by our brothers in
arms for so many years, the Vietnamese people would be so
heartless as to refuse to support and assist them when they
requested it? If it had done so, the people of Viet Nam would
no longer be worthy of the sympathy which progressive

116. We apologize for having taken up a little of the
Council’s time, but we wanted to furnish additional infor11

mation on the expansionist and hegemonistic policy of the
Peking authorities so that members might have a just picture of the true dangers of this policy, which weigh on the
future of the countries of Indo-China and South-East Asia
and of which the recent brutal aggression by China against
Viit Nam constitutes the most striking proof.

123. I should merely like to draw attention to one curious
statement by the representative of Peking in his attempt to
show that China, a large country, is the victim of aggression
and is being intimidated by a small country. Obviously, that
is an absurd allegation. The Chinese representative felt it
necessary to make that allegation in order to try to quieten
the growing concern that China’s expansionist policy is
arousing among other States, particularly the States of that
region. That concern is perfectly justified. Not for nothing
did the United States magazine U.S.News and WorIdReport
note in its last issue that if this use of force were to have the
desired results China’s neighbours would have even more
reason for concern about Peking’s possible future actions.

117. No man of conscience in the world is unaware that
the Peking authorities seek by the vilest means to conceal
their true face from the eyes of world public opinion while
persisting in their criminal policy towards Viet Nam and
South-East Asia. That is why any solution to the problem of
the war of aggression of China against Viet Nam that linked
this problem to the so-called problem of Kampuchea would
be tantamount to legalizing China’s aggression against Viet
Nam and encouraging the expansionist and hegemonistic
policy of the Peking authorities.

124. The Peking leaders are trying to hide their criminal
aims from their neighbours and from world public
opinion-indeed,
from their own people. They try to conceal their aggression in Viet Nam by alleging that it is merely
a “limited military action” which will come to an end in a
few days. After extending the deadline from one day to the
next, the Peking leaders have finally stated that they will
need 33 days, that is, the same amount of time they needed
for the attack on India in 1962. The Western press was too
hasty in stating that at last a deadline had been set for the
withdrawal of Chinese troops from Viet Nam. The Peking
leaders immediately made the proviso that this time China
might need more time. The Chinese aggressor is obviously
trying to drag out the aggression. It does not balk even at
stating openly its intention to expropriate a significant part
of Vietnamese territory.

118. As victims over many years of the hostile policy of
the Peking leaders and now oftheir open armed aggression,
we can affirm that so long as this path is still pursued the
error of Munich with regard to Hitlerian fascism will be
repeated and that this attitude, 40 years later in history, will
have even graver consequences in the face of this new
danger for humanity posed by the expansionist and hegemonistic policy of the Peking authorities.
119. That is why once again and in the same spirit that
several delegations have evinced we reiterate our urgent
request to the Council severely to condemn Chinese aggression against Viet Nam and to demand the immediate cessation of this aggression, the total and unconditional
withdrawal of the invading troops from the territory of Viet
Nam and absolute respect from China for the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Viet Nam.

125. Indignation throughout the world at Chinese aggression is growing. Ever louder grow the demands that China
should immediately withdraw its troops from Viet Nam.
But it is obvious that mere appeals cannot have an effect on
the aggressor. Decisive measures must be taken. In that
respect the Soviet delegation would once again like to draw
attention to the draft resolution submitted to the Council by
the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia/S/13117]. That draft
resolution contains a strong condemnation of the Chinese
aggression against Viet Nam. It contains a demand that the
People’s Republic of China should withdraw all its troops
from Vietnamese territory forthwith. All Member States are
called upon to ceaseall supplies of arms to China as well as
the transfer of any technology which may be used for
military purposes. The adoption of that draft resolution by
the Council would really be an important contribution
towards curbing the Chinese aggressors and restoring international peace and security.

120. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Ten days have
elapsed since the Chinese aggressors invaded the territory of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The heroic Vietnamese
people have valiantly defended their native land and are
giving fitting rebuff to the concentrated attacks by the
Chinese interventionists. They are sure of victory because
they are relying on the support of their true friends, the
Soviet Union and other socialist countries and all peace
loving States. Throughout the world the movement of protest against the Chinese aggression is growing, a movement
of solidarity with the struggle of the Vietnamese people for
their freedom and independence.

126. But the situation in the Council is now such that it is
not in a position to take the necessary steps with regard to
the Chinese aggression against Viet Nam. The reason is that
from the very beginning the Council was set on the wrong
track. As the Soviet delegation pointed out, the Council
should have dealt directly with the event that made necessary its convening; that is, Chinese aggression. The Soviet
delegation pointed out that attempts to link the question of
Chinese aggression against Viet Nam with any other problem could only make more diicult the adoption of the
necessary decision by the Council and led it to an impasse.
But that warning was not heeded. Furthermore, certain
representatives-in particular the representatives of the
United States and Norway-have proposed that the Council should call for an immediate cease-fire between the
parties and for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the
territories of Viet Nam and Kampuchea. Thus they are

121. During these deliberations in the Council, many
representatives of Member States have decisively condemned the aggressive actions by the Chinese expansionists
against Viet Nam and have emphasized the need for the
immediate withdrawal of Chinese troops from Viet Nam.
They have pointed to the danger to international peace and
security posed by the expansionist policy pursued by the
Chinese leaders.
122. No attempts by the Chinese aggressors to justify their
armed incursion into Viet Nam or to shirk responsibility for
that armed incursion can invalidate the patent facts that
have been adduced here by the representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam. The shameless slander resorted to
by the Chinese representative will not help, either.
12

troops from Viet Nam can peace be restored to that region
and the threat of further exacerbation of the international
situation avoided.

trying to place on an equal footing the Chinese aggression
against Viet Nam and the situation in Kampuchea, where
the people have overthrown a hated regime and are now
witnessing the rebirth of their country with the help of the
fraternal Vietnamese people on the basis of the Treaty of
Peace, Friendship and Co-operation between the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam and the People’s Republic of Kampuchea /S/13101J.

131. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I should like to
comment upon the statement just made by the representative of the Soviet Union.. ’
132. I think the Council should tonight be grateful to the
representative of Viet Nam. His was a revealing speech. I
listened to it with very great interest. As I understood it, he
gave four arguments as to what had happened in Kampuchea. First, that it was a matter of self-defence in relation to
border incidents; secondly, that the previous Government
was a terrible Government which justified intervention,
although, if I may say so, I did not notice Viet Nam in the
forefront of those countries that were seeking to raise the
matter in the Commission on Human Rights last year;
thirdly, that it was a spontaneous uprising of the Kampuchean people; and, fourthly, that it could not be aggression
anyway, on legal grounds. It was, as I have said, a useful
speech for the Council to consider.

127. As we have noted earlier, the adoption of such a
proposal would merely play into the hands of the aggressor
in its attempt to assume the right to “teach a lesson” to
another State. Nevertheless, certain persons have spoken in
favour of the adoption of such a resolution, addressed to all
the States of the region, alleging that this might have an
effect on China and might halt Chinese aggression.
128. But yesterday a statement was made in Peking which
makes this matter very clear. The statement was made by
that selfsame Peking leader who in his travels through
various countries doled out threats to “teach a lesson” to
Viet Nam because the entire army of 40,000 socalled Chinese specialists had been compelled to leave Kampuchea
and China had been deprived of an opportunity to organize
provocation against Viet Nam along the western border.
That leader stated quite definitely that China would sincerely welcome a resolution of the Council which would call
upon China to withdraw its troops from Viet Nam and
upon Viet Nam to withdraw its troops from Kampuchea.
That statement by the Peking leader shows quite clearly that
the link between the Chinese aggression in Viet Nam and
the so-called Kampuchean problem merely arouses profound satisfaction among the Chinese aggressors, since it
serves their true aims.

133. But I do want to look at this question of linkage that
Ambassador Troyanovsky has just raised. I have listened, I
think, to almost every speech that has been made in the
whole course of this debate and it does seem to me that the
overwhelming feeling among the vast majority of countries
that have spoken is that they deplore both actions. They
deplore the action of Viet Nam in Kampuchea, and they
equally deplore the action of China in Viet Nam. It also
seems to me that the overwhelming majority of countries
wish there to be a clear call from the Council for the troops
that are now in other peoples’ countries in that region to go
home. The trouble is that one side wishes to discuss only
Kampuchea and the other side wishes to discuss something
else. In those circumstances, clearly the Council is going to
be in some difliculty in acting, and acting decisively, in this
matter.

129. Thus, it is obvious that various kinds of proposals
and ideas that have appeared recently in the Council with
regard to general appeals for the withdrawal of foreign
troops from foreign territories can, in fact, only serve the
ends of the Chinese aggressors in providing justification for
their intention to continue their intervention in Viet Nam.
This applies equally to the idea of a cease-fire in Viet Nam
without a clear-cut condemnation of the Chinese aggression
and a demand for the immediate withdrawal of Chinese
troops. The adoption of such a resolution could only consolidate the position of the aggressor in the territory it has
seized, as has happened in the past, and it would run
counter to the resolve of the heroic Vietnamese people to
drive the aggressor from their territory. Obviously, only
after the complete elimination of the Chinese aggression in
Viet Nam can we start talking about providing mediation
services.

134. At this stage I would only say that, as far as the
United Kingdom is concerned, we feel that the Council
should at least go on trying to see whether or not it is
possible to produce some text which can be agreed upon or
which at least the majority of us can clearly agree upon, so
as to indicate to the world as a whole that the vast majority
of countries in the international community do believe that
both should be deplored and that both should go home.
135. And, finally, I would say to Ambassador Troyanovsky in regard to the call for withdrawal that has been
made in this debate by the United Kingdom and other
countries, including, as I understand it, the ASEAN countries, that in no sensehas it been said that withdrawal by one
side is to be conditional upon withdrawal by the other side.
We want withdrawal from both, not that the withdrawal of
one should depend upon the withdrawal of the other.

130. In order to discharge its duties in the maintenance of
peace, the, Council should adopt a clear-cut, unambiguous
position of condemnation of Chinese aggression, against
Viet Nam,. Only by the immediate withdrawal of Chinese

The meeting rose at 10.05 p.m.

..
.. ..

13

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONi

PUBLICATIONS

Unite 1 Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world.
Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies aont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaires
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressea-vous
A : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Genbve.
ZCAIC IIOJIYPHTb

H3AAHHSf

OPPAHH

OB’HEAHHRHHhIX

3AUHU

HAHHH

EisAaHm
Ooranusa~~
OCYbemiHemibrx
HawiR
noxwo
xyn~~b
P ~HWWHLIX Maraamfax
H aren-reraax
so scex patiosax
wspa. Hasonare
cnpaaxu
06 ~xuumax
s
~aruem wmrn~o~
wara3Hme
HUH nnmuve
no anpecy : Opnrzusaauwt
06meawsreHHbrx
Hauufi.
C~KUHR
no nponazce naztauuA, ?IbIO-ROpm
XIIH XCeHesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las public&ones
de bs Naciones
Unidas
estan en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
o dirfjase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Seccf6n de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Lftho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$US.

1.50

79-70002-November

198f-2.250
