United Nations

A/RES/57/286

General Assembly

Distr.: General
31 January 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 121

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/57/653)]

57/286. United Nations pension system
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 51/217 of 18 December 1996, 53/210 of 18 December 1998
and 55/224 of 23 December 2000 and section V of its resolutions 54/251 of 23 December
1999 and 56/255 of 24 December 2001,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board,1 the
report of the Secretary-General on the investments of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund 2 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions, 3
Endorses the observations and recommendations contained in the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;3
I
Actuarial matters
Recalling section I of its resolution 55/224,
Having considered the results of the valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund as at 31 December 2001 and the observations thereon by the Consulting
Actuary of the Fund, the Committee of Actuaries and the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board,
1.
Takes note of the actuarial situation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund, which went from an actuarial surplus of 0.36 per cent of pensionable remuneration as
at 31 December 1997 to an actuarial surplus of 4.25 per cent of pensionable remuneration as
at 31 December 1999, and to an actuarial surplus of 2.92 per cent of pensionable
remuneration as at 31 December 2001, and, in particular, of the opinions provided by the
Consulting Actuary and the Committee of Actuaries, as reproduced in annexes VII and VIII,
respectively, to the report of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;1

_______________
1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/57/9).
A/C.5/57/11.
3
A/57/490.
2

02 56042

A/RES/57/286

2.
Also takes note of the general support of the Board for the report of the
Working Group established by the Board to undertake a fundamental review of the benefit
provisions of the Fund, taking into account developments in staffing and remuneration
policies in the member organizations and in pension arrangements at the national and
international levels, and notes in particular that the Board approved the recommendations
of the Working Group, set out in paragraphs 157 and 158 of the report of the Board,1 as
further promoting the human resources framework adopted by the International Civil
Service Commission and the General Assembly and serving to enhance the mobility of
staff and the portability of pensions;
3.
Further takes note of the recommendation of the Board that the current
contribution rate should be maintained but kept under review;
4.
Approves, in principle, the changes in the benefit provisions of the Regulations of
the Fund, as set out in annex XIV to the report of the Board,1 that would eliminate the
limitation on the right to restoration for existing and future participants, with implementation
to begin at such time as the actuarial valuation of the Fund shows a clear upward pattern of
surpluses;
5.
Notes that the Board agreed to make no changes in the methodology currently
used in the determination of final average remuneration, but agreed to study all possible
means of redressing the existing aberrations in the levels of initial pensions and in income
replacement ratios over time;
6.
Concurs with the transfer agreements with the European Organization for the
Safety of Air Navigation and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as
approved by the Board under article 13 of the Regulations of the Fund, with a view to
securing continuity of pension rights between the Fund and the two organizations, as set
out in annex X to the report of the Board;1
II
Pension adjustment system
Recalling section II of its resolution 55/224,
Having considered the reviews carried out by the Working Group of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and subsequently by the Board, as set out in its report,1
of various aspects of the pension adjustment system,
1.

Recalls the aim of enhancing the mobility of staff and the portability of pensions;

2.
Approves, in principle, the changes in the pension adjustment system, as set out
in annex XIII to the report of the Board,1 with implementation to begin when the actuarial
valuation of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shows a clear upward pattern of
surpluses, namely:
(a)
age 50;

To apply cost-of-living adjustments to deferred retirement benefits as from

(b) To apply cost-of-living differential factors to deferred retirement benefits as
from the date of separation;
3.
Notes that the Board approved the recommendation of the Working Group to
eliminate the 1.5 percentage point reduction in the first consumer price index adjustment
due to existing and future beneficiaries, subject to an actuarial surplus being revealed in the
actuarial valuation to be performed as at 31 December 2003;

2

A/RES/57/286

4.
Takes note of the decision of the Board to continue to study the problems
associated with the adjustment of pensions after award;
5.
Also takes note of the results of the monitoring of the costs/savings of recent
modifications of the two-track feature of the pension adjustment system and of the
intention of the Board to continue to monitor those costs/savings every two years, on the
occasion of the actuarial valuations of the Fund;
III
Financial statements of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
and report of the Board of Auditors
Having considered the financial statements of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund for the biennium ended 31 December 2001, the audit opinion and report of the Board
of Auditors thereon, the information provided on the internal audits of the Fund and the
observations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board,1
Notes that, in its report on the accounts of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
for the biennium ended 31 December 2001,4 the Board of Auditors indicated that the
financial statements were in compliance with accepted standard accounting principles and
that there were no major findings of problems concerning procedures and controls;
IV
Administrative arrangements and longer-term objectives
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling section VII of its resolution 51/217, section V of its resolutions 52/222,
53/210 and 54/251, section IV of its resolution 55/224 and section V of its resolution
56/255 concerning the administrative arrangements and expenses of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund,
Having considered chapter VII of the report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board1 concerning the administrative arrangements of the Fund,
1.
Takes note of the information set out in paragraphs 96 and 97 of the report of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board1 on the revised budget estimates for the
biennium 2002–2003;
2.
Approves the increase in resources under administrative costs for the biennium
2002–2003, from 29,943,800 to 30,006,300 United States dollars, for the recalculation of
benefits due to a judgement of the International Labour Organization Tribunal and a
retroactive change in local salary scales;
3.
Takes note of the information set out in paragraphs 100 to 104 of the report of
the Board1 on the whole-office review of the staffing structure and levels of both the Fund
secretariat and the Investment Management Service, and also takes note of the support and
endorsement in principle of the Board for the Secretary/Chief Executive Officer’s efforts
and plans for modernization in order to deal with the fast-growing activities of the Fund;
4.
Also takes note of the support of the Board for the efforts of the
Secretary/Chief Executive Officer to continue to search for permanent premises for the
Fund in New York;

_______________
4

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/57/9), annex XII.

3

A/RES/57/286

V
Survivors’ benefits
Recalling section V of its resolution 55/224,
Takes note of the further review undertaken by the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board of issues related to the pension entitlements of survivors, and requests the
Board to examine the administrative and financial aspects of this matter, as a whole, and
report to the General Assembly thereon at its fifty-ninth session;
VI
Activities relating to former participants from the former
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic
and the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic
Recalling section VI of its resolution 55/224,
1.
Notes the information provided by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board in paragraphs 125 to 140 of its report;1
2.
Decides that this issue does not require further consideration by the General
Assembly;
VII
Size and composition of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
and the Standing Committee
1.
Takes note of the information set out in paragraphs 205 to 220 of the report of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board1 on the review of the size and composition of
the Board and its Standing Committee;
2.
Requests the Board to study the representation of the Fund’s member
organizations on the Board, so as to clarify the criteria adopted for that purpose, and to
submit further proposals to the General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session, with a view to
making such representation more equitable in order to reflect the actual distribution of
active participants in the Fund, present and future trends in Fund participation, the
changing nature of the Fund’s member organizations and improved participation by
members and alternate members in the Committee and Board meetings;
VIII
Other matters
1.
Takes note of the observations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board,
as set out in paragraphs 194 and 195 of its report,1 on the review and conclusions reached
by the International Civil Service Commission on the changes in average tax rates at the
seven headquarters duty stations, which formed the basis for the development of the
current common scale of staff assessment for pensionable remuneration;
2.
Approves, with effect from 1 April 2003, amendments to articles 28 (g), 30 (c)
and 34 (f), of the Regulations of the Fund, as set out in the annex to the present resolution,
to increase the ceilings applicable in the commutation of the minimum benefit;
3.
Also approves, with effect from 1 April 2003, the addition of a new paragraph
to article 21 of the Regulations of the Fund, as set out in the annex to the present
resolution, stating that a participant is deemed to have separated when he or she is on leave

4

A/RES/57/286

without pay for an extended period of time without concurrent contributions having been
paid to the Fund;
4.
Notes that the Board considered the possible application by the International
Criminal Court to become a member organization of the Fund and that a formal application
would be submitted to the Standing Committee in 2003, with possible membership to take
effect on 1 January 2004;
5.
Also notes that the Board considered the detailed report of the medical
consultant, covering the period from 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2001;
6.

Takes note of the other matters dealt with in the report of the Board;

7.
Decides to revert to the issue of possible improvements in pension benefits at
the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly;
IX
Investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
1.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the investments of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund2 as well as the observations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board, as set out in paragraphs 81 to 83 of its report;1
2.
Stresses the importance of ensuring that the fiduciary responsibility of the
Secretary-General, under the Regulations of the Fund, to take decisions on the investments
of the assets of the Fund would under no circumstances be compromised;
3.
Notes the concern expressed by the Board over the reduction in the market
value of the investments of the Fund and the continuing efforts by the management of the
investments to deal with market turbulence;
4.

Takes note of the intention of the Board of Auditors and the Pension Board:

(a)

To follow up on the audit recommendations;

(b) To review the procedures and operating methods of the Investment
Management Service;
(c) To review terms of reference for an independent external performance review
of the investments of the Fund;
X
Diversification of investments of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
Recalling its resolutions 36/119 A to C of 10 December 1981,
1.
Recognizes that the Fund’s policy of broad diversification of its investments by
currency, types of asset classes and geographical areas continues to be the most reliable
method of reducing risk and improving returns over long periods of time;
2.

Reaffirms paragraph 3 of section VIII of its resolution 55/224;

3.
Also reaffirms the policy of diversification of the investments of the Fund
across geographical areas, wherever this serves the interests of the participants and
beneficiaries of the Fund, in accordance with the four criteria of safety, profitability,
liquidity and convertibility;

5

A/RES/57/286

4.
Requests the Secretary-General to continue to report on this matter to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002

6

A/RES/57/286

Annex
Amendments to the Regulations of the
United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund
Article 21
Participation
Add the following new paragraph (c):
“(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of (b) above, a participant is deemed to
have separated when he or she has completed (i) a consecutive period of three years
on leave without pay without concurrent contributions having been paid in
accordance with article 25 (b), or (ii) four years under the conditions described in
(i) above within a total period of five years. To re-enter the Fund, such former
participant would have to satisfy the requirements for participation set out in
(a) above.”
Article 28
Retirement benefit
In paragraph (g), subparagraph (iii), replace the number “300” with the number
“1,000”.
Article 30
Deferred retirement benefit
In paragraph (c), replace the number “300” with the number “1,000”.
Article 34
Widow’s benefit
In paragraph (f), replace the number “200” with the number “600”.

7
