VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling its resolution 32/197 of 20 December
1977 on the restructuring of the economic and social
sectors of the United Nations system,
Having received the proposed medium-term plan of
the United Nations for the period 1980-1983,73 the
relevant chapters of the report of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination 74 and the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 75 as well as the reports on evaluation submitted by the Joint Inspection Unit, 76
Mindful of Economic and Social Council decision
1978/84 of 8 November 1978 on the proposed
medium-term plan and the report of the Committee
for Programme and Co-ordination,
Deploring the unacceptable delay in the submission
of the documents on the draft medium-term plan,
which hindered its meaningful consideration by the
competent intergovernmental organs in accordance
with the procedure laid down in General Assembly
resolution 31 /93,
1. Takes note of the proposed medium-term plan
for the period 1980-1983 and requests the SecretaryGeneral to use it in the light of the comments of the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on individual plan sections as the framework for the preparation of the programme budget for the biennium
1980-1981;
2. Decides to consider at its thirty-fourth session,
concurrently with the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 1980-1981, the recommendations which
the Economic and Social Council may make in 1979
concerning the orientation to be given to the programmes of the Organization in the light of paragraph (e) of Council decision 1978/84;
3. Takes note with appreciation of the relevant
chapters of the report of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination; 74
4. Welcomes the intention of the Committee for
Programme and Co-ordination to conduct an in-depth
study of the programme planning process during its
nineteenth session, 77 expresses the wish that this study
will lead to a solution to the problems stemming
from the late distribution of documents and supports
the recommendation of the Committee whereby the
required documents should be made available at least
six weeks prior to the beginning of each session;78
5. Approves the recommendations contained in the
report of the Joint Inspection Unit on programming
and evaluation79 . in the light of the conclusions of
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination80
and the observations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 81 as well as
the recommendations of the Committee for Programme
and Co-ordination concerning the study by the Secretary-General on the feasibility of establishing timelimited objectives for subprogrammes; 82
73 Jbid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/33/6/
Rev.1 and Corr.I).
7 4 Jbid., Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), chaps. I and VIII.
75 A/33/345.
7 6 A/33/225, A/33/226; E/1978/41 and Corr.2.
77 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), para 3.
78 Jbid., para. I.
79 A/33/226.
80 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), p(,ras. 6-12.
81 A/33/226/ Add.2 and Corr. I.
82 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), para. 10.

201

6. Approves the recommendations contained in the
reports of the Joint Inspection Unit on evaluation in
the United Nations system, 83 as commented on by the
Administrative Committee on Co-ordination84 and the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, 80 and
on evaluation of the programme on public administration and finance, 85 as commented on by the SecretaryGeneral86 and the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination ;s7
7. Endorses the guidelines proposed by the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on financial information to be included in
future medium-term plans; 88
8. Takes note of the progress report submitted by
the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on
the implementation of General Assembly resolution
32/197;8 9
9. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination that the introductory survey to the medium-term plan should constitute an analysis of the activities of the Organization
and the strategy for their implementation and be
prepared by the Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation under the
authority of the Secretary-General; 90
10. Approves the recommendations of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination on further
harmonization of programming in the United Nations
system, including the request to the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination to submit detailed proposals for securing an overview of the objectives and
plans of the organizations of the system; 91
l 1. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee for Programme and Co-ordination that the
Director-General for Development and International
Economic Co-operation be associated with preparation
of cross-organizational programme analyses on the
lines suggested by the Committee; 92
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination with the
necessary technical and substantive services in order
that it may be able to fulfil its increased responsibilities
and, in particular, carry out the programme of work
it has set itself for 1979.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978

33/119.

Report of the International Civil Service
Commission

The General Assembly,
Taking note with appreciation of the fourth annual
report of the International Civil Service Commission,98
83 A/33/225.
84 A/33/225/ Add.1.
85 A/33/227.

so A/33/227 / Add.1.
87 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-third
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), paras. 15-20. ·
ss A/33/345, paras. 7-11.
89 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-third
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), para. 101.
·
110 Ibid., paras. 51 and 52.
91 Jbid., paras. 46-49.
02 Ibid., para. 28.
113 Ibid., Supplement No. 30 (A/33/30) and A/33/30/ Add.1.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

202

the report of the Secretary-General thereon 94 and the
related oral report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95
Reiterating the importance of the role of the Commission as a central point within the common system
for questions of personnel policy,

Reaffirming the objective which it stated in adopting
article 9 of the statute of the International Civil
Service Commission, namely "the development of a
single unified international civil service through the
application of common personnel standards, methods
and arrangements",
Viewing with deep concern discordant actions taken
unilaterally by several of the organizations in recent
months,

I
1. Urges the competent authorities of all organizations of the United Nations common system to
refrain from actions which do not contribute to the
strengthening and development of the common system;
2. Requests the Secretary-General and his colleagues on the Administrative Committee on Coordination to study the feasibility of establishing a
single administrative tribunal for the entire common
system and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session;
3. Calls upon Member States to ensure that their
representatives in the governing organs of the specialized agencies do not take, on matters of concern
to the common system, positions conflicting with those
which they took in the General Assembly;

II
1. Expresses the hope that, notwithstanding the
pressure of urgent problems concerning remuneration,
the International Civil Service Commission will be
able to assume progressively its functions under articles 13 and 14 of its statute and make progress in
1979 in its consideration of those aspects of personnel policy other than remuneration mentioned in
paragraphs 309 to 329 of the report of the Commission, in particular career development and those other
aspects which have occupied the General Assembly's
attention at its current session;
2. Approves the Commission's intention to keep
under review the effects of currency instability upon
the United Nations common system of salaries and
allowances, to continue its efforts to eliminate possible anomalies in post adjustments at certain duty
stations and to seek to improve the system;
3. Also approves the Commission's intention to
make, as a matter of priority, a comprehensive examination of the functioning, methods of establishment
and adjustment and appropriate level of pensionable
remuneration, in particular with a view to preparing,
in co-operation with the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board, proposals to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session for correcting anomalies in the United Nations pension system brought about by the current economic and
monetary circumstances;
94 A/C.5/33/37.
95 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Fifth Committee, 32nd meeting, para. 63.

III
1. Notes the information provided by the report
of the International Civil Service Commission on the
evolution of the relationship between remuneration of
the Professional and higher categories of the United
Nations common system and the comparator national
civil service and the Commission's conclusion on safeguards existing against possible undue widening of the
margin between the levels of the remuneration of the
two services resulting from the operation of the post
adjustment system; 96
2. Approves the use, for the purpose of making
such salary comparisons, of the table of grading
equivalencies recommended by the Commission in
paragraph 92 of its report and requests the Commission to continue its study of grade equivalencies
between the United Nations common system and the
comparator national civil service, in order to determine the proper equivalent grades in the comparator
system for the United Nations grades of Director (D-2)
and Assistant Secretary-General, and to report its
findings to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
3. Further requests the Commission to study the
feasibility of identifying posts of equivalent functions
and responsibilities for the post of Under-SecretaryGeneral and to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session;
IV
1. Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1979,
the amount of the dependency allowances payable in
local currency to staff in the Professional and higher
categories shall not be less than the local currency
equivalent of the dollar amount of the allowance at
the time it was established or last revised;
2. Further decides that the scale of termination
indemnities established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 31/141 of 17 December 1976 be amended
to provide that the indemnity payable to a staff member holding a fixed-term appointment with less than
six years' completed service shall not exceed three
months' pensionable remuneration less staff assessment;
3. Requests the International Civil Service Commission to give further study to the question of an
end-of-service grant payable to staff members with
fixed-term appointments in the context of its examination of the relationship between career staff and
fixed-term staff in the common system, ensuring that
such a grant does not become a form of pre-pension
plan, and to make recommendations to the General
Assembly not later than at its thirty-fifth session;
4. Decides that payment of the repatriation grant
to entitled staff members shall be made conditional
upon the presentation by the staff member of evidence
of actual relocation, subject to the terms to be established by the Commission;
5. Approves the rates of the payment to be made
to the spouse or dependent children of a staff member
who dies in service, as set out in the schedule contained in paragraph 194 of the Commission's report;
6. Decides that the existing age limit for eligibility
to the education grant be replaced by the formula "up
to the end of the fourth year of post-secondary studies
96 Ibid., Thirty-third Session, Supplement No. 30 (A/33/30),
para. 142.

VIII.

203

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Filth Committee

or the award of the first recognized degree, whichever
is the earlier";
7. Decides also that expenses incurred by expatriate staff members for the post-secondary studies of
their children in the - country of the parent's duty
station shall be eligible for reimbursement under the
education grant, with effect from the beginning of the
academic year in course of 1 January 1979;
8. Further decides that when, for the purpose of
applying the scale of reimbursements approved for the
education grant, the expenses incurred by a staff member in a currency other than the United States dollar
are converted into dollars, the rate of exchange used
shall be whichever is the higher of that which was in
force at the date when the existing scale of reimbursements came into effect or that in force at the date
when the reimbursement is made, the same rate being
used in converting the dollar amount of the reimbursement into the currency in which it is to be paid;
9. Approves the extension of the provision of the
education grant to include the reimbursements of the
expenses incurred by staff members for the special
education of their disabled children, upon the terms
and conditions specified in paragraph 246 of the
Commission's report and in the annex to the present
resolution;
10. Invites the Commission to reconsider its intention to extend the assignment allowance from five
to seven years;
11. Approves the amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations necessary to give effect to
the above decisions, as set out in the annex to the
present resolution, and invites the Secretary-General
to make such consequential changes as are necessary
in the Staff Rules and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session in accordance
with the provisions of regulation 12.2 of the Staff
Regulations;
12. Decides that the above decisions shall enter
into effect on 1 January 1979, except where otherwise
specified.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
ANNEX
Amendments to the Staff Regulations of the United Nations

Regulation 3.2
In the first paragraph, delete the words "under the age of
twenty-one" from the first sentence and insert the following
text as the second sentence:
"The grant shall be payable in respect of the child up to
the end of the fourth year of post-secondary studies or the
award of the first recognized degree, whichever is the earHer."
Insert the following text as the third paragraph:
"The Secretary•General shall also establish terms and
conditions under which an education grant shall be available
to a staff member whose child is unable, by reason of
physical or mental disability, to attend a normal educational
institution and therefore requires special teaching or training
to prepare him/her for full integration into society or, while
attending a normal educational institution, l'equires special
teaching or training to assist him/her in overcoming the
disability. The amount of this grant per year for each
disabled child shall be equal to 75 per cent of the educa-

tional expenses actually incurred up to $4,000, subject to a
maximum grant of $3,000."

Regulation 3.4
Add the following sentence at the end of paragraph (a):
"The amount of either of these allowances payable in local
currency shall not be less than the local curr,ency equivalent
of the dollar amount at the time it was established or last
revised."
Annex JI/
In the schedule of termination indemnities set out in paragraph (a) of annex III, amend the wording in the last column
to read as follows:
"One week for each month of uncompleted service subject
to a minimum of six weeks' and a maximum of three
months' indemnity pay."

33/120.

Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly
and to the member organizations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund for 1978 97 and the related
report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions, 98
Reaffirming that no change in the pension adjustment system should entail an increase in the present
or future liabilities of Member States,
I
ADJUSTMENT OF BENEFITS IN RESPECT OF
COST-OF-LIVING CHANGES

Decides to revise the system of adjustment of benefits in payment contained in General Assembly resotion 3354 (XXIX) of 18 December 1974 and previous
resolutions on the same subject, with effect from 1
January 1979, in accordance with the recommendations
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board contained in paragraphs 18 to 46 of its report to the
Assembly for 1978 and in annex V thereto;
II
TRANSFER OF PENSION RIGHTS

Concurs in the agreement approved by the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board with the Government of Canada under article 13 of the Regulations
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund with
respect to continuity of pension rights between that
Government and the Fund;
III
EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Board to supplement the voluntary contributions to
the Emergency Fund, for a further period of one year,
by an amount not exceeding $100,000;
IV
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $3,726,500
(net) for 1979 for the administration of the Fund.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978
H1 Ibid.,
Supplement No. 9
A/33/9/ Add.l.
n8 A/33/375.

(A/33/9

and Corr.I)

and
