s

UNITED
NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/24249

7 July 1992
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
Following consultations with the members of the Security Council, the
President of the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the
Council, at its 3092nd meeting, on 7 July 1992, in connection with the
Council's consideration of the item entitled "Further report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM II) ":
"The Security Council has considered carefully the report of the
Secretary-General (S/24145 and Corr.l) on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM II), and notes the efforts of the Angolan
parties to implement commitments agreed to in the "Acordos de Paz para
Angola". It commends the efforts of the Angolans to move their country
towards free and fair multiparty elections on 29 and 30 September 1992 in
accordance with the established timetable. There is no viable
alternative to this. The Security Council calls on all interested
parties to cooperate fully with the electoral process to ensure that
elections are free and fair.
"The Council re-emphasizes the observation of the Secretary-General
in his report, that Angola being a sovereign and independent country, the
organization and supervision of all tasks under the Peace Accords is the
responsibility of the Angolan parties themselves. Nevertheless, the
Council, which has mandated United Nations observation and verification
of the peace process, at the request of the Angolan parties, remains
seriously concerned at sorne constraints holding back the process at the
moment.
"The maintenance of peace since May 1991, and the commitment by all
parties to the electoral process, are encouraging. Nevertheless, the
Council reaffirms the importance it attaches to the fulfilment by the
parties in good faith of all obligations contained in the "Acordos de Paz
para Angola". In this connection, it strongly appeals to the Government
and UNITA to overcome rapidly the delays and inadequacies described in
the report, and increase the momentum of progress on the issues of
confinement of troops and weapons, demobilization and the formation of
the new armed forces and police.
92-29608

3277i (E)

070792

070792

/

...

S/24249
English
Page 2
"The Council also expresses its concern at the political and
security situation in Angola, which requires the greatest restraint.
Violent incidents, mutual accusations and hostile propaganda should be
terminated and give way to tolerance, cooperation, and reconciliation.
It is imperative to agree, without delay, on a brief and clear Code of
Electoral Conduct and to ensure that everybody is allowed freedom of
movement and speech and the ability to register to vote without fear in
all areas of the country. The Council calls on the Government and all
parties to work closely with the Special Representative and all United
Nations specialized agencies engaged in the electoral process to ensure
that voter registration is conducted in accordance with established
procedures and completed in a timely manner.
"The Security Council calls on both parties to devote all available
resources to preparations for the elections in order that their
commitment to elections on 29 and 30 September 1992 may be met and
welcomes with appreciation commitments by donor countries to provide all
support for all vital tasks relating to the final three months of the
peace process. Since the logistical difficulties are major constraints
on the process, the Council strongly appeals to the Member States
concerned to provide the promised assistance expeditiously and urges
Member States as well as the United Nations agencies to display
flexibility and pragmatism in this cooperation to ensure that a
successful conclusion of the Angolan operation leads to stability and
prosperity in Angola.
"The Security Council calls on all parties to take all necessary
measures to ensure the security and safety of UNAVEM staff and property.
"The Security Council will continue to keep the situation in Angola
under close review and looks forward to a further report by the
Secretary-General at the beginning of the electoral campaign."
