General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

56

proposals designed to secure these objectives and in accordance with
paragraphs 57 and 58 of the Final Document, and thereby to ensure
that the survival of mankind is not endangered:
(h) Further steps to prohibit military or any other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques:

(i) Multilateral regional and bilateral meas u res on the limitation
and reduction of conventional weapons and armed forces, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Final Document:

/j)

Reduction of military expenditures:

(k) Confidence-building measures, taking into account the particular conditions and requirements of different regions. with a view to
strengthening the security of States.
D.

Disarmament and deve/opment

15. Peace and development are indivisible. During the Second
Disarmament Decade, utmost efforts should be made towards the
implementation of the specific measures whereby disarmament will
contribute effectively to economic and social development and thus
facilitate the full and early realization of the new international
economic order. To this end, renewed efforts should be made to reach
agreement on the reduction of military expenditures and the reallocation of resources from military purposes to economic and social
development especially for the benefit of developing countries.
16. Efforts should also be made to strengthen international cooperation for the promotion of the transfer and utilization of nuclear
technology for economic and social development, especially in the
developing countries, taking into account the provisions of ali relevant paragraphs of the Final Document, in particular to ensure the
success of the United Nations Conference for the Promotion of lnternational Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, to be
convened in principie by 1983, as decided upon in General Assembly
resolution 34/63 of 29 November 1979, as well as other promotional
activities in this field in the United Nations system, including those
within the framework of the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency.
E.

recognize and understand the dangers in the present world armaments situation, so that world public opinion will be mobilized on behalf of peace and disarmament. This will be of great importance to the
strengthening of international peace and security, the jusi and peaceful resolution of disputes and conflicts and effective disarmament.
20. 1n the course of the decade of the l 980s, therefore, governmental and non-governmental information organs of Member States
and those of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, as well
as non-governmental organizations, should, as appropriate, undertake further programmes of information relating to the danger of the
armaments race as well as to disarmament efforts and negotiations
and their results, particularly by means of annual activities conducted
in connexion with Disarmament Week. These actions should constitute a large-scale programme further to alert world opinion to the
danger of war in general and of nuclear war in particular. In keeping
with its central role and primary responsibility in the sphere of disarmament, the United Nations, in particular its Centre for Disarmament. should intensify and co-ordinate its programme of publications, audio-visual materials, co-operation with non-governmental
organizations and relations with the media. Among its activities, the
United Nations should also, in the course of the Second Disarmament Decade, sponsor seminars in the different regions of the world at
which issues relating to world disarmament, in general, and to the
particular region, especially, will be cxtensively discussed.
G.

21. As part of the process of facilitating the consideration of issues
in the field of disarmament, studies on specific questions should be
undertaken on the decision of the General Assembly, when necessary
for preparing the ground for negotiations or reaching agreement.
Also, studies pursued under the auspices of the United Nations, in
particular by the United Nations lnstitute for Disarmament Research
established by Asscmbly resolution 34/83 M of 11 December 1979
within the framework of the United Nations I nstitute for Training and
Research, could bring a useful contribution to the knowledge and exploration of disarmament problems, especially in the long term.

Disarmament and international security

17. An essential condition for progress in the field of disarmament is the preservation and strengthening of international peace and
security and the promotion of confidence among Sta tes. Nuclear
weapons pose the greatest danger to mankind and to the survival of
civilization. lt is essential to halt and reverse the nuclear-arms race in
ali its aspects in order to avert the danger of war involving nuclear
weapons. The ultimate goal in this context is the complete elimination
of nuclear weapons. Significant progress in nuclear disarmament
would be facilitated both by parallel political and international legal
measures to strengthen the security of States and by progress in the
limitation and reduction of armed forces and conventional armaments of the nuclear-weapon States and other States in the regions
con cerned.
18. Ali States Members of the United Nations have, in the Final
Document, reaffirmed their full commitment to the purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and their obligation strictly to observe
its principies as well as other relevan! and generally accepted principies of international law relating to the maintenance of international
peace and security. Disarmament, relaxation of international tension,
respect for the right to self-determination and national independencc.
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, the peaceful settlement
of disputes in accordance with the Charter and the strengthcning of international peace and sec'urity are directly related to each other.
Progress in any of these spheres has a beneficia! effect on ali of them:
in turn, failure in one sphere has negative effects on others. 1n the decade of the 1980s, ali Governments, in particular the most advanced
military Powers, should therefore take such steps as will con tribute to
the widening of trust among nations of the world as well as in the
various regions. This implies a commitment on the part of ali States to
avoid actions likely to increase tension or create new areas of threats to
international peace and security and. in their relationship with other
countries, strictly to respect the sovercignty and territorial integrity nf
States, and the right of peoples under colonial or foreign domination
to self-dctcrmination and national independcnce.

F.

Public awareness

19. As stated in paragraph 15 or the Final Document, it is essential that not only Govcrnments but also the peoples of the world

Srudies

H.

lmplementation. review and appraisal

22. In the accomplishment of the activities earmarked for the
Second Disarmament Decade, ali Governments, particularly the most
advanced militar} Powcrs, should make an effective contribution. The
United Nations should continue to play a central role. The Committee on Disarmament should fully discharge its responsibility as the
single multilateral disarmament negotiating body. The General
Assembly should, at its annual sessions and, in particular, at its second
special session devoted to disarmament to be held in 1982, make an
effective contribution to the pursuit of the goals of disarmament.
23. lt is pertinent also to recall that paragraphs 121 and 122 ofthe
Final Document státed:
(a) That bilateral and regional disarmament negotiations may also
play an important role and could facilitate the negotiation of multilateral agreements in the field of disarmament:

(b) That al the earliest appropriate time, a world disarmament
conference should be convened with universal participation and with
adequate preparation.
24. In order to cnsure a co-ordinated approach and to consider the
implementation of the Declaration of the 1980s as the Second Disarmamen t Decade, this question should be included in the agenda of the
second special sess1on of the General Assembly devoled to disarmament, envisaged for 1982.
25. In addition, the General Assembly will undertake al its fortieth
session, in 1985, a review and appraisal, through the Disarmament
Commission, of progress in the implementation of the mcasures
identified in the prcscnt Declaration

35 / 47.

Preparations for the second special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament'

The General Assembly,
Recalling section I I I of its resolution 33 /71 H of 14
December 1978. in which it decided to convene a second
' See also sect. X. 8.1, decisions 3514 ¡ 7 and .15 /430.

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee
--

-- --- ---

special session _devo~ed to d_isarmament in 1982 and ~o
set up, at its th1rty-f1fth sess1on, a preparatory comm1ttee for the second special session,
Reaffirming the validity of the Final Document of t~e
Tenth Special Session of the Genera) Assembly 6 and 1ts
conviction that disarmament remams one of the essential objectives of the United Nations,
Expressing its concern over _the con_tinuation of the
arms race, which aggravates mternat10nal peace and
security and also diverts vast resources urgently needed
for economic and social development,
Reiterating its conviction that peace can be secured
through the implementation of disarmament !11easures,
particularly of nuclear disarmament, conduc1ve to the
realization of the final objective, namely, general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control,
l. Decides to establish a Preparatory Committee for
the Second Special Session of the General Asse~bly
Devoted to Disarmament composed of seventy-e1ght
Member Sta tes appointed by the ~resident of the_ Ge_neral Assembly on the basis of equ1table geograph1c d1stribution;
2. Requests the Preparatory Committee to prepare a
draft agenda for the special session_, to examine ali ~elevant questions relating to that sess1on and to subm1t to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session its recommendations thereon, including those in respect of
the implementation of the decision_s and recom~endations adopted by the Assembly at 1ts tenth spec1al session;
3. Invites ali Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General their views on the agenda _and ot~er
relevant questions relating to the second spec1al sess1on
of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament not
later than I April 198 I;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
replies of Member States relevant to paragraph 3 above
to the Preparatory Committee and to render to it ali n~cessary assistance, including the provision of essential
background information, relevant documents and summary records;
5. Requests the Preparatory Committee to meet for
a short organizational session of not longer than one
week before the end of the thirty-fifth session of the
General Assembly in order, inter afia, to set the dates for
its substantive sessions;
6. Further requests the Preparatory Committee _to
submit its progress report to the General Assembly at 1ts
thirty-sixth session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-sixth session an ítem entitled: "Second special session of the General Assembly devoted to disarmament:
report of the Preparatory Committee for the Second
Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to
Disarmament".

79th plenary meeting
3 December 1980

*

*

*

A t the 79th plenary meeting, the Presiden/ of the General Assembly
announced that, in accordance with paragraph I of the abo ve resolution
and on the basis of consultations held in the First Committee. he had ap'Resolution S-10/2.

----

-

_._

--

-

57

-

pointed the fo//owing States as members of the Preparatory Committ~e
for the Second Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to ~1sarmament. it being understood that any Member Sta/e would be_e~lllled
to participare in the work ofthe Committee ~nder the same condu'.ons as
those /aid down for the Preparatory Commrttee for the first specral session of the ,General Assembly devoted to disarmament: ALGERIA.
ARGENTINA, AUSTRALIA, Al ISTRIA, BAHAMAS, BANGLADESH. BELGIUM,
BFNIN, BRAZIL, 8UlGARlA, BIIRU1'DI, BYELORUSSIAN SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPllBl K. CANADA, CHINA, COLOMBIA, CONGO, COSTA RICA, CUBA.
CYl'RllS, CZECHOSI OVAKIA. DFNMARK. ECUADOR, EGYPT. ETHIOPIA,
FIJI. F1Nl AND, FRAME. Gl·RMAN DEMOCRATIC RF.PLIBLIC. GERMANY.
FFDFRAI
INDI,\.

RFPUBI.IC OF. GRH('l. GUYANA,

fNDONESI,\,

l.HlANON.

]RAN.

LiBI-.RIA,

IRAQ.

LiB\ .\N

HONDURAS. HUN(iARY,

ITAI Y.

JAMAICA.

ARAB

JAMAHIRIY•\,

JAPAN,

KLNYA.

MAi AYSIA.

MAURl'l ll'S. MFXICO, MOMiOLIA. MOROCCO. NEPAi. NHHERLANDS,
NEW

Zl·ALAND,

NIGERIA.

NORWAY.

PAKISTAN.

PANAMA,

PERll.

PHII IPl'INES. POLAND. ROMANIA, SFNEGAI., SIERRA LFONF. SPAIN. SRI
LANKA. SlllHN. SURINAMI. SWHJIN, TllNISIA, TllRKF.Y, lJKRAINIAN
SOVII-T SoCIAl.lST R~PUBl.ll. UNION 01· Sov1n SOCIAI.IST RFPLIBI.ICS.
UNITI.D

KIN(;IJOM (JI·

ÜRI AT

UNI n

REP\iBI.IC OF

T.-\Nl,\NIA.

1)

BRITAIN AND
UNITrD

NORTIILRN

IRl-1 AND.

STA ns OI

AMI RICA,

V1 NI /l 11 A. YL1c;os1AVIA. Z-\IRI andZAMBL'<

35/141.

Economic and social consequences of the armaments race and its extremely harmful effects on
world peace and security

The General Assembly.
Having considered the item entitled "Economi_c and
social consequences of the armaments race and 1t~ e~tremely harmful effects on world peace and secunty ,
Deeply concerned that t~~ arms race,_ particularly in
nuclear armaments and m1htary expend1tures, _has continued to increase at an alarming speed, absorbmg enormous material and human resources, which represents a
heavy burden for the peoples of ali countries and _constitutes a grave danger for world peace and secunty,
Convinced that, disarmament being a matter of universal concern, there is a pressing need for ali Governments and peoples to be informed about and be aware of
the problems created by the armament~ race an_d of the
need for disarmament. and that the United Nat1ons has
a central role in this connexion,
Noting that since the preparation of the updated
report of the Secretary-General entitled Economi~. and

Social Consequences of the Arms Race and of M1hta~y
Expenditures,' new developments have taken_ place m

the fields covered by the report that are ?~ part1cul~r. relevance in the present economic and poht1cal cond1t1ons
of the world,
Recalling its decision. as reaffirmed in its resolution
32/75 of 12 December 1977. to keep the item under constant review,
Recalling further paragraph 93 (e) of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General Assembly, x which provides that the Secretary-General shall
periodically submit reports to the Assembly on the
economic and social consequences of the armaments
race and its extremely harmful effects on world peace
and security.
l. Requests the Secretary-q~neral to bring up t~
date, with the assistance of quahf1ed consultant experts
appointed by him, the report entitled Econom!~ and So-

cial Consequences of the Arms Race and of M1htary Ex-, -Unit¡;-d-N-;tions publication. Sales No. E.78.IX. l.
'Resolution S-10/2.
.
.
' Subsequently referred to as the Group of Experts on _the Econorn,_c
and Social Consequences of the Arrns Race and of M1htary Expen,d1tures.
