United Nations

A/RES/58/214

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 February 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 94 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 23 December 2003
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/58/484/Add.5)]

58/214. International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/236 of 22 December 1989, 49/22 A of 2 December
1994, 49/22 B of 20 December 1994, 53/185 of 15 December 1998, 54/219 of
22 December 1999, 56/195 of 21 December 2001 and 57/256 of 20 December 2002
and Economic and Social Council resolutions 1999/63 of 30 July 1999 and 2001/35
of 26 July 2001, and taking into due consideration its resolution 57/270 B of
23 June 2003 on integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic
and social fields,
Recalling also of the inclusion of the item “disaster management and
vulnerability” in the multi-year programme of work of the Commission on
Sustainable Development, 1
Emphasizing that disaster reduction, including reducing vulnerability to
natural disasters, is an important element that contributes to the achievement of
sustainable development,
Noting the relevant provisions of the Ministerial Declaration of the Ministerial
Conference of the Third World Water Forum, held in Kyoto, Japan, on 22 and
23 March 2003, on water-related disasters, 2
Reiterating that, although natural disasters damage the social and economic
infrastructure of all countries, the long-term consequences of natural disasters are
especially severe for developing countries and hamper the achievement of their
sustainable development,
Recognizing the urgent need to further develop and make use of the existing
scientific and technical knowledge to reduce vulnerability to natural disasters, and
emphasizing the need for developing countries to have access to technology so as to
tackle natural disasters effectively,
_______________
1
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2003, Supplement No. 9 (E/2003/29), chap. I,
sect. A.
2
See A/57/785, annex.

03 50736

A/RES/58/214

Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters and
their increasing impact within recent years, which have resulted in massive loss of
life and long-term negative social, economic and environmental consequences for
vulnerable societies throughout the world, in particular in developing countries,
Recognizing the need to continue to develop an understanding of, and to
address, socio-economic activities that exacerbate the vulnerability of societies to
natural disasters and to build and further strengthen community capability to cope
with disaster risks,
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
1.
of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction; 3
2.
Invites Governments and relevant international organizations to consider
disaster risk assessment as an integral component of development plans and poverty
eradication programmes;
Stresses that continued cooperation and coordination among
3.
Governments, the United Nations system, other international organizations, regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and other partners, as appropriate,
are considered essential to address effectively the impact of natural disasters;
Recognizes the importance of linking disaster risk management to
4.
regional frameworks, as appropriate, such as with the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, 4 to address issues of poverty eradication and sustainable
development;
5.
Also recognizes the importance of integrating a gender perspective as
well as of engaging women in the design and implementation of all phases of
disaster management, particularly in the disaster reduction stage;
Further recognizes the importance of early warning as an essential
6.
element of disaster reduction, and recommends the implementation of the outcome
of the Second International Conference on Early Warning, held in Bonn, Germany,
from 16 to 18 October 2003, which highlighted the importance of strengthened
coordination and cooperation to integrate activities and expertise of the various
sectors involved in the early warning process and has contributed to the review of
the Yokohama Strategy for a Safer World: Guidelines for Natural Disaster
Prevention, Preparedness and Mitigation and its Plan of Action; 5
7.
Decides to convene a World Conference on Disaster Reduction in 2005,
at the senior-official level, designed to foster specialized discussions and produce
concrete changes and results, with the following objectives:
(a) To conclude the review of the Yokohama Strategy and its Plan of Action,
with a view to updating the guiding framework on disaster reduction for the twentyfirst century;
(b) To identify specific activities aimed at ensuring the implementation of
relevant provisions of the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit on

_______________
3

A/58/277.
A/57/304, annex.
5
A/CONF.172/9, chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
4

2

A/RES/58/214

Sustainable Development (“Johannesburg Plan of
vulnerability, risk assessment and disaster management;

Implementation”) 6

on

(c) To share best practices and lessons learned to further disaster reduction
within the context of attaining sustainable development and identify gaps and
challenges;
(d) To increase awareness of the importance of disaster reduction policies,
thereby facilitating and promoting the implementation of those policies;
(e) To increase the reliability and availability of appropriate disaster-related
information to the public and disaster management agencies in all regions, as set out
in the relevant provisions of the Johannesburg Plan of Implementation;
Accepts with deep appreciation the generous offer of the Government of
8.
Japan to host the Conference, and decides that the Conference will be held at Kobe,
Hyogo, Japan, from 18 to 22 January 2005;
Decides to establish an open-ended intergovernmental preparatory
9.
committee for the Conference to review the organizational and substantive
preparations for the Conference, approve the programme of work of the Conference
and propose rules of procedure for adoption by the Conference, and also decides
that the preparatory committee will meet at Geneva, following the 2004 semi-annual
sessions of the Inter-Agency Task Force for Disaster Reduction, for up to two days
each time, and that it will hold a one-day meeting at Kobe within the dates
mentioned in paragraph 8 above, as necessary;
10. Also decides that the intergovernmental preparatory committee will have
a bureau consisting of five representatives of Member States elected on the basis of
equitable geographical representation;
11. Invites regional groups to nominate their candidates for the bureau of the
preparatory committee by the end of January 2004, so that they can be involved in
the preparations for the first meeting of the preparatory committee, and to notify the
secretariat of the Conference of those nominations;
12. Requests the inter-agency secretariat for the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction to serve as the secretariat of the Conference and to coordinate
preparatory activities, the costs of which will be funded extrabudgetarily through
the Trust Fund for the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction and in close
cooperation with the host country and the preparatory committee for the
Conference, with the full support of the relevant departments of the Secretariat;
13. Understands that the activities set out in paragraph 12 above will not
hinder the other existing work and priorities of the inter-agency secretariat for the
Strategy;
14. Invites Member States, all United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies and other relevant intergovernmental agencies and organizations, in
particular the members of the Inter-Agency Task Force for Disaster Reduction, to
participate actively in the Conference, as well as its preparatory process;

_______________
6
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa,
26 August-4 September 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I,
resolution 2, annex.

3

A/RES/58/214

15. Welcomes contributions from all regions that could provide substantive
inputs to the preparatory process and the Conference itself;
16. Encourages effective contributions from major groups, as identified in
Agenda 21, 7 invites them to seek accreditation to the Conference and its preparatory
process, and decides that their accreditation and participation will be in accordance
with the rules of procedure of the Commission on Sustainable Development, the
rules of procedure of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and the
established practice of the Commission on the participation and engagement of
major groups;
17. Decides that the actual additional costs of the preparatory process and the
Conference itself should be funded through extrabudgetary resources, without
negatively affecting programmed activities, and through specific voluntary
contributions to the Trust Fund for the Strategy;
18. Requests the Secretariat to provide conference services for the
preparatory process and the Conference itself, the costs thereof to be borne by the
host country, on the understanding that the Secretariat will ensure that its existing
human resources are utilized to the maximum extent possible, without further charge
to the host country;
19. Encourages the international community to provide the necessary
financial resources to the Trust Fund for the Strategy and to provide the necessary
scientific, technical, human and other resources to ensure adequate support for the
activities of the inter-agency secretariat for the Strategy and the Inter-Agency Task
Force for Disaster Reduction and its working groups, as well as to facilitate the
preparations for the Conference;
20. Expresses its appreciation to those countries that have provided financial
support for the activities of the Strategy by making voluntary contributions to its
Trust Fund;
21. Requests the Secretary-General to allocate adequate financial and
administrative resources, within existing resources, for the effective functioning of
the inter-agency secretariat for the Strategy;
22. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session a report on the implementation of the present resolution, in
particular on the state of preparations for the World Conference on Disaster
Reduction, under the item entitled “Environment and sustainable development”.
78th plenary meeting
23 December 2003

_______________
7

Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June
1992 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.

4
